                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03350 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline H, Drug Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On February 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines E and H. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 17, 2010, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 5, 2010. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 9, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
scheduled on May 25, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. 
Applicant did not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through W, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on June 16, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He has worked for a defense contractor since 2004. He 
graduated from college earning a bachelor’s degree in 1995 and a master’s degree in 
1996. He married in 1998. He has three children, one under the age of five, a two-and-a 
half year old, and a 19-month-old.1  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) on April 20, 2004. On 
his application he disclosed that he had used marijuana 16 times from September 1, 
1995 to March 31, 2003. In response to question 28, asking if he had ever used a 
controlled substance while possessing a security clearance, he answered “no.” At his 
hearing he admitted he used marijuana from 1994 to 2003.2 He did not use marijuana 
or any illegal drugs from 2003 until 2008, because “it was not permitted” while holding a 
clearance.3 
  
 In January 2008, Applicant was on family leave for twelve weeks after his wife 
gave birth to their third child. She accepted a job in the U.S. Virgin Islands and Applicant 
accompanied her with the children. He cared for the children while she worked. A friend 
and his family visited them there for a week. The friend was interested in using 
marijuana. Applicant stated he did not recall which of the two actually purchased the 
marijuana. He stated he was unaware at the time of what the status of his security 
clearance was because he was on family leave. He understood that although he was on 
family leave that he was going to return to his job and he would still have a security 
clearance upon his return. He was never advised his clearance was suspended or in 
abeyance while he was on family leave.4 He stated that although he was on medical 
leave and not actively employed, he was aware of his duties regarding holding a 
security clearance. He stated: “It’s always in the back of my mind that I can never 
disclose what I know. I’m mean, your (sic) always conscious in some regards of a 
1 Tr. 38, 54, 56, 73. 
 
2 Applicant credibly testified that he was providing a broad time period to ensure he included all of his use. 
I find the discrepancy is immaterial.  
 
3 Tr. 38-41, 55-58, 69.  
 
4 Tr. 44-46, 59-63, 66-69. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
clearance that you have to—you can’t talk about things.”5 He stated he used marijuana 
twice while on family leave in the U.S. Virgin Islands.6  
 
Applicant stated in interrogatories regarding the purchasing of marijuana that: “I 
did not volunteer to buy [marijuana]. We were daring each other to see who would. A 
seller walked by and asked if we wanted anything and we said yes. I walked away with 
him and noticed [my friend] did not follow.”7 He stated further: “I purchased 3 joints 
worth about $20 in St. Thomas on Coki beach.”8   
 
Applicant was granted a Secret security clearance sometime in late 2004 or 
2005. On December 15, 2008, Applicant completed another SCA, so he could upgrade 
his Secret security clearance to a Top Secret security clearance. In response to 
Question 24(a), he disclosed that he had illegally used a controlled substance in the last 
seven years. In response to Question 24(b), he disclosed that he illegally used a 
controlled substance while holding a security clearance. The substance was marijuana. 
In the comment section he indicated he used marijuana “3-4 times” and stated: “I was 
on leave in St. Thomas, USVI.” On December 24, 2008, nine days after completing the 
SCA for a Top Secret security clearance, Applicant used marijuana with his brother-in-
law while at a family party. His wife and children were at the party, but not present when 
he used the marijuana. This was the last time he used an illegal drug.9 
 
Applicant does not intend to use any illegal drug in the future. He completed a 
“statement of intent” never to use illegal drugs again and indicated he will not be 
involved with anyone who uses illegal drugs. He documented that if he should violate 
his intention he consents to an automatic revocation of his security clearance.10 
Applicant recognizes he used poor judgment when he used marijuana while holding a 
security clearance.11  
 
Applicant no longer associates with others from his past with whom he previously 
used marijuana. He still associates with his brother-in-law and his friend with whom he 
used it in the Virgin Islands. He has told these two people that they cannot use drugs 
around him or his children. His friend has also stopped using illegal drugs.12  
5 Tr. 60. 
 
6 Tr. 62. 
 
7 GE 3. 
 
8 Tr. 79-83. 
 
9 Tr. 41-42, 63-66, 74, 77-79. 
 
10 Tr. 43-44; AE V. 
 
11 Tr. 74. 
 
12 Tr. 40-41, 52-54. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant was involved in an incident at a concert in 2001.13 He had been 
drinking and had an altercation with a security guard. The security guard made 
offensive comments. Applicant was charged with assault. The charge was reduced to 
disturbing the peace. He paid a fine and apologized. Applicant has not been charged 
with any other criminal violations since then.14  
 
 Applicant’s former supervisor, who is now his coworker, testified on his behalf. 
He has no reservations about Applicant continuing to hold a security clearance. 
Applicant and his team received an award for their good work. He confirmed that drug 
use is prohibited by the company, on or off duty.15  
 
 A coworker testified on Applicant’s behalf. He has been a friend and colleague of 
Applicant’s for several years. He is aware of Applicant’s past substance abuse. He has 
no concerns about Applicant holding a security clearance.16  
 
 I have considered the numerous personal and professional letters of 
recommendation, performance evaluations and appraisals, performance assessments, 
and drug screen results.17 Applicant is described as follows: 
 
• Loyal, honest, trustworthy, dedicated, and diligent.  
• Hard working, high level of integrity, dependable, strong sense of character. 
• He is a very bright and personable. 
• He is recommended for a security clearance and is not considered a security 
risk. 
• He is passionate about his work. 
 
Applicant’s performance evaluations and appraisals indicate he “consistently 
meets, sometimes exceeds and seldom falls short of expectations” and he “consistently 
exceeds expectations and desired results.” He also was given a grade of “outstanding” 
in different categories on his evaluations.  
 
I have considered the psychological evaluation completed by a licensed 
psychologist. The evaluation concluded Applicant is not a habitual drug user and that he 
is aware of his poor judgment in purchasing and using marijuana and that he has no 
plans to do the same in the future.18 
 
13 The SOR alleges the date as 2003. I have sua sponte amended the date to 2001. 
 
14 Tr. 47-51, 55, 84-85. 
 
15 Tr. 26-36; AE G. 
 
16 Tr. 18-24; AE E. 
 
17 AE A-U. 
 
18 Tr. 52-53; AE I. 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 
and conclude the following have been raised: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
Applicant used marijuana from 1994 to 2003 and while on leave and holding a 
security clearance. He and his friend purchased marijuana while in the U.S. Virgin 
Islands. After completing an updated SCA to obtain a Top Secret security clearance, he 
again used marijuana. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 
26. The following two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant used marijuana from 1994 to 2003 with varying frequency, when he 
was younger and prior to obtaining a security clearance. He stopped when he obtained 
his security clearance. He later resumed his use in 2008 while on family leave and 
again shortly after he completed his SCA for a Top Secret security clearance. It has 
been approximately 18 months since his last use of marijuana. Applicant signed a 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of his clearance for any violation if he 
should use illegal drugs in the future. He has instructed those with whom he associates 
that they should not use drugs in his presence. There is no indication that Applicant is 
drug dependent or in need of drug rehabilitation. I find AG ¶ 26(b) applies.  
 
It has been a relatively short period of time since Applicant’s last drug use. 
Applicant was a mature adult, husband, and father of three children, when he chose to 
use marijuana. He used marijuana after he was granted a security clearance. When he 
completed his SCA in December 2008, he indicated he had used marijuana while 
holding a security clearance. He was aware he had a security clearance and that when 
he returned to his job, he would continue to have a security clearance. Applicant’s 
explanation was that he was “unaware that a security clearance remains active during 
periods of leave.” Even if believed, his attitude shows a disregard for obeying the law 
and raises questions about his judgment. There is no question when he used marijuana 
in December 2008 that he was aware he had an active security clearance. Less than 
two weeks after completing his SCA for a Top Secret security clearance, he used 
marijuana again. His completion of the SCA should have been an overt reminder that 
using drugs while holding a security clearance is prohibited. It is one of the questions he 
was required to answer on the SCA. His intentional disregard for the seriousness and 
consequences of his conduct casts serious doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 26(a) does not 
apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
I considered the disqualifying conditions under personal conduct AG ¶ 16 that 
could raise a security concern and conclude the following have been raised: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant used marijuana while he held a Secret security clearance. Less than 
two weeks after completing a SCA for a Top Secret security clearance, he again used 
marijuana. This was after he admitted on the SCA that he used marijuana, but did not 
think his security clearance was active because he was on leave. He used marijuana 
with a friend and with his brother-in-law. Applicant pled guilty to an amended assault 
charge and was fined. I find the above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s confrontation with a security guard at a concert in 2001 was a minor 
incident. He apologized and paid the fine. I find the offense happened under unique 
circumstances and unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 17(c) applies to that offense. 
 
Applicant’s drug use was not minor or isolated. He used illegal drugs from 1994 
to 2003. He ceased using them when he obtained a security clearance. He used them 
again during a period of time when he claims he did not believe his security clearance 
was active. He then used marijuana when he knew he had a security clearance and 
was attempting to have it upgraded. His conduct while holding a security clearance 
raises questions about his judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. Even if he believed 
his security clearance was not valid while he was on leave, he chose to disobey the law 
by purchasing drugs and then using them. Although he has promised never to use 
illegal drugs again, he has told those with whom he used drugs that he no longer does, 
and he has taken steps to reduce his vulnerability, it does not negate or mitigate the 
seriousness of his conduct. Applicant made conscious decisions to violate the trust that 
was bestowed upon him when granted a security clearance. He irresponsibly violated 
the trust and privilege of holding a security clearance. I find that although AG ¶ 17(d) 
and (e) apply, they are not enough to overcome the consequences of Applicant’s 
deliberate actions of using drugs while holding a security clearance. I find AG ¶ 17(c) 
does not apply to his drug use.   
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines D and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is a college graduate, a husband, and a father of three children. He has 
excelled at work and provided many character references that were considered. 
Applicant used marijuana in varying degrees from 1993 to 2004. When he received his 
security clearance he stopped using illegal drugs. He used them again while he was on 
leave and then again after completing a SCA to upgrade his security clearance. 
Applicant’s actions cannot be attributed to youthful indiscretion. Rather, he was well 
aware that marijuana is illegal. He chose to buy it on a beach and use it with his friend. 
Even if he believed he did not have an active clearance, he chose to commit a criminal 
act. He made the same decision, weeks after completing his SCA. Applicant’s judgment 
raises concerns about his reliability and whether he can be trusted to make good 
decisions in the future. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guidelines for Drug Involvement and Personal 
Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph  2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph  2.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interests to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
