                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-05238 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to financial 
considerations and personal conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 13, 2009, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On January 13, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
1 Item 5. 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
On January 30, 2010, Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR. On February 
1, 2010, Applicant submitted his Answer to the SOR. He elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated April 14, 2010, was provided to him by letter on the same day. 
Applicant received the FORM on May 3, 2010. He was afforded a period of 30 days to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
timely submitted additional information, which was received without objection from the 
Department Counsel. The case was originally assigned to another administrative judge 
on June 4, 2010, and was reassigned to me on June 18, 2010, due to caseload 
considerations. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b., and denied the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.c. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.   
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old defense contract employee, who at the time he 
submitted his Response to FORM in May 2010, was deployed to Iraq and in support of 
U.S. Forces. The record does not contain information regarding his start or projected 
end date in Iraq.  
 
The only information regarding Applicant’s educational background is that he 
attended a vocational school from March 1980 to October 1982. Applicant was married 
from August 1995 to August 1998, which ended by divorce. He did not list any 
dependents on his e-QIP.2 In his Responses to the SOR and FORM, Applicant makes 
reference his “27+ years of military service” and the fact that he held a secret clearance 
during his National Guard service.3 The record does not contain specific information 
regarding his military service. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in September 1999, and was 
awarded a discharge in January 2000. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) The record does not contain details 
regarding this bankruptcy such as assets, liabilities, or amount discharged. 
 
More significantly, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) filed a lien against 
Applicant in July 2006 in the amount of $45,204. In addition to Applicant’s admissions, 
 
2 Id. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
 
ed in Iraq.  
                                           
his Chapter 7 bankruptcy and debt to the IRS are evidenced by official court records 
and a January 2009 credit report.4 
 
In February 2009, when interviewed by a DoD investigator, Applicant said he 
cashed out his employer “savings account” of approximately $110,000 in 2000. He 
added that the IRS took approximately $40,000 in taxes from this “cash out” because of 
an early withdrawal, and after that, he still owed an additional $30,000 to the IRS. This 
amount increased to $45,204 due to interest and penalties.5 In July 2006, the IRS filed 
a tax lien against him for $45,204. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) In August 2006, he hired a tax 
resolution firm to resolve his tax liability with the IRS. At that time, according to 
Applicant, the firm submitted an Offer in Compromise to the IRS. Applicant stated that 
he and the firm are still waiting for a response from the IRS.6 Applicant is unable to 
provide any documentation regarding communication between his tax firm and the IRS 
because he is currently locat 7
 
Applicant is current on his bills and has the money to pay off his IRS debt 
“whenever [tax firm] and the IRS reach an agreement with my Offer in Compromise.”8 
According to his Personal Financial Statement attached to DOHA’s second set of 
Interrogatories and signed by him in September 2009, he has a net monthly remainder 
of $568. The same set of Interrogatories requested documentation from him, which he 
did not provide. At the time he signed these Interrogatories, he was not overseas and 
appears to have been drawing unemployment stateside.9 
 
I find that Applicant has owed $45,204 to the IRS since at least 2006. His efforts 
to resolve this debt have been disappointing given the apparent importance of securing 
a security clearance. Applicant’s undocumented assertions that his tax firm is 
attempting to resolve this debt for the past four years is insufficient to show good faith 
on this debt.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
When completing his May 2009 e-QIP, Applicant answered “No” to Section 27 
thereby denying that in the last seven years he had a lien placed against his property for 
failing to pay taxes or other debts. He answered “No” to Section 28 denying that in the 
 
4 Items 7 - 9. 
 
5 Item 6. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Response to FORM 
 
8 Response to FORM and Item 6. 
 
9 Id. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
last seven years he had ever been over 180 days delinquent on any debt. Lastly, he 
answered “No” to Section 29 denying was that he is currently over 90 days delinquent 
on any debt. These responses are clearly false given the fact the IRS filed a lien against 
him in July 2006 in the amount of $45,204, an amount that remains past due. (SOR ¶¶ 
2.a. – 2.c.)  
 
Applicant’s explanation for failing to list his IRS tax lien was, “I answered ‘no’ on 
the security clearance application for these paragraph subjects due to my Offer in 
Compromise with the IRS.”10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”11 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
 
10 Item 4. 
 
11 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might 
accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR Case 
No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 
375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).12 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that an applicant’s failure or inability to 
live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor 
self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of 
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant accumulated a significant debt with the IRS in the amount of $45,204, 
which has remained unpaid since at least 2006. Additionally, he filed for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in 1999 and was awarded a discharge in 2000. Applicant admitted these 
allegations. He presented no documentary evidence of efforts to pay or resolve his debt 
to the IRS.  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of 
not meeting financial obligations, apply in this case.  
 
 
12 “The administrative judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and unfavorable, 
evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the Directive, and 
decide[s] whether applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” ISCR Case 
No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant has not produced evidence sufficient to warrant the application of any 
of the above mitigating conditions. He has not shown that his financial situation has 
resulted from circumstances beyond his control, has not shown he has ever sought or 
received financial counseling of any type, and has not established a track record of 
financial responsibility sufficient to mitigate the financial considerations that give rise to 
a security concern in this case. What is clear from the record evidence is that, while 
Applicant may well intend to resolve his debt with the IRS at some unspecified time in 
the future, he has not made any demonstrated effort to do so thus far.  
 
 Despite being questioned about his financial situation in February 2009 by the 
DoD investigator, and despite being questioned again in DOHA interrogatories in 
September 2009, Applicant has produced no evidence documenting that he has made 
any attempts to pay his delinquent debt with the IRS or to attempt a good-faith effort to 
resolve this debt. In short, Applicant’s history of financial problems is recent and not 
isolated. He has not produced evidence showing he has exhibited good judgment and 
responsible conduct in managing this portion of his finances. Based on record evidence, 
Applicant’s financial difficulties with the IRS appear likely to be a continuing concern. 
His 2000 Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing lacks security significance because of the passage 
of time. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose his 2006 $45,204 tax lien with the IRS when answering 
pertinent questions on his May 2007 e-QIP. The Government established through the 
evidence presented the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(c).13 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could potentially mitigate security 
concerns about his personal conduct: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
 
13Deliberate and materially false answers on a security clearance application may violate 18 U.S.C. § 
1001. The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 (1995): as a 
statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of influencing, the decision making 
body to which it is addressed.” See also United States v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 2004). If 
Applicant had provided accurate answers on his security clearance applications, his accurate answers 
are capable of influencing the government to deny his security clearance. His failure to disclose financial 
problems are sufficiently serious to potentially jeopardize approval of his security clearance. Making a 
false statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony (the maximum potential sentence 
includes confinement for five years and a $10,000 fine). In light of my ultimate decision, and the absence 
of an allegation of a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 in the SOR, it is unnecessary for me to decide whether 
or not Applicant actually violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001. 
 
8 
 
 
                                           
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant does receive some credit 
for truthfully disclosing his tax lien when confronted by a DoD investigator. However, his 
contention that a pending “Offer in Compromise” somehow absolved him from 
disclosing the lien, as well as past and current delinquencies is not plausible.14 
Applicant’s purported explanation that the Offer in Compromise filed with the IRS nearly 
 
14The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
9 
 
 
three years prior to the completion of his e-QIP relieves him from truthfully disclosing 
the debt rings hollow. There is no exception in the e-QIP process from reporting liens or 
delinquencies based on a pending offer to settle a debt. 
 
While he did acknowledge his IRS lien during his February 2009 interview, that 
does not take away from the fact at the time he completed his e-QIP he was well aware 
of his unfavorable financial history. Applicant was no neophyte to the security clearance 
process – he had over 27 years of military experience and previously held clearances in 
the National Guard. He knowingly and deliberately chose not to disclose full information 
about his unfavorable financial history.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
Whole-Person Concept. Applicant’s indebtedness has been ongoing since at least 
2006. His deliberate falsifications, if relied upon, could have adversely affected or 
influenced the security clearance adjudication process to the detriment of the 
Government.  
 
Applicant receives substantial credit for his 27 years of military service. His work 
for a Government contractor overseas is noted, and aside from the SOR allegations no 
other disciplinary or security-related problems surfaced. His record of employment and 
military service weigh in his favor. There appears to be a dichotomy between how 
Applicant handled his financial affairs and his work-related performance. I am convinced 
that he is loyal to his company and his country.   
 
  Applicant’s failure to resolve a significant debt with the IRS and his deliberate 
failure to disclose information on his security clearance application is serious, recent, 
 
10 
 
 
and not mitigated. I have questions about his current ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules, and regulations. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, 
and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I conclude he 
has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to financial considerations and personal 
conduct.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors” and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has failed to mitigate or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a. to 2.c.:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
