 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-02800
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is denied.
On July 26, 2007, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions
(SF 86) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with a defense contractor.
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a set of
interrogatories  to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying information in his1
background. After reviewing the results of the background investigation and Applicant’s
responses to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary
affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.3
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
 Ax. J contains 20 separate documents totaling 54 pages. Department Counsel posed objections to two letters4
(one from Applicant) that, in part, address facts related to the allegations in SOR 2.a and 2.b. The basis of
Department Counsel’s objections was that these documents discuss factual matters that were not already in
the record at the close of Applicant’s hearing or seek to re-open the record as to SOR 2.a and 2.b. Department
Counsel’s objections are overruled. I have considered all of the information submitted in Ax. J, assigning its
contents appropriate weight in context with all of the other information admitted at the hearing.
 Also cross-alleged under Guideline F at SOR 1.v.5
2
Applicant’s access to classified information. On December 23, 2009, DOHA issued to
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which, if proven, raise security
concerns addressed in the adjudicative guideline (AG)  for financial considerations3
(Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on April 1, 2010. Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued on April 6,
2010, I convened a hearing in this matter on April 28, 2010. The parties appeared as
scheduled. The Government presented 13 exhibits (Gx. 1 - 13), which were admitted
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. With his response to the SOR
(Answer) he attached six documents. The Government waived objection and Applicant’s
attachments were admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - F. Applicant submitted at
hearing three additional documents, which were admitted without objection as Ax. G - I.
I also left the record open after the hearing to give Applicant time to submit additional
relevant information. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on May 6, 2010. The
record closed on May 14, 2010, when I received Applicant’s post-hearing submission,
which has been admitted over Department Counsel’s objections  as Ax. J.4
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant accrued
approximately $95,203 for 21 delinquent debts (SOR 1.a - 1.u). Under Guideline E, the
Government alleged that Applicant was a co-defendant in a civil suit brought by the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in August 2008. (SOR 2.a)  The SEC had5
claimed that, by deliberately issuing misleading press releases about a company for
which he was the chief executive officer (CEO), Applicant manipulated the value of
shares of that company. The suit also alleged that Applicant received proceeds of the
sale of the company’s stock through an unregistered distribution. In the SOR, the
Government also alleged that Applicant deliberately lied to the SEC when he responded
to the civil suit by claiming he had nothing to do with the press releases and had no
knowledge of them. (SOR 2.b)
In response to the SOR, Applicant denied with explanation the allegations in
SOR 1.b, 1.c, and 1.u. He admitted with explanation the debts alleged at SOR 1.a, 1.d -
1.t, and 1.v. He also admitted the allegation in SOR 2.a, but denied the allegation in
3
SOR 2.b. His admissions are incorporated herein as facts. Having reviewed the
transcript, and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 46 years old and employed by a defense contractor in a position that
requires a security clearance. Applicant has worked for his current employer since
February 2010 after working for another contractor as a national security analyst from
April 2007 until February 2010. (Gx. 1) His co-workers and other associates who have
known him over the past ten years characterize Applicant as a man of good character
and integrity, who is also reliable, knowledgeable, and hardworking. Several
professional sources from Government agencies and private companies praised him for
his expertise, good judgment, and commitment to his work. (Ax. J)
Applicant served on active duty in the United States Air Force from November
1984 until December 2004, when he retired under honorable conditions with the rank of
Master Sergeant. He has held a security clearance since about 1989. (Gx. 1) Records
of his military service indicate his performance in the Air Force was outstanding. Among
his many personal awards were multiple Air Force Achievement Medals, multiple Air
Force Commendation Medals, multiple Meritorious Service Medals, and numerous other
citations and letters of commendation. (Ax. J)
Applicant was married from November 1984 until February 2006, when he and
his ex-wife divorced. They have 12 children ranging in age from 5 to 24. He and three of
his children now live with his fiancée and her two children. Applicant’s divorce decree
initially obligated him to pay off their marital debt, relinquish the marital residence to his
ex-wife (who subsequently sold it), and to pay alimony of $1,100 and child support of
$3,516 each month. In August 2008, the decree was modified. Applicant now pays his
ex-wife alimony of $100 each month and child support of $2,400. After falling behind in
his payments for a short time due to unemployment, Applicant paid his arrearages and
is now current on all of his support obligations. (Gx. 2; Ax. J; Tr. 74 - 75)
From December 2004 until November 2006, Applicant served as the CEO in a
small business owned by a person he had known when they worked together at an Air
Force base. Applicant was in charge of the day-to-day operations. The company was
established to do business as a defense contractor providing computer and physical
security services for various DoD facilities and installations. Applicant and a small staff
ran the company’s operations from State A. He was the registered agent for the
company in that state. The finance, human resources, administrative support, and the
rest of the company’s employees lived and worked in State B. The owners resided in
State C and were never involved in the daily operations of the company. Their primary
focus was on obtaining investment capital and to sell stock to fund the company’s
growth. (Gx. 4; Tr. 49 - 51, 53, 82 - 90)
In April 2005, Applicant’s company became a sub-contractor to another defense
contractor. That contract did not guarantee how much work, if any, the prime contractor
would seek from Applicant’s company. (Gx. 4) Applicant’s company subsequently
issued a press release that claimed the contract was worth six million dollars, despite
the fact that no work had been requested by the prime contractor. Two other press
releases claiming other multi-million dollar contracts were issued in June 2005 and
4
January 2006. After each of the press releases, both the volume of stock in Applicant’s
company and the value of that stock increased significantly. There was no support for
the claims made in the press releases. (Id.) Applicant testified that in January 2005 his
company had no revenue, no contracts, and employed only five people. At the end of
the year, the company employed about 35 people and earned about $1.3 million in total
revenue, far less than the figures claimed in the company’s press releases. (Tr. 90 - 91)
In August 2008, the SEC filed a civil complaint in federal district court against
Applicant and the owners of his company alleging they deliberately issued, through
press releases, false information about the value of their company. The complaint
further alleged that Applicant and the other principals in the company issued the press
releases in a deliberate attempt to inflate the value of company stock and to profit from
improper sales of that stock. (Gx. 4) Applicant admitted that he had been involved with
getting the contract that was the subject of the first press release, and that some of the
information therein came from an internal working document. However, Applicant has
always denied any wrongdoing and insisted that the owner issued the press releases
over his strenuous objections. Contrary to the SOR 2.b allegation, Applicant did not
deny knowledge of the press releases. (Gx. 3; Gx. 7; Tr. 92 - 94)
In an Order for Summary Judgment against Applicant’s co-defendants, the court
agreed that Applicant told the owner not to publish the press releases because the
information would be misleading. (Ax. J) On December 22, 2009, the final judgment as
to Applicant consisted of three permanent injunctions against future SEC-related
conduct by the Applicant. Based on his finances, the court did not order any civil
penalties or disgorgement of any funds he may have received through the increased
value of his company’s stock. (Tr. 97 - 98) It was not established that Applicant ever
received any funds from the sale of company stock. The final judgment against
Applicant was by consent and did not contain any admission or denial of the SEC’s
allegations. (Ax. G)
The company for which Applicant was CEO continued to exist until about
January 2007, but there was no work after about July 2006. Applicant stopped working
for the company in November 2006, but he was not paid consistently after July 2006.
He stayed on as CEO only because he felt an obligation to try to protect the employees
under him, many of whom he had recruited to join the company. (Tr. 95 -96) Applicant
was unemployed from November 2006 until he was hired by a defense contractor in
April 2007. (Gx. 1) During his unemployment, he was still obligated to pay his ex-wife
the monthly support specified in their divorce decree. As already noted, he fell behind
on some of his payments. He also used personal credit extensively to make ends meet. 
As a result, he incurred significant delinquent debt that was largely unpaid as of
his hearing. The debts alleged at SOR 1.a, 1.g - 1.m, 1.r, and 1.t total about $36,460
and consist of unpaid credit cards or other personal credit accounts. The $17,610 debt
alleged at SOR 1.p is for a truck that Applicant purchased in January 2005. He began
missing payments in March 2007, but was able to make some payments in May and
July 2007. The truck was repossessed in August 2007. Applicant owes the amount
remaining after the truck was resold. (Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Gx. 11; Gx. 12; Gx. 13)
5
Credit reports obtained during Applicant’s background investigation also showed
that Applicant was obligated for a $1,633 debt (SOR 1.d) owed to an apartment
complex where he and his fiancee lived in 2007. This debt has been paid. (Answer to
SOR; Ax. J; Tr. 57 - 58) Also related to that apartment was an alleged $191 debt (SOR
1.q) to a cable television company for failing to return the cable box after he moved out.
Applicant denies owing this debt as it represents charges made after he properly closed
the account. (Tr. 65 - 66) A $381 debt for a satellite television account (SOR 1.e) and a
$3,524 debt for the balance due on a home loan (SOR 1.o) were to be paid by his ex-
wife using proceeds from the sale of the marital residence. Applicant has no knowledge
of a $173 debt for an unpaid medical bill (SOR 1.f) attributed to him. (Answer to SOR) It
may be for a doctor’s visit for one of his children, but it should have been covered by
TriCare, the medical insurance for retired military members.
Also attributed to Applicant in the credit reports obtained during his background
investigation is an unpaid telephone bill for $18,987. (SOR 1.s) After Applicant and his
ex-wife separated in 2006, one of his sons came to live with him. Without Applicant’s
knowledge, the boy subscribed to an internet service provider using a long-distance
phone number as the means of connecting to the internet. The use of a standard phone
line was necessitated by the fact that Applicant lived in a rural area. Applicant tried for
several months to resolve the debt, but the phone company would not negotiate. (Tr. 66
- 67, 105 - 106)
In 2006, Applicant gave a small piece of land in State A to his brother. However,
his brother did not have the deed recorded properly and the taxes were still charged to
Applicant. As a result, Applicant incurred a $269 tax debt to State A that was enforced
through a lien filed against him in August 2006. (SOR 1.u) This debt has been paid and
the deed has been properly recorded. (Tr. 67 - 69, 106 - 107; Ax. J)
As the registered agent for his company in State A, Applicant was named on all
accounts to be paid by the company. When the company failed in 2006, he was
obligated to pay several debts, including an unpaid corporate cell phone account for
$2,386. (SOR 1.n) He also became obligated for unpaid corporate taxes not paid by the
company. The tax debts total $13,589. (SOR 1.b and 1.c) Applicant denies he should be
obligated to pay these debts, but he has been working with State A tax authorities to
repay the debts. (Ax. A; Ax. B) He also claimed that the actual total owed is about
$2,905. (Ax. I) However, that amount is likely the amount he owes for his own income
taxes after his ex-wife improperly claimed their children on her taxes at the same time
he claimed them on his. He is repaying that debt through automatic deductions from his
paycheck. (Ax. D; Tr. 55, 72 - 74)
Applicant also made $50 monthly payments to the creditor alleged in SOR 1.a
(Ax. F) beginning in January 2009. He also received financial counseling and was trying
to obtain a debt consolidation loan in 2008. The company he was working with
recommended he wait until he knew whether his alimony and support obligations would
be reduced. However, after his support obligations were reduced by about $2,100 in
August 2008, he did not continue the debt consolidation loan process. In April 2010, five
days before his hearing, he retained an attorney to file a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition.
(Tr. 57, 79 - 81) The current status of his bankruptcy is unknown.
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 Directive. 6.3.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
6
Applicant’s current finances reflect a positive cash flow, after all expenses
including child support. Applicant estimates he has between $600 and $800 remaining
each month. His retirement savings total about $6,000. (Tr. 81 - 82)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,7
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under AG ¶ 15 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) and AG ¶ 18
(Guideline F - Financial Considerations).
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a
security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  A person who8
has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the
Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
7
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that:
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
The Government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in
SOR 1.a - 1.v; that is, that Applicant accrued about $95,203 for 21 delinquent debts
since about 2006, and that he was charged with violating provisions of the Securities
and Exchange Act in 2005 and 2006. The debts alleged at SOR 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.o, 1.q,
and 1.u have been paid or otherwise resolved. For reasons discussed under Guideline
E, the allegation at SOR 1.v is also resolved for the Applicant. However, those debts
comprise only about 6% of the total debt he owes. Applicant has not demonstrated that
he is able or willing to pay or resolve his debts. Even without the debts that have been
resolved, or discounting the debts that may be attributed to the failed business (SOR
1.b, 1.c, and 1.n), Applicant still owes about $54,000 in delinquent personal debt.
Accordingly, the record requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations).
In response to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant established that he has a
valid dispute as to the debts alleged at SOR 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.o, and 1.u. Accordingly, the
mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue) applies. As to the $18,000 phone bill alleged at SOR 1.s,
Applicant was responsible for knowing what was happening under his own roof. He
cannot reasonably dispute such a large phone bill just because his son caused the debt.
Applicant also established that many of his debts arose when he became
unemployed in November 2006. His loss of income combined with a large monthly
alimony and child support obligation caused him to rely on credit cards and other forms
of personal credit to make ends meet for several months. He also became obligated to
pay other debts related to the business for which he was a CEO between late 2005 and
late 2006. Other alleged debts related to an apartment he rented after his divorce, and
8
debts his ex-wife should have paid after she sold their house have been resolved.
These facts require consideration of the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's
control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances). However, most of the debts remain unpaid and have not been
addressed in a constructive manner. Applicant claimed that he received some financial
counseling and had started the process of obtaining a debt consolidation loan, but no
action has been taken since August 2008. Applicant intends to file for federal
bankruptcy protection, but did not retain an attorney for that purpose until less than a
week before his hearing. Available information does not support a conclusion that he
acted responsibly under the circumstances. The mitigating condition at AG ¶ 20(b) does
not apply. Likewise, because most of his debts have not yet been paid or otherwise
resolved, none of the other mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has failed to present
sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns raised by the Government’s
information.
Personal Conduct
The Government also presented sufficient information to support the SOR 2.a
allegation that Applicant was the subject of a civil suit by the SEC in August 2008.
However, all of the available information probative of whether Applicant actually
engaged in the conduct alleged by the SEC tends to show he tried to stop the press
releases and that he had no control over the information that was released. In short, he
was in over his head and was being manipulated by the owner and other co-defendants
in the suit. More specifically, a federal district judge reached that conclusion in his Order
of Summary Judgment against the owner of the company. The record as a whole
regarding Applicant’s role in the malfeasance alleged by the SEC shows that Applicant
was not a witting accomplice in the fraudulent actions of the owner and other co-
defendants. Further, although permanent injunctions were issued in the Consent Order
against the Applicant, the same order does not contain any finding of culpability by
Applicant. Applicant’s response to SOR 2.a merely acknowledged the fact that the SEC
named him in a civil suit. His admission did not establish that he acted as the SEC had
claimed. As such, the SOR allegation that he was the subject of an SEC lawsuit, without
more, does not support application of any of the disqualifying conditions under
Guideline E. 
Further, available information does not support the SOR 2.b allegation that
Applicant deliberately lied to the SEC in his response to the civil complaint. This
allegation is based on the complaint itself (Gx. 4), which does not prove that Applicant
lied. Applicant was entitled to his answer to the SEC complaint (Gx. 7), in which he
denied intentionally trying to manipulate the value of the company’s stock. Again, in the
Order for Summary Judgment against the company’s owner, the judge concluded that
Applicant told his boss not to issue the press releases. To be disqualifying, Applicant’s
answer to the SEC must have been a deliberate attempt to provide “false or misleading
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official,
competent medical authority, or other official government representative.” (AG  ¶ 16(b))
 See footnote 5, supra.10
  See footnote 7, supra.11
9
That did not happen here. On balance, the Government’s information does not support
disqualification under Guideline E. SOR 2.a, 2.b, and 1.v are resolved for the Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and F. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 46 years
old and presumed to be a mature adult. References from co-workers, Government
officials, former Air Force comrades, and other associates and friends laud his work
ethic, dedication, expertise, and reliability. As to the suit against him and others by the
SEC, available information reflects that he did not knowingly engage in any fraudulent
conduct as his co-defendants did. His candor and his personal conduct pertaining to the
SEC suit are not in question here. However, Applicant’s judgment and suitability for
access to classified information remain in question because of his financial problems.
Although most of his debt was the result of a period of unemployment and his divorce-
related support obligations, he has not responded to those challenges in a reasonable
way. Although he has had steady income since about April 2007, he failed to follow
through on a debt counseling and consolidation effort in 2008. He has only recently
initiated bankruptcy proceedings. Although such action may be his most appropriate
course of action, the fact that he waited so long to affirmatively resolve his debts
undermines confidence in his continued access to classified information at this time. 
On balance, a fair and commonsense assessment  of all available information10
bearing on Applicant’s past and current circumstances shows he has not satisfactorily
addressed the government’s doubts, raised by his ongoing financial problems, about his
ability or willingness to protect the government’s interests. Because protection of the
national interest is the paramount concern in these adjudications, those doubts must be
resolved against the individual and in favor of the Government.11
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
10
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.I: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.t: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.v: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to allow Applicant to have access to classified information. Request for security
clearance is denied.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
