 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01719 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
The Government failed to establish deliberate falsifications of a security 
clearance application by the Applicant under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. However, 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant answered the SOR, initially on February 1, 2010, followed by a March 
2, 2010 supplemental answer. He also requested an administrative determination, but 
 
2 
 
the Department Counsel requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on April 
22, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 23, 2010, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on May 27, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6, which were received without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is 
marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without objection. The record 
was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted 
documents, which were marked AE F and G and admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s post-hearing memorandum is marked HE II. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 9, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since January 2005. In 1999, he earned a bachelor’s degree in 
computer science. He is single and has no children. He currently earns approximately 
$85,000 per year. He currently holds a security clearance1  
 
 The SOR alleges two delinquent debts including a judgment. The debts were 
listed on credit reports obtained on October 23, 2008 and December 5, 2009. Applicant 
admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose when he bought a home in May 2007. His 
mortgage was approximately $328,000 after making a $2,000 down payment to buy the 
house. This was a 40-year mortgage at a 6.75% fixed interest rate. His original monthly 
payments were about $2,500 per month. In May 2008, Applicant was struggling to make 
his mortgage payments. He became over extended on his credit card debt and his 
mortgage payments increased by approximately $250 per month starting in July 2008. 
Applicant asked the lender why his payments increased and was told it was because of 
an escrow adjustment. Sometime during the spring of 2008, Applicant began skipping 
mortgage payments about every other month. In July 2008, Applicant applied with a 
nonprofit corporation for assistance in seeking a loan modification from his lender. The 
last update from the nonprofit corporation (June 22, 2010) shows that it is still 
negotiating with the Applicant’s lender over a loan modification. The last mortgage 
payment he made was in April 2009. He testified he stopped because he was told by 
the lender not to make any further payments while he was in the process of negotiating 
a loan modification. He offered no documents from the lender supporting this assertion. 
He currently owes over $40,000 on missed mortgage payments on the debt listed at 
SOR ¶ 1.a.3    
 
  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 45-47, 52. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to SOR (AA). 
 
3 AA; Tr. at 57-61, 63-70; AE B; GE 6. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant has been employed in the same position since he bought his home. He 
has not suffered any diminution of pay since he bought his home. Additionally, he did 
not take on any other major debt obligations since he bought his home. Rather than 
saving the money that was supposed to go to his mortgage payments, Applicant paid 
the credit card judgment (SOR ¶ 1.b) and two other debts not listed in the SOR. If 
Applicant’s loan modification is not approved he will have to give up the house, possibly 
through a short sale. His personal financial statement indicates that he has a monthly 
deficit of approximately $500 per month.4   
 
 Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Position (e-
QIP) on October 7, 2008. He answered “No” to Sections 28 a. and 28 b., which asked, 
respectively, in the last 7 years have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt or 
currently 90 days delinquent on any debt? Applicant fully discussed his finances and 
delinquent debts when he was interviewed for his background investigation in 
November 2008. He responded truthfully to DOHA interrogatories in April 2009 and 
August 2009. He was open and candid about his finances at his hearing. Applicant 
denied intending to mislead the government about his finances. He credibly testified that 
he did not know that his mortgage was either 180 days or 90 days overdue. Because he 
was continuously attempting to catch up with his delinquent mortgage payments, it was 
unclear in his mind if he had ever been 180 days or 90 days delinquent on his 
mortgage.5 After considering all the evidence, I find that Applicant did not intentionally 
falsify his e-QIP. 
 
 Applicant did not receive financial counseling other than his dealings with the 
nonprofit corporation assisting with his loan modification. He also sought a loan 
consolidation from his credit union. The credit union turned him down.6   
 
 Applicant had two coworkers testify and they expressed favorable opinions about 
Applicant’s professionalism, honesty, trustworthiness, and loyalty. They were both 
aware of Applicant’s financial problems. Additionally, a character letter from a friend, 
who has known Applicant since 1999, describes him as “an honorable and trustworthy 
citizen”.7   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 95, 100-105; GE 4. 
 
5 Tr. at 78-80, GE 1, 3-5.  
6 Tr. at 61-62. 
 
7 Tr. at 111-114, 118-122; AE E. 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and a judgment and was unable or 
unwilling to satisfy his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant still owes $40,000 of missed monthly payments on his mortgage, with 
no progress on a loan modification plan. His financial issues are current and ongoing. 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
There is nothing about Applicant’s financial condition that was caused by events 
beyond his control. He decided to buy a home in 2007 and had a good paying job to 
support that decision. He still has that job and no unexpected expenses, such as major 
 
6 
 
medical bills, etc., arose to cause him financial distress. His mortgage payments did rise 
by $250 per month caused by escrow adjustments, but this type of increase is not 
uncommon. I find there were no conditions that were outside his control. AG ¶ 20(b) is 
not applicable.  
 
 Although Applicant is attempting to have his mortgage loan modified, there is no 
certainty that it will be modified. He has not sought out financial counseling aside from 
enrolling in the modification program. His finances are not being resolved and are not 
under control. His pay off of the judgment listed at SOR ¶ 1.b is insufficient to support a 
finding that he has made a good-faith effort to pay or otherwise resolve his debts. 
Likewise, merely enrolling into a loan modification program does not amount to a good 
faith effort to repay the loan under these circumstances.8 AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not 
applicable to the debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant does not dispute the debts. AG ¶ 
20(e) is not applicable.  
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set 
out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
[sensitive] information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the [public trust position] process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the [public trust position] process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
                                                          
8 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant submitted inaccurate information on his e-QIP, but as discussed above, 
it was not an intentional falsification. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. I also found Applicant to 
be honest and candid about his finances. Appellant’s mortgage delinquency remains a 
concern. Although he is seeking a loan modification, that process has been ongoing 
since July 2008, with no outcome and a positive result is speculative at this point. Even 
if the loan is somewhat modified, according to Applicant’s current income to expense 
worksheet, he still could not afford the payments. He has no contingency plans if the 
modification does not go through.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did mitigate the Personal Conduct concerns, but did not mitigate the 
Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
