1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-03135
SSN: ------------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The record evidence
shows Applicant was denied access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) in
2005. The other governmental agency (OGA) took this action based her involvement in
drug-related activity from 1997 to about 2003 or 2004, minor employee theft, and failure
to fully disclose her drug-related activity during the security clearance process. In 2007,
she completed her current security clearance application, and she did not provide a full,
frank, and candid response to a question about her involvement in drug-related activity.
Although Applicant has done a magnificent job at building a new life and removing
herself from an unsavory environment where illegal activity was the norm, her deliberate
falsification of the post-2005 security clearance application cannot be overlooked.
Accordingly, as explained in further detail below, this case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Exhibits A and B. 2
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on February 26,1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining it was unable to find it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guidelines
known as Guideline E for personal conduct and Guideline J for criminal conduct. The
criminal conduct allegations refer to the personal conduct allegations as these matters
are factually interrelated. In brief, the SOR alleges Applicant engaged in employee theft,
illegal drug-related activity by assisting her mother, boyfriend, and brother in their
conduct, and six instances of making false statements during the security clearance
process. The SOR also recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative
judge to decide whether to deny or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR in a timely fashion, and she requested a hearing. In
her Answer, she admitted the SOR allegations except for ¶ 1.f. The case was assigned
to me May 3, 2010. The hearing took place June 2, 2010. The hearing transcript (Tr.)
was received June 9, 2010.  
Findings of Fact
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has never
married and has no children. She has a bachelor’s degree in computer science. Since
July 2004, she has worked as a software engineer for a large publicly-traded company
engaged in defense contracting. Her job performance has been good and she has
developed a reputation as a loyal and dependable employee.  She is currently working2
part-time because she is also a part-time student in her second year of law school.
Upon completing law school, her long-term goals are to work in the areas of intellectual
property and litigation.    
The genesis of this case may be traced to about March 2005, when the OGA
denied Applicant access to SCI. The OGA’s clearance decision statement described in
detail Applicant’s involvement drug-related activity 1997 to about 2003 or 2004, minor
 Exhibit 6 at 4–5. 3
 Tr. 58–59. 4
 Exhibit 4. 5
3
employee theft, and failure to fully disclose her drug-related activity during the security
clearance process. These matters are the basis for the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.l
and will not be repeated further. The primary source for those facts was information
Applicant provided during a series of interviews facilitated by polygraph examination.
The polygraph examination results are not in evidence here. 
The OGA’s clearance decision statement also provided the specific reasons for
the denial as follows:
[Applicant] is 22 years old. From at least 1994 to the present, she has
demonstrated a pattern that reveals herself to be an individual lacking in
maturity, judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, honesty, and a willingness
to abide by rules and regulations. She has been involved in various drug-
related activities from at least 1997 to the present, to include removing
and hiding evidence from the police, and has stolen from two previous
employers (one employment she did not report on her forms). During her
[OGA] SCI processing, she failed to fully disclose her involvement with
illegal drugs on her forms and during her first interview with an [OGA]
representative. In addition, [Applicant] did not initially report her theft from
previous employers, disclosing only during her second [OGA] interview.
Finally, [Applicant] agreed to abide by the [OGA’s] Drug Policy (by signing
the [OGA’s] Personnel Security Policy Advisory on 5 December 2003),
which states that the improper use of illegal drugs is strictly prohibited.
Improper use includes the use, transfer, possession, sale, or purchase of
any drug. She then violated this policy by driving her brother to purchase
drugs, assisting her boyfriend in the dividing and packaging of cocaine for
sale, and transporting her brother’s cocaine (in September 2004 and
Christmas time, December 2003).  3
The OGA concluded that her actions in the past several years were inconsistent with
the applicable standards for access to SCI. 
After receiving and reviewing the OGA’s clearance decision statement, Applicant
reserved the right to appeal the denial.  Subsequently, she decided to not pursue it4
because she was demoralized, embarrassed, and lacked the confidence to do so.
More than two years later in August 2007, Applicant completed another security
clearance application, which is the basis for this case.  In response to Question 26, she5
acknowledged having a clearance or access authorization denied. In response to
Question 24a, Applicant admitted using illegal drugs in the last seven years and she
 Tr. 39. 6
 Tr. 41. 7
4
reported a one-time use of marijuana at a college party. In response to Question 24c,
Applicant denied having any drug-related involvement in the last seven years (the
question specified “the illegal purchase, manufacture, trafficking, production, transfer,
shipping, receiving, or sale or any narcotic, depressant, stimulant, hallucinogen, or
cannabis for your own intended use or that of another”). Nowhere in her application did
Applicant report her involvement with drug-related activity as previously disclosed during
the OGA security clearance process. 
Applicant was raised in a neighborhood in a large city where illegal drug activity
was rampant. Her mother, until recently, was addicted to cocaine. Her boyfriend from
about 1999 to 2003, was a drug dealer, and her brother was involved as well. Applicant
described her situation as follows:
I grew up in [a large city] and I had a lot of negative things around me,
particularity drugs, a lot of illegal activity. It’s not something that I’m a
stranger to, it was in my house, it was outside, it was where I played. It
was all around me.
So a lot of what I did when I was young was a result of my environment
and thinking that those things were normal. It was a part of my norm to
see illegal activity. And it became part of me to some extent, until I started
to develop into my own person which didn’t happen until post-college
when I started to get help and guidance from other people.6
* * * *
So I haven’t done these things or anything close to illegal since college. It
just took until now for me to realize that even if I don’t include this as a
part of my self definition, in a process like that and when I’m going to work
for the government, the importance of candor and I really thought that at
one point that if I don’t consider these things a part of me then they won’t
be.
But going through this process twice, once in 2004 and once again now,
I’m realizing that it’s best to just say whatever it is and let whoever decide
for themselves whether they want to think that it’s me or not, rather than
approaching this like a job application and trying to make it look the best
possible way it can look. So that’s that background.7
 Tr. 40. 8
 Tr. 75–84. 9
 Tr. 83–84. 10
 Tr. 92–96. 11
5
Applicant’s primary focus now is work, education, and changing her family history
beginning with her.  She has taken multiple steps to remove herself from her previous8
environment as follows: (1) she bought a home and moved away from her mother’s
home; (2) she has not used marijuana since she was a college student; (3) she urged
her mother to seek drug rehabilitation and her efforts were successful; (4) she ended
her relationship with her drug-dealing boyfriend in 2003; (5) she established and
maintains a mentor-relationship with a former manager and actively seeks her mentor’s
advice on professional and personal issues; (6) she is advancing in her career as a
software engineer; (7) in addition to classes, she is involved in other law-school
activities; (8) she mentors truant teenage girls at a local middle school; and (9) she
spends free time with her young nieces to expose them to positive activities such as
swimming and gymnastics. 
Concerning her 2007 security clearance application, Applicant explained she
answered Question 24c, about drug-related activity, in the negative because she still
believed that she had not done anything wrong, she was not a drug dealer, and her
involvement with drugs, via her boyfriend and brother, was not part of her life.  Applicant9
explained her thinking as follows:
I know it’s probably not the best thing but I’ve always considered those
things, I kind of block them out. I mean at these points I think I just did not
consider them me, just a part of what was going on around me. It’s hard
for me to explain how I’m separating this but it was things that were just
happening because I was there not because I wanted to do it or I initiated
it. And so I mentally separated the two.  10
Applicant’s thought process has now changed and she no longer separates or
compartmentalizes that part of her life.  She credits receiving the SOR and going11
through this process as one factor for the change. She credits her law school education
as the second factor. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to12
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.13
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 14
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 15
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.18
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.19
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 20
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).21
6
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As12
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt13
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An14
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  15
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting16
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An17
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate18
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme19
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.20
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.21
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating
conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a
commonsense decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.22
 AG ¶¶ 15, 16, and 17 (setting forth the security concerns and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).23
 AG ¶ 15. 24
7
information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person
concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust persuaded
confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The
decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s
loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines22
the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
To start, I have no concerns about the underlying personal conduct or criminal
conduct (i.e., the employee theft, drug-related activity, and false statements) that formed
the basis for the OGA’s adverse decision in 2005. Those matters are summarily decided
for Applicant. The evidence shows this chapter of Applicant’s life is over. She has done
a magnificent job at building a new life and removing herself from an unsavory
environment where illegal activity was the norm. She did so through a combination of
education, a good employment record, determination, self-discipline, and what appears
to be a great work ethic. I am both impressed and persuaded that these matters are
now in Applicant’s past, and I assess the likelihood of recurrence as essentially nil. But
the post-2005 security clearance application is a different matter, and it is addressed
below. 
Under Guideline E for personal conduct,  the suitability of an applicant may be23
questioned or put into doubt due to false statements and credible adverse information
that may not be enough to support action under any other guideline. The overall
concern under Guideline E is that:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  24
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 16(a). 25
 AG ¶ 17(a) – (g). 26
 AG ¶¶ 30, 31, and 32 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 27
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1) – (9).28
8
The issue here is the truthfulness of Applicant’s response to a question seeking
information about her drug-related activity when she completed the security clearance
application in 2007. She answered the question in the negative, her answer was clearly
incorrect, and the evidence shows her answer was deliberately false. Indeed, she
admitted the falsification when answering the SOR. The most likely explanation for this
is she was still compartmentalizing that part of her life in order to paint herself in the
most favorable light. She viewed the security clearance application as another type of
job application in which she sought to put her best foot forward. Although her thought
process is understandable, Question 24c of the security clearance application required
her to provide a full, frank, and truthful answer about her drug-related activity and she
failed to do so. To some extent, her false answer is aggravated by the facts surrounding
the denial of SCI in 2005. When she completed the security clearance application in
2007, she had then worked as a software engineer for a defense contractor for about
three years, and she was on notice that she was required to report such information to
security officials.  
The established falsification supports application of the relevant disqualifying
condition that addresses the deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of
relevant facts from a security questionnaire.  I reviewed all the potential mitigating25
conditions under the Guideline E  and conclude none apply to the falsification. Making26
false or misleading statements to the federal government during the security clearance
process is serious misconduct. A deliberate falsification is not easily explained away,
excused, or mitigated. Accordingly, Guideline E is decided against Applicant. 
The established falsification is also evidence of criminal conduct under Guideline
J.   Making a false statement on a security clearance application is a violation of federal27
law, specifically 18 U.S.C. § 1001 (making a false statement within the jurisdiction of a
federal agency). It is likewise unmitigated. Accordingly, Guideline J is decided against
Applicant. 
To conclude, the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s falsification of
her 2007 security clearance application justifies current doubts about her judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I
resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion,
I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s favorable28
evidence. Nevertheless, Applicant did not meet her ultimate burden of persuasion to
obtain a favorable clearance decision. At this point, Applicant’s suitability or fitness for a
security clearance is still a work in progress. 
 This falsification allegation is  decided for Applicant because the summary of the interview (Exhibits 4 and29
5) was insufficient evidence, and the investigator who interviewed Applicant did not testify. 
9
I carefully observed Applicant’s demeanor and listened to her testimony during
the hearing. And I reviewed the record in detail and thought about this case for several
days. Having done so, I am persuaded that Applicant has outstanding potential for a
bright future, and she would be unwise to allow this clearance decision to discourage or
deter her. She has proven that she can accomplish whatever she sets her mind to
despite the challenges. Now that she understands that a core value of the security
clearance process is the willingness and ability to self-report adverse information, I trust
Applicant will provide full, frank, and candid answers should she apply for a security
clearance in the future. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.l: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: For Applicant29
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant (on ¶ 1.m)
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
