                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-00990 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 1, 2008, Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On August 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B 
(Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 9, 2009. She 
answered the SOR in writing on or before September 11, 2009, and requested a 
decision without a hearing. DOHA received the request on September 11, 2009. On or 
about October 2009, Applicant changed her selection and decided to have a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
January 7, 2010, and I received the case assignment on January 13, 2010. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on January 29, 2010, and I convened the hearing as 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
scheduled on February 22, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which 
were received without objection. Exhibit 3, the request for administrative notice of 
documents pertaining to the People’s Republic of China, consists of 15 subparts 
(Attachments I through XV). Applicant testified. Her attorney submitted Exhibits A 
through E, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 
4, 2010. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the People’s Republic of China (PRC). (Tr. at 10-12.) The 
request and the attached documents were admitted into evidence as Hearing Exhibit 3. 
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a to 
1.d  and ¶¶ 1.f to 1.j of the SOR, with explanations. She denied the factual allegations in 
¶ 1.e of the SOR. She also provided additional information to support her request for 
eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 41 years old, married, and has two children, ages 6 and 8 years old. 
Her children were born in the United States. She works for a government contractor. 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 1998 and has a U.S. passport. Her last trip to the 
PRC was in 2000 and she has no present plans to travel there in the future.  Her mother 
visited her in the United States in 2005, and her father visited her in 2008. She does not 
speak to her mother because of some past conflict. She communicates with her father 
about once every two months by telephone. Her husband was born in the PRC. He lives 
in the United States and is a U.S. citizen. He works for a local energy company. She 
and her husband own a home in the United States and their combined income exceeds 
$150,000 annually. Applicant expressed her loyalty to the United States. (Tr. 14-18, 25-
27, 31, 37; Exhibit E) 
 
 Applicant was born in 1968. She came alone to the United States in 1985 after 
high school graduation to attend college here. Her father wanted her to study in the 
United States and to live here. Applicant graduated from college in 1991 with a 
bachelor’s degree. She attended another U.S. university and obtained another 
bachelor’s degree in 1994. (Tr. 28-30, 41-44) 
 
 Applicant’s parents live and work in the PRC. They were born there and are 
citizens of the PRC. They are members of the Communist Party in the PRC.  Applicant 
voluntarily disclosed her parent’s political party memberships. Applicant was never a 
member of the Communist Party when she lived in the PRC. According to Applicant’s 
 
3 
 
 
explanation, her parents joined the Communist Party as a means to obtain a better job 
and an improved income. Both parents worked at PRC universities and are now retired, 
receiving a pension from the PRC government. Her parents do not have access to any 
information or governmental connection in their retirement status. Her parents do not 
know of Applicant’s work for her employer. (Tr. 17-19, 24, 25, 33; Exhibits 1, 2) 
 
 Applicant has an uncle who is a university professor living in the PRC. She 
speaks with him once a year. She also has an aunt who is a member of the Communist 
Party and lives in the PRC. Applicant speaks with her once a year. Applicant told the 
government investigator that her aunt has no affiliation with a foreign government. (Tr. 
21; Exhibits 1, 2) 
 
 Applicant had two brothers who were twins. One died several years ago as a 
crime victim. The other brother is a banker in the PRC. He is not a member of the 
Communist Party. Applicant explained her brother did not need to join the Communist 
Party to gain economic advancement in the modern PRC. She speaks to him only once 
every few months over the telephone. (Tr. 20, 33, 34; Exhibits 1, 2)  
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law lives in the PRC. She lives in a rural community. She is 
not a member of the Communist Party. Applicant has never met her and has no contact 
with her. (Tr. 37; Exhibits 1, 2)  
 
 Applicant submitted two favorable personal and employment references. She 
also submitted her June 2008 employee evaluation showing rankings in all categories of 
“above average.” This evaluation was her 90-day performance evaluation. (Exhibits A-
D) 
  
I take administrative notice of the following facts concerning the PRC. The PRC 
is a one-party Communist totalitarian state. It has an economy growing at 10% annually, 
and expanding military forces, including its naval forces. It engages in industrial and 
military espionage on a regular basis against the United States and other countries. The 
United States and the PRC have been rivals since 1948, when the Communists took 
control of mainland China, and the Nationalist government fled to the island of Taiwan.  
Taiwan remains an issue of contention between the two countries. The U.S. - China 
Economic and Security Review Commission=s 2006 report to the U.S. Congress found 
the PRC has a large and aggressive intelligence gathering operation in the United 
States, particularly in the scientific and military fields. The PRC engages regularly in 
military, economic, and industrial espionage, including stealing nuclear weapons 
technology, missile design information, and commercial technology. The PRC also 
obtains commercial information through the use of front companies, buying dual-use 
technologies, and the direct collection of technology by non-intelligence agencies and 
individuals. The People’s Liberation Army (PLA) is integrated into the civil industrial 
base in the PRC, known as the “digital triangle.” The 2007 Report to Congress of the 
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission (Exhibit 3, Attachment V at 
page 102) states the linkages between the military and Chinese commercial information 
technology companies and the “state R&D institute” are longstanding, “as 
 
4 
 
 
telecommunications and information technology in China were originally under military 
auspices and the commercial relationships with state and military research institutes 
remain important.”  Additionally, the U.S. State Department reported the PRC has a 
poor human rights record, including but not limited to, denial of free speech and press, 
fair and open trials, and other basic rights recognized by the international community.  It 
also suppresses political dissent, using arbitrary arrests, forced confessions, and 
mistreatment of prisoners as part of its operational methods to maintain control of its 
population. (Exhibit 3 and its Attachments I to XV) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concern pertaining to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1 and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant’s mother, father, brother, aunt, and uncle are citizens and residents of 
the PRC. She does not contact her mother because they have a personality conflict. 
She speaks with her father monthly. She contacts her brother periodically. Applicant 
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
6 
 
 
annually contacts her aunt and uncle. These contacts create a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because they are 
made with persons living in a Communist dictatorship that has a history of economic 
and military espionage against the United States. It also creates a potential conflict of 
interest if Applicant were approached by any of her relatives to obtain information from 
Applicant on behalf of the PRC government. Applicant would have to choose between 
her loyalty to the United States and her relatives. AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) have been raised by 
the evidence. 
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation.  Two conditions that could mitigate the disqualifications are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant established the application of AG ¶ 8(b) and 8(c). The evidence 
presented at the hearing showed the true nature of her connections to her family and 
her substantial personal investment in her life in the United States.  
 
Applicant showed sufficient evidence and a persuasive presentation that her 
loyalty to the U.S. is paramount over her connections to any members of her family in 
the PRC. She has been in the United States for 24 years, longer than her first 16 years 
in the PRC as she was growing up. She obtained her education in the United States, 
owns property in the United States, and her children, ages 6 and 8,  were born in the 
United States. She and her husband became U.S. citizens and residents. Applicant 
owns a home in the United States, earns a very good salary and with her husband’s 
income they earn more than $150,000 annually. When Applicant became a citizen in 
1998, she renounced her PRC citizenship. She has not travelled to the PRC for 10 
years and has no plans to travel there in the future.  
 
There is no risk of exploitation or influence because of these tangential familial 
connections when balanced with Applicant’s substantial economic, educational, and 
immediate family connections to the United States. Therefore, she can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interests, 
 
 Her relationship with her mother and brother are casual or infrequent because 
Applicant has no contact with her mother and only quarterly contact with her brother. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s relationship with her father is closer and more regular. Her parent’s 
membership in the PRC Communist Party is problematic, but they are retired from their 
university professorial positions and have no contact with the university or the PRC 
government in their retirement status.  Her brother is not a member of the Communist 
Party.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant came to the United States 
when she was 16 years old. She has been living here since then, obtaining two college 
degrees, marrying, having two children, and buying a house. She has limited contact 
with family members in the PRC, speaking only to her father, and that once a month. 
She has not seen him since 2008. The last time she visited PRC was in 2000. Applicant 
is strongly committed to the United States and her life here. She has been a U.S. citizen 
for 12 years and remains in the United States instead of traveling to the PRC. There is 
no potential for pressure or coercion by the PRC against Applicant.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her foreign influence 
security concerns. I conclude the “whole-person” concept for Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
