                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02193 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant lacks a track record of financial responsibility. Her financial 
irresponsibility dovetails with her misuse of a government credit card and her 
recalcitrant disregard of traffic laws and court orders. Her overall behavior shows lack of 
judgment, reliability, and an unwillingness to comply with the law. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2008, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. On 
November 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for her, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted or denied. 
 
On January 6, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 31, 
2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 2, 2010. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled on April 29, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 15, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, presented one witness, and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) 1 through 26, which were admitted without objection. AE 26 
was submitted post-hearing. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 
6, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all SOR allegations. Her admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having 
considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old systems operator employed by a defense contractor. 
She has never been married and has a 14-year-old daughter. She receives only 
approximately $85 per month in financial support. Shortly after graduating from high 
school, she enlisted in the U.S. Air Force where she served from 1991 until 1995. At the 
time of her honorable discharge, she had achieved the pay grade of E-4. She also 
served in a state National Guard from 1998 until 2001. During her time in the service, 
because of her military occupational specialty, Applicant had access to classified 
information at the top secret level. Her access to classified information was continued at 
the same top secret level up to her hearing date. There is no evidence that Applicant 
has compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. 
 
Applicant has been consistently employed since March 1998, except for one-
month in 2008, while in between jobs. She received her full salary as unemployment 
compensation. She estimated her gross yearly income since 1998 as follows: between 
March 1998 and July 2000, she earned $27,000; between July 2000 and December 
2002, she earned $31,000; between December 2002 and December 2005, she earned 
$41,000; between January 2006 and October 2008, she earned $57,000; and from 
November 2008 to present, she has been earning approximately $71,000 a year. (Tr. 
82-86) 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation, which 
revealed she has financial problems. The SOR alleges one bankruptcy case and eight 
 
3 
 
 
delinquent or charged off debts totaling approximately $80,000, which include two 
judgments.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection and 
was discharged of all dischargeable debts in April 2002. A student loan was not 
discharged, and Applicant later paid it. She explained she was forced to file for 
bankruptcy protection because she was involved in a car accident. In 1996, she did not 
have the money to pay for her car insurance premiums, and she drove her car without 
insurance. She was determined to be at fault, and after the accident, she agreed to a 
monetary judgment to pay for damages. She made three $300 payments and filed for 
bankruptcy protection. She claimed she could not afford to pay the judgment and her 
day-to-day living expenses. After the bankruptcy discharge, Applicant acquired another 
judgment related to her car accident for $5,633. She paid it via a garnishment of wages. 
(Tr. 54, 87-89) 
 
In 2006, Applicant purchased a condominium for $190,000, and financed it with 
two mortgages, a first mortgage for 80% of the loan and the second for the remaining 
20%. Within a year, she became financially overextended because of her limited 
income. She also claimed she was financially overextended because she provided 
financial assistance to her father, paid the increasing cost of gas, and bore the 
expenses associated with being a single parent with limited financial support. The 
condominium was foreclosed in October 2007. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d ($3,780) allege the same delinquent debt - an October 2008 
judgment for past-due condominium maintenance fees. In March 2010, the creditor 
enforced the judgment through a $150 monthly garnishment of wages.  
 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is the deficiency owed on the condominium’s first 
mortgage. Applicant’s full pay off is around $78,000. (AE 17) This debt is unresolved. 
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h ($40,000) is the deficiency owed on the condominium’s 
second mortgage. This debt is unresolved. Applicant claimed she does not have the 
financial means to address both debts and pay for her other financial obligations and 
her day-to-day living expenses. She intends to address her smaller debts first and then 
the larger debts. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c ($860) alleges a judgment filed against Applicant in April 2004 for 
past-due rent. Applicant lived in an apartment from 1997 until 2004. During her first year 
as a tenant, she was frequently delinquent on her rent. Later on, she was sporadically 
delinquent. (Tr. 89-91) She became aware of the judgment in 2006 when she was 
processing the loans to purchase the condominium. She claimed she made the first 
efforts to resolve the judgment in 2008, but did not have the financial means to do so. 
She averred that in 2009, she attempted to identify the current account holder, but was 
unsuccessful. She then disputed the account through a credit bureau and it was deleted 
from her credit report. (AE 26) The basis for the removal of the account is not clear from 
the evidence presented.  
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,022) alleges a collection account for telephone services Applicant 
received in 1999-2000. The account became delinquent in 2000. (GE 7) Applicant paid 
it in March 2010. (AE 26)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.f ($504) alleges a collection account for gas services Applicant received 
between 1998 and 2004, when she was living in an apartment. Applicant is paying the 
debt through a debt management plan she established in January 2010. (AE 25) 
Applicant testified she intends to add to her debt management plan several medical 
accounts, totaling $315, that have been delinquent for approximately one year. (Tr. 119) 
These debts were not alleged in the SOR.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.g ($564) alleges a collection account for a musical instrument Applicant 
rented for her daughter. She lost the instrument in 2005, and stopped paying for it. 
Applicant settled the debt for $345 and paid it in March 2010. (AE 15-16)  
 
Applicant accepted responsibility for her financial obligations and candidly 
testified about her financial problems. She has been struggling to pay her debts for 
many years. She claimed her financial problems started when she left the Air Force in 
1995. She attributed her financial problems to her limited earnings, the mistake of 
purchasing a condominium beyond her financial means, providing financial assistance 
to her father and brother, the increasing fuel costs, and the expenses associated with 
being a single parent with limited financial support. She claimed she has been making 
changes in her lifestyle to pay her debts and promised to pay her debts sometime in the 
future. She is addressing the small debts first and plans to address the remaining debts 
in order. She is now following a budget, prepared the week before her hearing with the 
assistance of her facility security officer (FSO). She testified she has participated in 
financial counseling. 
 
In 2005, Applicant misused a government credit card (SOR ¶ 2.a). She used the 
government credit card to take an $80 cash advance to pay for her pet’s needs. (Tr. 72) 
She claimed she mistakenly used the government credit card instead of her own credit 
card. She also claimed she disclosed to her supervisor her misuse of the credit card 
when the account was reported delinquent. She paid the delinquent $100 charge and 
received a letter of caution from the government agency.  
 
Concerning the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.b through e, Applicant explained that in 
late 2007 she received a ticket for speeding. She failed to pay the ticket or to appear in 
court as required, and her license was suspended. In January 2008, she was stopped 
again and arrested for driving with a suspended license. Her license was then 
confiscated. 
 
Applicant claimed that in March 2008, she did not have a ride to work and she 
drove to work without a valid driver’s license and with expired license plates. She was 
stopped, arrested, and summoned to appear in court. The court ordered Applicant to 
serve one weekend in jail and to undergo a driving improvement course. In July 2008, 
Applicant failed to report for her weekend in jail and she was charged with Escape-
 
5 
 
 
                                           
Second Degree, and a warrant was issued for her arrest. In August 2008, Applicant 
again drove without a license and was arrested. Her license was revoked for one year. 
Additionally, she served two weekends in jail, completed the ordered driving 
improvement course, and was placed on one-year probation. She completed her 
probation in early 2010. She testified that since August 2008, she has not been involved 
in any additional problems with the law. 
 
Applicant is a productive, knowledgeable employee. Her supervisor considers 
Applicant to be an outstanding team member. Her performance was rated as excellent, 
and she often exceeds her position requirements. Applicant’s FSO testified on her 
behalf. Applicant disclosed to her FSO her financial problems after receipt of the SOR, 
and requested guidance to address her financial problems. In the FSO’s opinion, 
Applicant has put forth a lot of effort trying to resolve her debts. The FSO has no doubts 
about Applicant’s character, loyalty, and trustworthiness. She recommended the 
continuation of Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. They provide 
explanations for each guideline and list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s goal is to achieve a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. AG ¶ 2(c). 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence.”1 Once the 
Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
 
1 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might 
accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR Case 
No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is “more 
than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 
375, 380 (4 th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government.2 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant has had financial problems since 1995 when she was discharged from 
the Air Force. She claimed she filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection because she 
did not have the money to pay a judgment resulting from her failure to insure her car. 
After she was discharged of all of her dischargeable debts in 2002, she continued to 
acquire debts that became delinquent and remained delinquent for many years. She 
exacerbated her financial problems when she purchased a condominium beyond her 
financial means in 2006 that was foreclosed in 2007.  
 
Applicant owes approximately $115,000 as a result of the foreclosure. 
Additionally, she owes approximately $3,780 on another account that is being paid 
through a garnishment of wages. She is paying one account through a debt 
management program. She plans to add several other medical accounts that have been 
delinquent for around one year to her debt management program. AG ¶ 19(a): “inability 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
7 
 
 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations” apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s being a single mother with limited financial support may be 
considered as a circumstance beyond her control, which contributed to her inability to 
pay her debts. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies, but does not fully mitigate the financial 
concerns. Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She was considered to be at fault in her 1996 accident, and she violated 
the law by driving without insurance. Thus, she could have prevented the financial 
problems resulting from her car accident. Her purchase of the condominium (beyond 
her financial means), the alleged support to her family at the expense of her own 
financial problems, and the continued acquisition of debt without the resolution of prior 
delinquent debts were also within her control. 
 
 Applicant has been consistently and fully employed from 1998 to present. She 
has been earning at least $57,000 a year since January 2006. In November 2008, she 
started earning $71,000 with her current employer. Other than payments made as a 
result of legal action, she presented little documentary evidence of good-faith efforts to 
pay, settle, or resolve her SOR delinquent debts prior to receipt of her SOR. 
Considering her income since November 2008, the debt in the debt management 
 
8 
 
 
program ($504) and the delinquent medical accounts ($315) that she intends to add to 
the debt management program are relatively small debts. If she had been more 
financially responsible, she could have established payment plans with the creditors of 
those accounts.  
 
Applicant is not in control of her financial situation and has a substantial 
delinquent debt. Her behavior shows a lack of financial responsibility. Considering her 
lack of financial diligence, her financial problems are likely to continue. I find she does 
not understand the importance of having and maintaining financial responsibility. Her 
behavior shows lack of reliability and an unwillingness to pay her debts. None of the 
mitigating circumstances apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant’s misuse of the Government’s credit card and her recent recalcitrant 
disregard of traffic laws and court orders raise security concerns under AG ¶ 15(c) 
“credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for 
an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered 
as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations.” 
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal 
conduct security concerns:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
9 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
After considering the above mitigating conditions, I find none apply. The only 
mitigating conditions potentially applicable are AG ¶¶ 17(c) and (d). I give Applicant 
credit for acknowledging her behavior was improper. I also considered that her last 
traffic offense occurred in August 2008, and there is no evidence of Applicant’s further 
involvement with the law. Although traffic violations are considered minor offenses, 
Applicant’s repeated traffic violations, and recalcitrant disregard of court orders cast 
doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. Moreover, I do not consider her 
failure to appear in court a minor violation. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find 
Applicant’s questionable behavior is recent. Not enough time has passed for Applicant 
to establish her questionable behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
10 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated in my whole-
person analysis my comments on the analysis of Guidelines F and E. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant honorably served the 
United States in the Air Force and National Guard for approximately eight years. She 
has worked for the government or government contractors most of her adult life. She 
has possessed a security clearance for approximately 19 years. There is no evidence 
she has ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. She 
is considered to be an excellent employee. She is trusted by her FSO, who 
recommended her continued access to classified information. She has been a good 
mother, sister, and daughter. These factors show some responsibility, good judgment, 
and mitigation. Applicant also established some circumstances beyond her control, 
which contributed to her inability to pay her debts.  
Notwithstanding, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. She presented insufficient documentary evidence 
of debt payments, contacts with creditors, negotiations to resolve her SOR debts, or of 
other diligent efforts to resolve her debts. Applicant’s financial behavior shows that she 
is not in control of her financial situation and demonstrates a lack of financial 
responsibility. She still carries a substantial delinquent debt that exacerbates the 
financial considerations concerns. 
Considering the evidence as a whole, I find Applicant has not demonstrated she 
understands the importance of having and maintaining financial responsibility. Her 
financial irresponsibility dovetails with her failure to insure her car, driving her car without 
insurance, her misuse of a government credit card, and her recalcitrant disregard of 
laws and court orders. Her overall behavior shows lack of judgment, reliability, and an 
unwillingness to comply with the law.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.h,      
  1.i:       Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.g:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
11 
 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance for 
Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
