 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
    
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 09-04013 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant applied for a security clearance by submitting an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on May 1, 2007. After reviewing the 
results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of 
 
 
2 
                                                
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
On January 12, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant signed his notarized Answer on January 28, 2010, in which he admitted 
allegations 1.a. through 1.d. and denied allegation 1.e. Applicant requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 
6, 2010, and the case was assigned to me on May 11, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on May 20, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 10, 2010. The 
Government offered nine exhibits, marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
presented two witnesses. He also offered three exhibits, marked as Applicant Exhibit 
(AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
on June 18, 2010. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by striking subparagraph 1.e. I 
granted the motion. The amended SOR contains four allegations under Guideline E. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the Statement of 
Reasons, and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 36 years old, and married with three children. He completed some 
college credits but did not earn a degree. He served on active duty in the Army signal 
corps from 1992 to 2003. He held a security clearance from approximately 1993 to 
1994. It was revoked for approximately one year, and reinstated in about 1995. 
Applicant works as a technician in the computer field, and has worked for his current 
defense-contractor employer for three years. He testified that he currently holds a 
security clearance. (GE 1; AE A; Tr. 21-25; 66) 
 
In August 1994, when Applicant was 19 years old, he went to the Post Exchange 
to buy an amplifier for his car. He testified that he took several amplifiers out of their 
boxes, and then put the “wrong amp in the wrong box.” He also testified that when he 
was waiting to pay for it, he realized he had put a more expensive amplifier in a box 
marked with a lower price. He decided to see if he could “get away with this.” (Tr. 27-28) 
 
1 See Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6. Adjudication of this case is controlled by the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
3 
The police report at the time indicates that Applicant “admitted to placing the more 
expensive amplifier in the cheaper priced amplifier box, and purchasing the 
merchandise having knowledge he paid a lesser incorrect amount.” (GE 4) In his sworn 
statement of March 2002, he stated, “I admit to taking a more expensive amplifier and 
placing it in the box of a less expensive amplifier in an attempt to save money.” (GE 3) 
During his subject interview in 2007, he said that the amplifier was in the wrong box 
already, but he knowingly purchased it anyway in order to pay the lower price. (GE 9) 
 
Applicant was arrested outside the exchange. He was charged under the Uniform 
Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) with Larceny of Non-Appropriated Funds Property, 
Article 121. He received non-judicial punishment (Article 15), and was sentenced to 
forfeit one month’s pay, serve 14 days extra duty, and reduced from E-4 to E-3. (GE 2) 
His security clearance and access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) were 
revoked in October 1994 as a result of the larceny. The revocation memorandum 
describes Applicant's actions as, “…you removed a price tag of $285.00 from an 
amplifier and replaced it with a price tag of $149.00. You then paid for the amplifier and 
exited the store.” (GE 6) In November 1994, Applicant submitted a written request for 
reinstatement of his clearance and access. In that request, he stated, “When I got up to 
the counter, I realized I had the wrong amp in the box. While in line I decided to try to 
pay the lower price instead of changing the boxes again. Because the clerk didn’t check 
the amp, I thought, I got away with it.” (GE 5) In November 1994, Applicant’s supervisor 
recommended reinstatement of the security clearance. In his letter, the supervisor 
stated that throughout the Article 15 proceedings, Applicant maintained his innocence. 
When questioned by Department Counsel, Applicant reiterated that at the time, he did 
not know he had placed wrong amplifier in the wrong box until he was at the counter, 
and denied that his statements were inconsistent. (GE 3, 5; Tr. 31-32)  
 
Applicant's security clearance was reinstated and he maintained it until 2003, 
when he was honorably discharged. He believes that he learned a great deal from the 
events of 1994, and that he became a better soldier and mentor to younger soldiers. He 
testified that he became Solider of the Month, Soldier of the Quarter, and Soldier of the 
Year at various times in his military career. (Tr. 35) 
 
In 2000, Applicant was a non-commissioned officer (NCO) and held a top secret 
security clearance. (Tr. 36) Applicant participated in football. He provided his coach with 
some of his own prescribed drug, Percoset, so that the coach could provide it to players 
who were hurt. He testified that he did not consider this as an illegal use of drugs at the 
time, but now realizes that he should not have shared a prescription drug with people 
for whom it had not been prescribed. (Tr. 36-41) 
 
From April 2004 to January 2007, Applicant worked for company A as a systems 
administrator. (GE 1) In April 2004, company A assigned him to provide information 
technology support to computer networks for federal agency B. (GE 7) Agency B 
granted Applicant a top secret security clearance; he also held SCI access. (Tr. 43) 
Applicant worked at the site of a customer of agency B. Most work was performed as 
 
 
4 
night-time shift work. (GE 7) Applicant's performance evaluations of 2005 and 2006 
show consistent ratings of 4 (exceeds expectations), with some ratings of 5 (superior). 
(AE B) However, questions arose related to whether Applicant had worked the hours he 
charged on his time cards. Company A conducted an investigation.  
 
The security system at the facility where Applicant worked used employee 
badges to track their entry into and exit from the facility. It was the only facility where 
Applicant worked, and he had no reason to work in another location. Company A 
reviewed badge records for the period January 2005 to January 2007, and compared 
them to Applicant's time sheets. It concluded that, of the 4,808 hours Applicant claimed 
during that time period, he mischarged a total of 687 hours. When company A 
interviewed Applicant about the discrepancy, he admitted he did not work all the hours 
he claimed on his time sheets. He said he sometimes worked from home on “inventory 
work.” The company A manager noted that there was no requirement for him to work at 
home.  (GE 7, 8) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant disputed that he told the interviewers that he worked 
from home. He stated he told them he sometimes offered to help other workers who had 
problems by answering questions by telephone, even if he was at home. He believes 
the interviewers mistakenly construed this response as a claim that he worked from 
home. He also testified that he told the interviewer he listed different days on his time 
card than the ones he actually worked; however, the company does not report this 
version in the record of company A’s investigation. (Tr. 55) Company A concluded that 
Applicant committed time-card fraud. In January 2007, company A terminated Applicant 
based on his admission to mischarging time. He is not eligible for re-hire. His top secret 
security clearance was revoked on January 11, 2007. During his subject interview in 
June 2007, Applicant stated that he left company A voluntarily, and that although he 
signed documents when he left company A agreeing that he violated time-card rules, he 
felt that the statement did not apply to him. (GE 7, 8, 9) 
 
In May 2007, the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) of agency B conducted a 
joint investigation with company A into the charge that Applicant falsely claimed 687 
hours. The investigation found that the hours Applicant claimed were not related to 
agency business; that there were no errors or deficiencies in the badge records; and 
that Applicant had no authorization to work from home.  
 
Agency B’s investigative summary shows that in March 2007, the OIG contacted 
Applicant to offer him an opportunity to discuss the issue. Applicant declined at the time, 
and said he would contact the OIG later to arrange a time. After OIG made several 
attempts to reach him, Applicant contacted the OIG in June 2007, stating he was unsure 
if he wished to be interviewed. Ultimately, he declined. At the hearing, Applicant 
disputed that he was contacted in March 2007, claiming that agency B contacted him in 
about November 2007, not March 2007. He admitted that he did not attend an interview 
with agency B. (GE 7; Tr. 47-50) 
 
 
 
5 
Company A and the OIG calculated that the 687 mischarged hours amounted to 
$42,439 in false claims. Company A agreed to reimburse agency B the full amount. As 
Applicant's false claims violated a federal statute, the OIG reported the case to the 
Assistant United States Attorney (AUSA) of the Department of Justice. The AUSA 
declined to prosecute, in part, because company A agreed to pay the mischarged 
amount. The OIG considers the case closed. (GE 7) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant stated that the time discrepancies occurred because of 
his participation in a football league. He stated that he switched days with a coworker to 
accommodate his football schedule. This practice would have been acceptable if he had 
received permission to swap his days, but because he did it so often, he did not ask 
permission. He wrote on his time card the days he was scheduled to work instead of the 
days he actually worked. He sometimes worked for three consecutive days. Applicant 
testified he loved his job and he did it well. He testified, “I believe I defrauded the 
Government in the sense of not working when I was supposed to work.” He believes he 
was terminated because he did not actually work the days he listed on his time card, not 
because he charged for hours that he did not work. (Tr. 51-53, 65) 
 
In 2009, agency C considered Applicant for access to sensitive compartmented 
information (SCI). He participated in four agency C interviews and three polygraphs. (Tr. 
93) During his June 5, 2008 interview, Applicant stated that he was terminated by 
company A because it found that he charged 36 hours that he could not account for 
between 2004 and 2007. He also reported that he and others were tasked to conduct an 
inventory of a building, in addition to their usual duties. They claimed regular work 
hours, and added the time spent on inventory as additional hours of work, even though 
these work hours were concurrent with their regular work hours. In his September 25, 
2008 agency C interview, Applicant stated that his overtime supervisor authorized the 
inventory work as overtime hours. Charging in this manner resulted in Applicant 
receiving both regular pay and overtime pay for the same hours. He admitted during the 
interview, and at the hearing, that he did “double-bill” for hours when he was working on 
inventory, and that he was aware that charging concurrent hours did not comply with 
company A’s policy. However, he stated in the interview that he continued to do it 
because “it was working for him.” (GE 8, 9; Tr. 57-58) 
 
Agency C stated in its report that Applicant believed he mischarged only 36 
hours. Applicant disputes this characterization. However, he testified, “I’ve always 
stated that I couldn’t account for 36 of those 600 hours.” Additionally, in his interrogatory 
response, he stated, “I felt I always made up my time. I always thought I didn’t make up 
about 36 hours of time.” (GE 8, 9; Tr. 56- 57) 
 
During the September 2008 agency C interview, Applicant explained that his 
work schedule at company A was three days per week, with one 12-hour shift per day. 
However, at the hearing Applicant testified that his work schedule was three days on 
and three days off, which totaled five shifts per week. (Tr. 45) At the time, Applicant 
belonged to a semi-professional football league, whose practice and game times 
 
 
6 
                                                
conflicted with his work schedule. To arrive at his games timely, each week Applicant 
worked one 12-hour shift, and two consecutive shifts amounting to 24 straight hours. 
Applicant denied at the hearing that he actually worked 24 hours straight, stating that he 
worked 18 hours, and then slept, but was present in the building 24 hours. His 
supervisors were aware that he would sleep in the building. Applicant believed this was 
efficient because he could avoid driving his long commute more often than necessary. 
(Tr. 59-60) However, on his time card, Applicant reported three 12-hour shifts, instead 
of one 12-hour shift and one 24-hour shift, because company A rules did not allow 
employees to work more than 18 continuous hours in one shift. Applicant stated during 
the interview that he sometimes came to work late or left early because of his football 
games, but did not report this missed time on his time cards. In February 2009, agency 
C concluded that Applicant engaged in time card fraud between 2005 and 2007, while 
holding a security clearance, and did not admit the full extent of his fraud. Agency C 
declined to grant Applicant's request for access to SCI. (GE 8, Tr. 61) 
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor testified. She talks by phone to him once or twice 
per week, and in person about quarterly. She stated that he is a good worker and has 
received very high ratings from his managers. He has been going to school for a 
number of years, while working. He mentored a younger staff member who was having 
work problems. Most of Applicant's performance reviews for 2007 through 2009 show 
above average ratings. Part of the witness’s responsibilities is to sign the time cards 
submitted to the government by Applicant's company. She testified that if her company 
were in a situation where time-card fraud was charged, it would do a thorough 
investigation before it would re-pay the government for mischarged hours. (AE C; Tr. 
74-86) 
 
 Applicant's second witness is a friend of 18 years. They served in the military 
together, and the witness describes him as an exemplary soldier, and a good leader 
who was well-respected. The witness said Applicant contributes to his community, and 
is dependable and reliable. (Tr. 87-93) Applicant also submitted his company A 
performance evaluations during 2005 and 2006, which showed he received ratings of 4 
(exceeds expectations) in most categories, and 5 (superior) in some categories. (AE B) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.2 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
 
2 Directive at §6.3. 
 
 
7 
                                                
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegations implicate the following disqualifying condition under 
AG ¶ 16: 
 
 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
5 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 
AG ¶ 16(c) is relevant to Applicant's larceny in 1994, which involved a deliberate 
attempt to pay less than the legitimate cost of an item. It also applies to his distribution 
of a controlled drug to teammates who did not have a prescription for it. Both instances 
demonstrate willingness to disregard rules. Applicant’s most recent and most egregious 
failure to abide by the law occurred in 2007, when he charged the government for time 
that he did not work. He knew that he was required to enter the days and hours he 
actually worked, but chose to charge for time that he was not present at his work-site. 
There is no record evidence supporting Applicant's statement that he actually worked all 
the time he charged, but for 36 hours. However, there is evidence that Applicant 
charged for hours he did not work. The badge system at company A’s work-site tracked 
employees’ entries and exits. Company A and agency B reviewed these badge records 
and concluded that Applicant had charged the government for hours when he was not in 
the building. Upon review of the record, government agency C also concluded that 
Applicant engaged in time-card fraud. Applicant's falsified time cards caused the 
government to pay more than $40,000 for time when he was not working. He repeatedly 
disregarded his employer’s rules and repeatedly defrauded the government over a two-
year period. AG ¶ 16(c) applies. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, the following mitigating condition is relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant's actions were not minor. He knowingly and unjustly received 
compensation for hours he did not work, at the expense of the government. His 
employer, agency B, and agency C all concluded that he mischarged 687 hours of 
time, valued at more that $40,000, a significant misuse of government resources. Nor 
were his actions infrequent, occurring repeatedly over a two-year period. If Applicant's 
behavior consisted only of the theft in 1994 and the distribution of a prescription drug in 
2000, they might be mitigated by time and found unlikely to recur. However, Applicant's 
time-card fraud is more recent. His decision to again engage in untrustworthy conduct 
from 2005 to 2007 demonstrates a pattern of dishonesty and rule violations that are 
much closer to the present time, and raises serious questions as to his willingness to 
adhere to rules, and ultimately about his judgment and trustworthiness. AG ¶17(c) 
cannot be applied. 
 
 
9 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Although Applicant's actions in 1994 and 2000 conduct were not recent, they are 
consistent with the untrustworthy behavior demonstrated more recently from 2005 to 
2007. Applicant mischarged the government for hundreds of hours of work time. He 
fraudulently charged the government for time he did not work, requiring his employer to 
repay the government more than $40,000. Despite his denials, it is unlikely a company 
would pay the government tens of thousands of dollars unless it had confirmed that 
Applicant acted fraudulently. His conduct was criminal in nature, and he could have 
been prosecuted. Applicant engaged in this conduct repeatedly over a period of at 
least two years. The information he provided during his interviews and at the hearing 
was inconsistent and therefore, not credible. Moreover, Applicant's continued denial 
that he mischarged any more than 36 hours, in the face of strong evidence to the 
contrary, indicates that he has not accepted responsibility for his actions. He engaged 
in fraudulent conduct while he held a security clearance, violating the trust that the 
government places in those to whom it grants clearances. Finally, Applicant cannot 
claim ignorance of the obligations of a security clearance holder, as he held one for 
more ten years while in the military.  
 
 Overall, Applicant's conduct raises serious doubts about his suitability for access 
to classified information. The record evidence fails to satisfy these doubts, which must 
be resolved in favor of the national security. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
 
 
 
10 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:   Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
