 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06715 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct concerns, but he has not mitigated 
Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 8, 2010 and April 16, 2010, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
exercised the Government’s right to request a hearing before an administrative judge. 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel’s memorandums are marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The case was 
assigned to me on May 11, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 18, 2010, 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on June 9, 2010. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were admitted without 
objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. 
Applicant submitted a letter that was marked AE I and admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked HE II. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on June 17, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is seeking to 
retain a security clearance he has held since about 1979. He served in the United 
States military from 1979 until he retired in 1999 as an E-7. He has worked for his 
current employer since he retired from the military. He attended college for about a year 
and a half, but he did not obtain a degree. He married in 1994 and divorced in 1995. He 
married again in 1997. He has an 18-year-old stepchild, and he and his wife have an 
11-year-old child.1 
 
 Applicant’s child was diagnosed with a birth defect related to the spinal cord in 
1998. There was a new medical procedure which involved a surgery that had only been 
conducted on a handful of people at that point. Applicant was still in the military but the 
military insurance did not approve all the costs of this new procedure. There were also 
incidental expenses, such as air fare and lodging in the city where the surgery was 
performed. The child continues to have medical problems related to the disease and 
medical expenses that are not covered by insurance. Applicant’s mother-in-law passed 
away a few months after their child was born. His wife was distraught over the two 
events. She decided not to return to work. She stayed at home and cared for the 
children. Their finances suffered as a result of the combination of these factors. They 
filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and their debts were discharged in June 2000.2 
 
 Applicant and his wife purchased a timeshare in about December 2000. He 
testified they purchased the timeshare in order to help rebuild their credit. His wife 
returned to work in about 2003. She was injured at work a short time later, requiring 
several surgeries. She has unrelated injuries that also require surgery. She also suffers 
from depression. She is now considered 100% disabled and does not work. She 
receives Social Security disability.3 
 
 Applicant’s wife managed the finances. She developed a gambling problem and 
lost most of the money that was to be used to pay their debts. Applicant and his wife 
also took in two nieces and his wife’s father for a period when they were having 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23-26, 38, 47-49; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 25-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 5, 8. 
 
3 Tr. at 26-27, 42, 59-60; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8. 
 
3 
 
difficulties. Applicant and his wife filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in March 2007. He stated 
that he discovered that his wife was not paying the bills about six months before he filed 
bankruptcy.4   
 
 The bankruptcy petition listed under Schedule D – Creditors Holding Secured 
Claims, two vehicle loans totaling $39,000 and the $1,104 mortgage on their timeshare. 
Under Schedule E – Creditors Holding Unsecured Priority Claims, the petition listed 
$5,000 owed to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for tax year 2005. Under Schedule 
F – Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, the petition listed 39 debts totaling 
$116,072. Included were debts for the loans on two repossessed vehicles, the mortgage 
on their foreclosed home, multiple debts to military exchanges, and four debts for “bad 
checks.” There was only one $30 debt that was clearly identifiable as a medical debt.5  
 
 The bankruptcy court approved a motion to convert the bankruptcy to a Chapter 
7 bankruptcy in November 2008. The case was closed in October 2009, for failure of the 
debtor to file a certificate of completion of the financial management course. Applicant 
testified that he thought he and his wife had completed the financial management 
course and their debts had been discharged shortly after the case was converted to 
Chapter 7. He learned that had not occurred when he received material from DOHA. In 
April 2010, the case was reopened upon motion of Applicant’s attorney after financial 
management course certificates by Applicant and his wife were submitted to the court. 
Applicant’s debts were discharged on April 20, 2010. The bankruptcy court included an 
explanation that “[d]ebts for most taxes” are not discharged in a Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
case.6 
 
 The bankruptcy court records indicate that one of Applicant’s cars was 
repossessed in 2005. Applicant testified that he thought his cars were repossessed in 
2007 or 2008, but admitted that his truck could have been repossessed in 2005. A credit 
report from November 2008 shows the last action on the vehicle loan occurred in 
October 2006. Applicant stated the repossession started a big family argument about 
finances. He thought afterward that “everything was back under control, and it spiraled 
out again.”7 
 
 Applicant stated that he is currently in dispute with the IRS about his taxes. He 
stated that the IRS informed him that he owes about $7,000. Because his wife handles 
the finances, he was unsure of exactly how much is owed or why the IRS believes they 
owe for back taxes. He and his wife have been working the issue with IRS agents.8 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 27-28, 34, 39, 45, 49-51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8. 
 
5 GE 8, 10. 
 
6 Tr. at 32-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8, 10; AE A-G. 
 
7 Tr. at 51-54; GE 6-8. 
 
8 Tr. at 55-58; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8, 10. Applicant’s IRS debt was not specifically 
alleged in the SOR and will not be used for disqualification purposes. It will be used in assessing his 
overall financial situation, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s wife continues to gamble. He estimated that she has cut her gambling 
down to once a week from the seven days a week that she used to gamble. She has not 
received any counseling for her gambling problem, but Applicant stated that family and 
friends have had multiple “interventions.” She continues to handle the finances, but he 
indicated that he now “monitor[s] it a hundred percent.” They do not have a checking 
account. She only has access to a debit card that limits her to withdrawing a maximum 
of $500 a day. Applicant indicated they are currently able to pay all their bills and with 
the exception of the IRS matter discussed above, they are not delinquent on any 
accounts.9 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
October 10, 2008. Section 27a asked “In the last 7 years, have you filed any petition 
under the bankruptcy code (to include Chapter 13)?” He answered “Yes,” and indicated 
that he filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in about March 2006, and was “Currently paying 
Bankruptcy off.” He answered “No” to Questions 28a and 28b, which asked “In the last 7 
years, have been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and “Are you currently 
over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” Applicant credibly denied intentionally 
falsifying the SF 86. He reasonably could have considered that he was not “currently 
over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s),” because his debts were being addressed in his 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Applicant clearly notified the Department of Defense that he 
had financial problems. He submitted derogatory information under a different question 
(Section 23).10 After considering all the evidence, I find that Applicant did not 
intentionally falsify his SF 86.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 28-31, 39-41, 58; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 8. 
 
10 Tr. at 46-47; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
 
5 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
6 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The financial problems that led to Applicant’s first bankruptcy were directly 
related to the expenses incurred as a result of his child’s medical condition. Applicant 
responded reasonably under the circumstances by filing bankruptcy. AG ¶ 20(b) is 
applicable to his 2000 bankruptcy.  
 
Applicant attributed his recent financial problems to his wife’s gambling problem. 
That qualifies as a condition that was outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 
20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant relied upon his wife to handle their finances. He stated that he did not know 
there was a problem until about six months before he filed bankruptcy in March 2007. 
However, there are indications that his truck was repossessed as early as 2005. I do not 
find that he acted completely responsibly when, despite indicators that there were 
problems, he ignored the state of his financial affairs. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable 
to Applicant’s recent financial problems. 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as part of his bankruptcy. His 
dischargeable debts were discharged on April 20, 2010. He still has unresolved tax 
issues. His wife continues to gamble, but Applicant indicated it is much less frequent. 
 
7 
 
He now monitors the finances, but she has access to $500 per day from a debit card. 
Most of Applicant’s current financial problems have been resolved by bankruptcy, 
providing mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). Bankruptcy is a legal means of addressing 
burdensome debt, but it does not constitute a good-faith effort to pay or resolve his 
debts.11 AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. While Applicant indicated his current financial 
situation is stable, he has not established a track record of fiscally responsible behavior. 
I am unable at this time to make a finding that financial problems are unlikely to recur. 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the bankruptcy and 
the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
                                                          
11 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 Applicant provided inaccurate information on his SF 86, but, as addressed 
above, it was not intentional. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. Personal Conduct security 
concerns are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable service for 20 years in the U.S. military. I also 
considered his stable work record since he retired from the military. The financial 
problems leading to Applicant’s first bankruptcy were clearly caused by his child’s 
medical condition. His second bankruptcy was related to his wife’s gambling problem. 
His debts were discharged in April 2010, providing a fresh start. Despite the bankruptcy, 
I have lingering concerns. Applicant still has unresolved tax issues, and his wife 
continues to gamble, albeit at a substantially reduced rate. I am not holding his wife’s 
gambling against Applicant, but to the extent that it impacts on his finances, it remains a 
factor for consideration. Since his debts were discharged less than three months ago, 
he does not have a post-bankruptcy track record of maintaining financial stability. I am 
unable to find that recurrence of financial problems is unlikely.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Personal Conduct concerns, but he has not mitigated 
Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
