 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-03087 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on October 28, 2008. On 
February 18, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines J and E. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on February 23, 2010; answered it on March 16, 
2010; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
request on March 17, 2010. Department Counsel amended the SOR on March 29, 
2010, and was ready to proceed on the same date. The case was assigned to me on 
March 31, 2010. Applicant answered the amendment to the SOR on April 19, 2010. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 20, 2010, scheduling the hearing for May 10, 
2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 13 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified but presented no 
witnesses or documentary evidence. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on May 18, 
2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e 
and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 2.b, and 2.c. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since May 2005. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 
March 1984 to May 2005 and retired as a first class petty officer. (GX 3 at 6.) He 
received a security clearance while he was in the Navy. 
 
 Applicant married in January 1988 and separated in August 1995. He and his 
wife have two sons, ages 22 and 19. (Tr. 25.) After their separation, Applicant paid his 
wife $500 per month in child support pursuant to an informal, verbal agreement. (GX 3 
at 6.) 
 
 In November 1997, Applicant was arrested for driving under the influence (DUI). 
He was convicted in September 1998 and sentenced to 90 days in jail (suspended) and 
a $250 fine. His driver’s license was suspended for one year and he was required to 
attend an alcohol safety action program (ASAP). (GX 13 at 4.) 
 
 In June 2003, Applicant was arrested for DUI (2nd offense) and being a habitual 
offender, a felony. He pleaded guilty to DUI and a misdemeanor habitual offender 
offense. He was sentenced to 12 months in jail (suspended) and placed on 
unsupervised probation for three years. His driver’s license was suspended for three 
years. (GX 4; GX 5.) He did not apply for reinstatement of his driver’s license after the 
three years had passed. (Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 After the June 2003 arrest for DUI, Applicant appeared before an administrative 
separation board convened to determine whether he should be discharged from the 
Navy for misconduct. The board retained him on active duty. (Tr. 30.) 
 
 In February 2004, Applicant was charged with public intoxication. He was fined 
$25 and required to pay court costs of $69. (GX 6.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In January 2007, Applicant was charged with speeding and being a habitual 
offender, a felony. He did not have a driver’s license, because he had not applied for 
reinstatement after the period of suspension had passed, but the driver’s license 
offense was not specifically charged. (Tr. 34.) The speeding charge was disposed of by 
nolle prosequi. He pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor habitual offender charge. He was 
sentenced to 12 months in jail, with 10 months suspended, and placed on unsupervised 
probation for two years. (GX 8; GX 9.) 
 
 In May 2007, Applicant was charged with fictitious display of license plates and 
being a habitual offender. He told a security investigator that the license plate violation 
occurred when he purchased a car from a friend and used the friend’s license plates to 
drive the car home. (GX 13 at 5.) At the hearing, he testified he borrowed the car from a 
friend and did not know that the license plates were for another vehicle. (Tr. 52-53.) He 
was found guilty of the license plate offense in absentia in September 2007. In January 
2009, he pleaded guilty to the felony habitual offender charge, and was sentenced to 12 
months in jail. (GX 10; GX 11.) The record does not reflect how much time, if any, he 
spent in jail. The court records reflect some jail time served on weekends. (GX 11 at 1.) 
At the hearing, he testified that he was not sure if he was still on unsupervised 
probation, but he knew that his driver’s license was suspended. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his security clearance application in October 2008, he 
answered “yes” to question 23d, asking if he had ever been charged with or convicted of 
any offenses related to alcohol or drugs. He disclosed his DUI arrest in 2003, but he did 
not disclose his DUI in 1997 or his arrest for public intoxication in 2004. In his answer to 
question 23d, he explained that he had another “traffic charge” that was pending, 
apparently referring to the habitual offender charge of which he was convicted in 
January 2009. He answered “no” to question 23a, asking if he had ever been charged 
with or convicted of any felonies, and he did not disclose his felony arrests in June 
2003, January 2007, and May 2007. 
 
 Applicant testified that he stopped drinking alcoholic beverages after his arrest 
for public intoxication in 2004. (Tr. 28, 31.) He completed the ASAP program and also 
received alcohol counseling from the Navy. (Tr. 29.) He testified that he stopped 
drinking because he was concerned about its impact on his Navy career. (Tr. 30-31.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified he did not disclose his 1997 DUI because he 
was told to limit his responses to incidents that occurred during the last seven years. 
(Tr. 50.) A summary of an interview with a security investigator in February 2009 reflects 
that Applicant first told the investigator that he did not disclose all his criminal charges 
because he did not remember the details of the offenses. However, on further 
questioning, he told the investigator he did not disclose his complete criminal history 
because it might adversely affect his security clearance and his employment. In his 
February 2009 security interview and at the hearing, he admitted he did not disclose his 
criminal record to his facility security officer. (Tr. 45; GX 3 at 5.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
At the hearing, Applicant admitted that the security investigator’s summary of the 
interview was accurate. His hearing testimony was vague and equivocal: he admitted 
that he did not volunteer adverse information; but he insisted that he did not intend to 
conceal information, because he knew that the investigators would find it. (Tr. 45-50.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
5 
 
 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges a DUI arrest in November 1997 and conviction in September 
1998 (¶ 1.a); DUI and habitual offender arrests and convictions in June 2003 (¶ 1.b); 
arrests for driving with a revoked license and being a habitual offender in January 2007, 
and a conviction of being a habitual offender in July 2007 (¶ 1.c); falsification of a 
security clearance application in October 2008(¶ 1.d); an arrest for public intoxication in 
February 2004 (¶ 1.e); and arrests for fictitious display of license plates and being a 
habitual offender in May 2007, and conviction of being a habitual offender in January 
2009 (¶ 1.f). Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by documentary evidence, establish 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e. The documentary evidence establishes SOR ¶ 1.f. 
 
The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30 as follows: “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” Applicant’s record of arrests and convictions raises two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 31(a) (“a single serious crime or 
multiple lesser offenses”) and AG ¶ 31(c) (“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or 
convicted”). 
 
 It is a felony, punishable by a fine or imprisonment for not more than five years, 
or both, to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch 
of the United States Government. 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Security clearances are matters 
within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the United States Government. A 
deliberately false answer on a security clearance application is a serious crime within 
the meaning of Guideline J. Applicant’s false answers on his e-QIP, discussed below 
under Guideline E, also raise the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 31(a).  
 
 Since the Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has 
 
6 
 
 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). The first prong of 
this mitigating condition focuses on whether the criminal conduct was recent. There are 
no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must 
be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. See ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time 
has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must 
determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct 
sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
 Applicant’s last criminal conviction was in January 2009, for conduct that 
occurred in January 2007, more than three years ago. He falsified his security clearance 
application in March 2008, and was less than candid about the falsification at his 
hearing. Although three years is a significant period of time, Applicant’s conduct since 
January 2007 does not demonstrate reform or rehabilitation. His misconduct, including 
his falsification, did not occur under unusual circumstances. I conclude AG ¶ 32(a) is 
not established.  
 
 Security concerns raised by criminal conduct also may be mitigated if “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 
32(d). For the reasons set out above in the discussion of AG ¶ 32(a), I conclude that 
this mitigating condition is not established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR cross-alleges the criminal conduct in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e as personal 
conduct under this guideline (¶ 2.a). In addition, it alleges Applicant falsified his security 
clearance application in his response to question 23d, asking about offenses related to 
alcohol or drugs (¶ 2.b), and in his response to question 23a, asking about felony 
charges or convictions (¶ 2.c). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as 
follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
7 
 
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition for falsification of a security clearance 
application is AG ¶ 16(a) (“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire”). When a falsification allegation is 
controverted, as in this case, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, 
standing alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the 
omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 Applicant’s explanation for not disclosing his 1997 DUI was plausible and 
credible, but he has not adequately explained his failure to disclose his arrest for public 
intoxication four years before submitting his application. He has not persuasively 
explained why he did not disclose his multiple felony arrests for being a habitual 
offender. He admitted to a security investigator that he was concerned that full 
disclosure of his criminal record would cost him his security clearance and his job. 
Applicant’s experience with a Navy administrative elimination board made him aware of 
the likelihood of losing his clearance. I am satisfied that he did not fully disclose his 
criminal record because he was afraid of losing his job. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is 
raised.  
 Applicant’s record of criminal arrests and convictions alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, 1.c, 
1.e, and 1.f raises the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and  
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
8 
 
 
Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). Applicant did not correct the omissions until he was confronted 
with the evidence by a security investigator in February 2009, more than three months 
after he submitted his application. I conclude AG ¶ 17(a) is not established.  
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”. AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant has 
several felony arrests and one felony conviction, and his deliberate falsification of his 
security clearance application was a serious offense. His misconduct was frequent and 
did not occur under unique circumstances. For the reasons set out above in the 
discussion of AG ¶ 32(a), insufficient time has passed to demonstrate rehabilitation. I 
conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. 
Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if “the individual 
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or 
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant receives some credit under this mitigating 
condition because he received counseling from both military and civilian sources for his 
excessive alcohol consumption, and he stopped consuming alcohol some time in 2004. 
This mitigating condition is established for the alcohol-related conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a, 1.b, and 1.e, but not for the other personal conduct alleged in the SOR. 
Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the individual 
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). This mitigating condition is not established 
because Applicant has attempted to conceal the extent of his arrest and conviction 
record.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
9 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Navy for more than 20 years, although his 
continued service was jeopardized by his conduct and he faced an elimination board 
shortly before his retirement. He held a security clearance for many years while in the 
Navy and while working as a federal contractor employee. He stopped drinking alcohol 
when he realized that it jeopardized his clearance and prospects for continued 
employment. On the other hand, he has a long record of ignoring rules and regulations, 
and he has not been completely candid during the security clearance process. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines J and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on criminal conduct and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
