 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00062 
 SSN:  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 31, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in a response that was misdated as March 14, 
2010, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned 
to me on May 11, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 19, 2010, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on June 10, 2010. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without objection. The record 
was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted 
documents that were marked AE C through E and admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s memorandums are marked Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II.  
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 17, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is applying for 
a security clearance. She attended community college for two semesters but did not 
obtain a degree. She is married with four children, ages 23, 20, 16, and 8.1 
 
 Applicant’s husband has worked for the same construction company for 19 
years. Their geographic area benefitted greatly from the housing boom of the 1990s and 
early 2000s. His work hours were severely cut by his employer in 2007 after the housing 
market slowed and then collapsed. Her husband picked up small jobs, but it was not 
enough to offset their loss of income. Applicant and her husband struggled to pay their 
bills, but were unable to maintain the payments. They lost their house to foreclosure in 
2007, and their two cars were repossessed. In February 2009, Applicant was laid off 
from the company where she worked for 22 years. She was hired by her current 
employer in May 2009.2   
 
 Applicant co-signed her brother’s mortgage. He was responsible for paying the 
mortgage. He also lost his longtime job at the same company where Applicant worked, 
and he fell behind on the mortgage payments. An Equifax credit report from March 17, 
2010, lists the mortgage as charged off, $12,000 past-due, and a balance of $83,000. 
Applicant testified that her brother found another job. He worked with the mortgagor, 
and the mortgage is now current to the lender’s satisfaction. She submitted a 
TransUnion credit report obtained on March 4, 2010, with her response to DOHA 
interrogatories. That credit report shows the mortgage as “Paid or paying as Agreed,” 
with zero past-due. A balance was not provided. Applicant submitted a mortgage 
payment record showing a monthly amount due on her brother’s mortgage of $664. The 
payment record showed no monthly payments made for the seven-month period from 
July 2009 to January 2010. The record showed five payments of at least $664 made in 
the five months between February 2010 and June 2010. The document reports that 
$8,633 was due on the mortgage for the 12-month period of the report; $3,357 was paid 
to the mortgage; leaving a shortage of $5,276. The legal assistant for Applicant’s 
bankruptcy attorney indicated that the mortgage payment record “shows current 
payments since February which is when her Loan Modification was approved.” A copy 
of the loan modification agreement was not submitted.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24-25, 31, 41, GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 18-24, 31-33; GE 1, 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 19-21, 35-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 3; AE D, E. 
 
 
3 
 
 The SOR alleges three delinquent medical debts totaling $1,067, the unpaid car 
loans for the two repossessed cars, the unpaid mortgage for her foreclosed house, and 
the mortgage for her brother’s house. Applicant admitted all the allegations. 
 
 Applicant had several surgeries for various medical conditions, and her husband 
also had some medical problems. They maintained medical insurance during their 
employment problems, but it was costly. Their medical bills were related to co-payments 
and deductibles.4 
 
 Applicant sought financial counseling from a debt management company in 
March 2010. She was advised to file bankruptcy. She contacted an attorney in April 
2010. He also advised her to file bankruptcy. Applicant completed the counseling 
required for her bankruptcy. She and her husband filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy on June 
16, 2010.5 
 
 The bankruptcy petition listed under Schedule D – Creditors Holding Secured 
Claims, the mortgage for Applicant’s brother’s house. The petition indicated that 
“[d]ebtor(s) will retain collateral and continue to make payments.” Under Schedule E – 
Creditors Holding Unsecured Priority Claims, the petition listed $3,000 owed to the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for tax year 2009 and $1,200 owed for state income 
taxes for tax year 2009. Under Schedule F – Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority 
Claims, the petition listed 37 debts totaling $46,907. The two largest debts were for 
$20,870 and $14,235 for the deficiencies owed on the car loans for Applicant’s two 
repossessed vehicles. There were 21 medical debts totaling $10,319. There was a 
$1,292 debt for an unsecured line of credit, and there was a $190 utility bill. The rest of 
the debts were notices only, with no amount listed. The mortgage for Applicant’s 
foreclosed home is not included in the bankruptcy.6  
 
 Applicant’s attorney told her that the bankruptcy should be completed “a couple 
[of] months” after the filing. She testified that her finances will be in order once the 
bankruptcy discharges her debts. She and her husband have older model cars, with 
high mileage. Her car is 23 years old and has more than 200,000 miles. They are 
renting a home. She is not accruing credit card debt. Her employer contracts her to a 
large defense contracting company. If she obtains a clearance, she will become eligible 
to be hired as a permanent employee of the large defense contractor. That would mean 
greater stability, salary potential, and benefits including health insurance.7  
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 28-30; GE 3.  
 
5 Tr. at 25-26; GE 3; AE A-C.  
 
6 AE C. The foreclosed mortgage is likely not included in the bankruptcy because Applicant’s 
state has an anti-deficiency statute which in most instances precludes the mortgagor from enforcing the 
deficiency owed on the mortgage after the home is foreclosed. 
 
7 Tr. at 26-31; GE 3; AE C.  
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:   
     
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant still owes the debts alleged in the SOR. Her financial issues are recent 
and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant and her husband both had stable employment before the recent 
economic decline. Her husband has worked for the same construction company for 19 
years in a city that benefitted greatly from the housing boom. He did not lose his job 
when the housing market slowed and then collapsed, but his work hours were severely 
cut. In February 2009, Applicant was laid off from the company where she worked for 22 
years. She was out of work for about three months before she was hired by her current 
employer. She and her family also had medical problems and were unable to pay the 
co-payments and deductibles. These qualify as conditions that were outside her control. 
To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under 
the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant wanted to resolve her debts. She sought financial counseling from a 
debt management company and an attorney, and both advised her to file bankruptcy. 
Applicant struck me as a hardworking, honest woman who strived to live the American 
dream. Things were going well. Her family had two cars and a home. After the housing 
crisis affected her husband’s employment, they essentially lost everything. They have 
adjusted their priorities. They drive two old cars and live in a rented home. It is telling 
that there is no credit card debt in the bankruptcy petition. Except for a $1,292 debt for 
an unsecured line of credit and a $190 utility bill, the Unsecured Nonpriority Claims are 
all medical debts and the deficiencies owed on the car loans for Applicant’s two 
repossessed vehicles. I find under the circumstances of this case, that seeking the legal 
remedy of bankruptcy is responsible action. AG ¶ 20(b) is applicable. 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as part of her bankruptcy. There are 
several issues that are unaffected by the bankruptcy. The mortgage on Applicant’s 
foreclosed home is not listed in the bankruptcy. That is likely because of the state’s anti-
deficiency statute. She has to rely on her brother to continue to make the mortgage 
payments on his house that she co-signed. The state’s anti-deficiency statute makes 
this somewhat less problematic, because she will not be held personally liable if he 
cannot keep the property out of foreclosure. Finally, the unpaid state and federal taxes 
for 2009 are a concern. The unpaid taxes were not alleged in the SOR, and Applicant 
was not questioned about them. After considering Applicant’s demeanor and sincerity, I 
am convinced that, if she has not already done so, she will pay her state and federal 
taxes. Applicant’s financial problems have not yet been resolved. However, the 
bankruptcy provides a clear indication that the problem is in the process of being 
resolved and is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable. 
 
 Applicant’s actions do not qualify as a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts.8 AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
                                                          
8 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
taking the legal remedy of bankruptcy to resolve debts brought on by the housing crisis 
and subsequent economic downturn. She is not attempting to absolve herself of 
excessive credit card debt caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending. She is 
attempting to rectify a situation that was beyond her ability to control. She has 
convinced me that she is on the right track financially.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or an anti-deficiency statute]) in order to claim the benefit of 
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
