 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06026 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 9, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his position 
with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of an ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant interrogatories to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying 
information. After reviewing the results of the background investigation and Applicant's 
responses to the interrogatories, DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
findings required to issue a security clearance. On May 23, 2012, DOHA issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for sexual 
behavior under Guideline D, and the same conduct was cross alleged as personal 
conduct under Guideline E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
 
2 
 
 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006. Applicant received the SOR on June 4, 2010.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 22, 2012. He admitted the allegations 
under both Guidelines D and E with explanation and a minor change to the dates of the 
incidents of security concern. He did not request a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel timely requested a hearing on July 22, 2012. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on October 2, 2012. The case was assigned to me 
on October 9, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 16, 2012, for a 
hearing on November 19, 2012. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government 
offered seven exhibits, which I marked and admitted into the record without objections 
as Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 7. Applicant testified on his behalf. I kept 
the record open for Applicant to submit documents. Applicant timely submitted two 
documents that I marked and admitted into the record as Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex) A 
and B. Department Counsel had no objection to the admission of the documents. (Gov. 
Ex. 8, e-mail, dated December 6, 2012) DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on November 29, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant admitted the allegations under sexual 
behavior and personal conduct with explanation. His admissions are included in my 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 56 years old and has been married for over 30 years, since January 
1982. He has three children, two grown and one in college. He has a bachelor’s degree 
and a master’s of business administration degree. He worked for a government agency 
in the counterterrorism area, much of the time in foreign countries, for over 23 years 
before retiring in September 2007. Since retiring from the government agency, he has 
worked in various positions for the same defense contractor. His present position is 
teaching counterterrorism and counterintelligence subjects under a government agency 
contract. In addition to working for the defense contractor, Applicant may be employed 
in the future as an independent contractor instructor for the same courses. (Tr. 11-17, 
39-42; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QUIP, dated December 9, 2008; App. Ex. 2, Employment Contract, 
dated November 12, 2012)  
 
The alleged sexual behavior security concerns arose because Applicant, from 
2003 to 2006, engaged in sexual activities with foreign prostitutes in foreign countries 
while he was employed with a U.S. government agency in a sensitive undercover 
overseas national security position (SOR 1.a); because in February 2006 he engaged in 
a sexual act with a foreign national in a foreign hotel “steam room” while working for the 
U.S. government agency in a sensitive undercover national security position (SOR 1.b); 
 
3 
 
 
and because from September 2007 until October 2010 he engaged in an extramarital 
affair that his wife is unaware of (SOR 1.c). The same conduct is cross alleged as a 
personal conduct security concern under Guideline E (SOR 2.a).  
 
The information concerning his sexual behavior was provided by Applicant during 
various investigations conducted by his previous government agency employer 
concerning his access to classified information. He was also candid about his sexual 
behavior when he was interviewed by security investigators on January 6, 2009, 
concerning his current access to classified information. He admitted that he engaged in 
sexual behavior with prostitutes about five or ten times in Amsterdam between 1999 
and 2002 while on government business. He disclosed this information in his previous 
2004 security investigation. The activity was clearly known by his former government 
agency, it was voluntarily disclosed, no action was taken, and he was cleared for 
access to classified information. (Tr. 46-48; Gov. Ex. 2 and Gov. Ex. 3, Response to 
Interrogatories, dated August 25, 2012; Gov. Ex. 4, Letter, dated January 11, 2011; 
Gov. Ex. 6, Investigative Information, dated May 5, 2011; Gov. Ex. 7, Report, dated 
November 6, 2009)  
 
He admitted to engaging in sexual behavior with prostitutes in various locations 
overseas from 2004 until July 2006. Applicant also provided information to security 
investigators that in February 2006, he engaged in a sexual act with a foreign national in 
a hotel steam room in a foreign country. His friends and spouse are not aware of his 
sexual behavior with prostitutes or his sexual encounter in the hotel steam room.p 
Applicant believes that the unwritten policy of his former government agency was that 
one-time visit to an individual prostitute does not constitute a foreign relationship 
requiring reporting. He did not consider his actions with prostitutes to be a security 
threat. He disclosed the information willingly to investigators and no action was taken. 
To Applicant, this confirmed what was considered the unwritten policy. Applicant 
believes that his visits to prostitutes were in an environment considered benign from a 
counterterrorism point. In all of the encounters, he was anonymous and the prostitutes 
did not know of his government position. He knows that this sexual behavior in a foreign 
country could put him in a position to be compromised, but he has never been 
compromised and he is no longer vulnerable to exploitation for this sexual behavior. The 
situations happened over six years ago during a period of serious marital problems. He 
has not been threatened or compromised in those six years. (Tr. 32-33, 48, 69-72; Gov. 
Ex. 2, Testimonies, December 17, 2008 – February 18, 2009, at 2-4) 
 
Applicant also admitted to investigators that he has engaged in an extramarital 
affair with a former college friend since September 2007. The affair started a few 
months before he retired from his former government agency. The affair ended in 
October 2010 but resumed again in February 2012. The affair is still ongoing. No one is 
aware of the affair. The affair is only known to Applicant and the woman. His former 
agency, his friends, his wife, and his present employer are not aware of the affair. If 
someone made an attempt to use the affair to exploit him, he would immediately reveal 
it to all concerned. (Tr. 51-55; Gov. Ex. 2, Testimonies, June 17, 2009 – July 7, 2009, at 
1) 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant admitted that he still occasionally engages in extramarital affairs. He 
admits to recently having sexual encounters with various females when he is on travel 
and teaching courses for his employer. He admits that there is a potential concern about 
his activities from a counterintelligence point, but he believes that there is no 
counterterrorism threat because there is no focus by adversaries on his activities. The 
information he has access to is not highly classified. (Tr. 68-69) 
 
Applicant attributes some of his sexual behavior to learning from his wife that she 
had an extramarital affair from 2001 until 2005. He engaged in this sexual behavior 
because of difficulties in his marriage and his wife’s lack of sexual interest in him. She 
advised him that if he ever had an affair, she would not want to learn about it. That is 
one of the reasons he has not told his wife of his sexual behavior and why she is not 
aware of his sexual activities. (Tr. 51-52; Response to SOR, dated June 22, 2012)  
 
Applicant admits that some of his decisions on sexual behavior were failures in 
judgment by him. He engaged in the activities because he was affected by this wife’s 
lengthy affair. He does not believe the affair is a counterintelligence threat but he does 
admit there may be such a potential threat. (Tr. 27-28) 
 
Applicant presented a letter of recommendation from a former coworker and 
friend. He worked with Applicant for a number of years on counter proliferation 
missions. The letter states that Applicant has a strong commitment to accomplish the 
mission. He is hard-working, has vision, and was creative during his career with the 
other government agency. Applicant is resourceful and a team player. Applicant could 
be relied on to exercise good judgment in difficult circumstances. Applicant is a strong 
teacher who highly motivates students to be dedicated and driven in the intelligence 
field. (App. Ex. A, Letter, dated October 21, 2012) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Sexual Behavior, Guideline D 
 
 The security concerns raised against Applicant are from the same incidents. The 
gravamen of Applicant's conduct was inappropriate sexual behavior by extramarital 
affairs and sexual encounters with prostitutes in foreign countries. The sexual behavior 
security concerns arise from conduct that indicates a personality or emotional disorder 
reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which can raise questions about the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 
12) Personal conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 
15) Since the security concerns are based on the same incidents and are similar, the 
concerns will be discussed together. 
 
 Applicant admits that he had sexual encounters with foreign prostitutes in foreign 
countries from about 1999 to 2006. He admits to a sexual encounter with a foreign 
national male in a foreign hotel steam room in 2006. He admits to having an 
extramarital affair starting in 2007 that is still ongoing. His wife, his coworkers, his 
employer, his friends and acquaintances are not aware of these sexual activities and 
behavior. This history of sexual behavior raises Sexual Behavior Disqualifying Condition 
AG ¶ 13(c) (sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
 
6 
 
 
exploitation, or duress), and AG 13(d) (sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that 
reflects lack of discretion or judgment). Applicant’s admitted sexual activities with 
prostitutes in a foreign country and an extramarital affair raise questions about the 
reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness of Applicant. The incidents have the potential 
to make Applicant vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, and duress. 
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence by way of Applicant's 
admissions and statements to establish the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 13(c) and 
AG ¶ 13(d). Applicant candidly admits to the alleged sexual behavior. The burden 
shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns under sexual behavior.  
 
 As noted above, the gravamen of Applicant's conduct causing the security 
concerns is Applicant’s extramarital sexual behavior and his sexual behavior with 
foreign prostitutes in foreign countries. Sexual Behavior Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 
14(b) (the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under such 
unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); Ag ¶14(c) (the 
behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress; and AG ¶ 
14(d) (the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet) may be 
applicable as raised by Applicants testimony. The last sexual activity with a foreign 
prostitute as reported by Applicant took place over six years ago. The incidents with 
prostitutes were frequent and voluntary. Future encounters with prostitutes, either 
overseas or in the United States, could recur when he has the desire to seek their 
services. His extramarital affair is private, consensual, and discreet, but it is still 
ongoing. While taken individually, the mitigating conditions can explain away his sexual 
behavior. However, the extent of his extramarital sexual behavior, whether with 
prostitutes or an individual, shows a lack of judgment and discretion that raises 
questions about reliability and trustworthiness. The extramarital affair is still ongoing and 
thereby can serve as a basis of coercion, exploitation or duress. Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns for sexual behavior.  
 
Personal Conduct, Guideline E 
 
 Applicant’s sexual conduct also raises personal conduct security concerns. 
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or 
concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, 
may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in 
another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in 
that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for exploitation or 
pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or other group) is applicable. 
 
 Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions AG 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so 
much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
 
7 
 
 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), and AG 17(e) (the individual 
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress) are applicable based on Applicant’s testimony. As noted 
above, Applicant’s sexual behavior was frequent, is still ongoing, and his conduct was 
voluntary, so there are no unique circumstances causing his conduct. His extramarital 
sexual behavior can recur. He has taken no steps to stop or eliminate his conduct, so 
he remains vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. Applicant has not 
mitigated security concerns for personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered that Applicant 
successfully served for over 23 years in another government agency. I considered the 
opinion of his coworker that he is highly regarded and an asset in teaching 
counterintelligence subjects. The adjudicative process is an examination of an 
individual’s past to determine if he will engage in risky conduct in the future and whether 
that conduct could affect his judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. Applicant readily 
and candidly admitted that he engaged in risky sexual behavior over a long period. He 
had sexual activities with foreign prostitutes in foreign countries. He engaged in a 
sexual act with a foreign national male in a steam room of a hotel in a foreign country. 
He is still having an extramarital affair with a college friend that started in 2007. He 
admits to still having extramarital relations with women while he is traveling for 
business. Applicant’s past sexual conduct indicates that he will continue with such 
conduct. His pattern of reckless and irresponsible sexual behavior and personal conduct 
shows poor judgment, a lack of discretion, and a failure to control impulses. His conduct 
demonstrates poor judgment, unreliability, and untrustworthiness. This pattern of 
 
8 
 
 
conduct casts doubt on Applicant’s willingness or ability to safeguard classified 
information. 
 
Applicant believes he is not vulnerable to manipulation, coercion, or exploitation, 
mainly because his conduct is discrete and private. His wife and others are unaware of 
his conduct. He no longer has access to information that is highly classified and 
valuable. However, his conduct is risky and there is a possibility that in the future he 
may be vulnerable to manipulation, coercion or exploitation. Any doubts must be 
resolved in favor of the national security. The record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the sexual behavior and personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
