 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07691 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 18, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 18, 2012, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 15, 2012. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on October 24, 2012. I convened the hearing as scheduled 
 
2 
 
 
on November 27, 2012. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, and they 
were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through 
F, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open 
until December 3, 2012, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. He 
submitted AE G and it was admitted into evidence without objection.1 DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 5, 2012.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all SOR allegations with explanations. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old. He has a bachelor’s degree and has worked in the 
software engineering field for the same employer since 2003, but he has had periods of 
unemployment because of the contractual nature of his job. He married in 1986 and 
divorced in 2009. He has a 22-year-old son and a 21-year-old daughter from the 
marriage.2 
 
 Applicant had debts discharged in bankruptcy in 1997. He had accepted an 
employment position in another location, and he was unable to sell his house. He rented 
the house, but the tenants did not pay their rent. This affected his finances, so he used 
credit cards to keep up with the mortgage payments. He explained he financed his 
expenses with credit cards because he needed to feed his family and to save the equity 
he had in the house. The debt owed on the house was included in the bankruptcy 
discharge. He believed the bank eventually sold the house. He had about $44,000 in 
unsecured debt discharged.3 
 
 Applicant stated that his ex-wife’s primary focus was that the children receive 
whatever they wanted, including items that were considered unnecessary or a luxury. 
Applicant was frustrated with her spending habits, and in May 2006, he cut all of their 
credit cards. He took out a home equity line of credit for $26,000 (SOR ¶ 1.c; $20,590) 
to pay their debts. He noticed that his wife started to slowly obtain new credit cards that 
she would keep secret from him. She would make purchases and hide the items from 
him. She would also contact the credit card companies to extend their line of credit. This 
pattern continued and their delinquent debt increased. On February 13, 2007, Applicant 
closed their joint checking account and told his wife she could not be trusted regarding 
their finances. In April 2008, they separated. Under state law they had to remain 
separate for a year before a divorce could be granted.4  
                                                          
1
 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s memorandum email. 
 
2
 Tr. 20-23. 
 
3
 Tr. 23-27. 
 
4
 Tr. 27-31-34, 58. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant supported his wife during their separation, which impacted his finances. 
She was earning about $600-$650 a month and he provided her with $1,000 a month 
for four months. He decreased the amount for eight to nine months while he made her 
car payments instead. He estimated he paid at least $6,000 to her from April 2008 to 
November 2009.5 
 
 The following details the current status of the delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($21) is paid. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($20,590) is for the 
$26,000 line of credit Applicant obtained. He has an agreement with the creditor to pay 
$375 a month. He indicated the current balance is $18,500. The creditor has agreed to 
settle the debt for $7,500, but Applicant wants to pay what he can afford to pay and 
does not want to settle the debt for a reduced amount.6 
 
 Pursuant to Applicant’s divorce settlement he was awarded the family home. He 
attempted to sell the property for several years, but due to the economy he was unable 
to sell it. His realtor suggested he rent the house. He did so with a month-to-month 
lease, hoping he could sell it. Because Applicant was no longer the primary resident, the 
mortgage company proceeded to foreclose on the property. The mortgage company 
would accept a short sale of the property, but the offer it received was too low. The 
house was foreclosed in October 2011. It eventually sold in February 2012. Applicant 
contacted the mortgage company and it advised him the house sold for $132,000. The 
original mortgage was for $136,000. This debt is listed in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant indicated 
the problem with maintaining the mortgage payments on his house was also due to a 
cash-flow situation. He fell behind on his mortgage payments when he was providing 
marital support to his separated wife. Applicant is waiting to receive an Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) 1099-C cancellation of debt form for the $4,000 deficiency that 
he intends to file with his tax return.7 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($12,964) is for a car loan. Applicant cosigned the loan for 
his wife’s car. She was to make the $400 monthly payments. She failed to do so and the 
car was repossessed. Applicant negotiated a settlement with the creditor where he 
would pay $5,000, which was half of the settlement amount, and his wife would be 
responsible for the remaining half. Applicant took a loan from his 401k to pay this debt. 
He received confirmation from the creditor in October 2010 that the debt was settled 
and satisfied. He received an IRS Form 1099-C for the cancellation of the debt and filed 
it with his 2010 tax return. He indicated his wife did not pay her half of the debt.8  
 
                                                          
5
 Tr. 30. 
 
6
 Tr. 34, 36-37; AE C. 
 
7
 Tr. 38-41, 46-50, 54; Answer to SOR; GE 4. 
 
8
 Tr. 41-46, 63-66; Answer to SOR; AE G. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant does not believe the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f belongs to him. He suspected it 
belonged to his daughter. It is reported as paid on his credit report.9  
 
 When Applicant and his wife separated he assumed most of the delinquent 
debts. Their divorce was final in November 2009. He was ordered to pay his wife $500 a 
month for 24 months. He paid her that amount for 25 months because the final month 
was December and he wanted her to have extra money to ensure she had her rent 
paid. He does not have any other debt issues. He had sought financial counseling and 
arranged a debt consolidation plan. He was able to pay some of his delinquent bills 
through this plan.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
9
 Tr. 34-35; AE F. 
 
10
 Tr. 46, 50, 62-63. 
 
5 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had debts discharged in bankruptcy in 1997. He and his wife 
accumulated delinquent debts because of her spending habits. I find there is sufficient 
evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were attributed to his wife’s overspending. Despite 
his efforts to curb her ability to spend, he was unsuccessful. He and his wife divorced. 
He has been actively addressing his delinquent debts. His financial problems occurred 
under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur. He took drastic measures to 
stop his wife from overspending by cutting up the credit cards and removing her from 
their joint accounts. I find his financial issues do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies.  
 
 Applicant’s wife’s overspending was beyond his control. He made valid attempts 
to stop it, but she continued to thwart his efforts. Eventually, they divorced, which also 
impacted his finances. He has a payment agreement for the line of credit he obtained 
and has been making payments. He has resolved the other debts. I find the conditions 
that resulted in Applicant’s financial problems were beyond his control and he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 Applicant has received financial counseling and has paid or is paying his 
delinquent debts. I find he initiated a good-faith effort to repay his creditors and resolve 
his debts. I find his financial problems are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 51 years old. His wife was overspending and he attempted to stop 
her by destroying their credit cards and removing her from their joint accounts. She 
continued to spend without telling Applicant, by applying for new credit cards and 
getting the credit limit increased. Applicant filed for divorce and provided his wife marital 
support during their separation. During this time he had difficulty maintaining two 
households and his finances suffered. He acted responsibly by paying some of his 
delinquent debts, setting up a payment plan on another, and negotiating and paying a 
settlement. Despite a difficult situation, he has managed to put his finances back in 
order. I find his finances are not a security concern. Applicant has met his burden of 
persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
