 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted]1 )  ISCR Case No. 10-01952 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard L. Morris, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption), J (Criminal Conduct), and E (Personal Conduct). The security concerns 
under Guidelines G and J are mitigated, and Applicant refuted the allegation under 
Guideline E. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 17, 
2009. On May 23, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified 
him that it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue his eligibility for access to classified information, and it recommended that his 
case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to continue or 
revoke his clearance. DOHA set forth the basis for its action in a Statement of Reasons 
                                                          
1 On my own motion, without objection from either party, I corrected the Statement of Reasons to conform 
to the investigative file by reflecting Applicant’s middle initial. (Tr. 4-5.) 
 
 
2 
 
(SOR), citing security concerns under Guidelines G, J, and E. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on June 1, 2012; answered it on June 18, 2012; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
June 20, 2012. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 25, 2012, and the 
case was assigned to me on June 30, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 
30, 2012, scheduling it for August 21, 2012. I convened the hearing as scheduled. At 
the beginning of the hearing, Applicant requested a continuance to obtain counsel, and I 
granted his request. 
 
DOHA issued a second notice of hearing on October 1, 2012, rescheduling the 
hearing for October 24, 2012. I convened the hearing as rescheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified, presented the testimony of four witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AX) A through C, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on November 5, 2012.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.h. 
He did not respond to the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a, which cross-alleges the allegations in 
SOR ¶ 1.a-1.f and 1.h. He denied the allegations in SOR ¶ 3.a. His admissions in his 
answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old interoperability training representative employed by a 
defense contractor since December 2008. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy 
from August 1981 until February 2009. During his Navy career, he deployed 13 times 
for periods of at least six months. (Tr. 69.) He retired from the Navy as a master chief 
petty officer, the highest enlisted rate in the Navy. He held a security clearance during 
all of his Navy service. He began working for his current employer while on terminal 
leave before his retirement from the Navy. 
 
 Applicant married before he enlisted in the Navy and divorced in 1979. One child 
was born during this marriage. He married again in April 1985 and left on a seven-
month deployment two weeks after the marriage. When he returned from deployment, 
his wife had left him, and they had no further contact. No children were born during this 
marriage. He divorced his second wife and married his current wife in November 1991. 
                                                          
2 DOHA received the transcript of the August 21, 2012 session on August 29, 2012. All references to a 
transcript in this decision pertain to the transcript of the October 24, 2012 hearing. 
 
3 
 
(GX 2 at 3; Tr. 54.) He has a 34-year-old daughter, a 20-year-old daughter, and a 16-
year-old son. (Tr. 54; GX 1 at 26-27.) 
 
 Early in his Navy career, Applicant had several alcohol-related incidents. In April 
1983, he was arrested by civilian authorities for public drunkenness and held in jail 
overnight. In June 1983, he received non-judicial punishment for an alcohol-related 
unauthorized absence and missing his ship’s movement. In July 1985, he received non-
judicial punishment for dereliction of duty. The SOR alleged that his dereliction was 
alcohol-related, but he denied that alcohol was involved. In August 1986, he received 
non-judicial punishment for drunk driving. In May 1988, he was arrested by civilian 
authorities for driving under the influence (DUI), driving on a suspended license, and 
illegal possession of alcohol. In July 1988, he was arrested by civilian authorities for DUI 
and driving on a suspended license.  
 
Applicant testified that after his non-judicial punishments for alcohol-related 
misconduct, he was required to meet with a drug and alcohol counselor. (Tr. 85.) After 
his July 1988 DUI arrest by civilian authorities, he sought assistance from a Navy drug 
and alcohol program advisor. He completed a 30-day inpatient treatment program at a 
Navy hospital in December 1988. He completed the aftercare requirements, which 
included periodic counseling, weekly Alcoholics Anonymous meetings, and sobriety for 
one year. (Tr. 85-86.) He had no further alcohol-related problems for more than 20 
years. He testified that he has never been diagnosed as alcohol dependent. (Tr. 72.) 
 
In September 2008, Applicant was arrested by civilian authorities for DUI. He 
pleaded guilty, and he was fined about $1,925 and ordered to perform 40 hours of 
community service. He was not required to obtain treatment or counseling. (GX 2 at 4; 
Tr. 77.) 
 
 In a personal subject interview (PSI) with a security investigator in December 
2009 and at the hearing, Applicant explained that the September 2008 DUI occurred 
after he attended a social event in connection with a conference, consumed three or 
four cups of beer, and returned to his hotel room. He testified that he was at the social 
event for “an hour or so” and that he had dinner and some finger foods in addition to 
beer. His next memory was being stopped by the highway patrol while driving away 
from his hotel, failing a field sobriety test, and being arrested. He testified that he was 
given a breathalyzer test, which registered high enough to cause the police to arrest him 
for DUI. He testified that he did not know the blood-alcohol level that was registered on 
the breathalyzer.3 He was given a blood test because he was wearing a bracelet 
identifying him as a diabetic. He was hospitalized overnight because his blood-sugar 
level was over 500. He was released the next morning, and he reported his arrest to his 
commanding officer. He testified that when his blood-sugar level is too high, he 
becomes lethargic, confused, and lackadaisical. (GX 2 at 3-4; Tr. 70-71, 97.) In 
                                                          
3 Department Counsel argued that the court record of Applicant’s arrest included in GX 4 reflected a 
blood-alcohol level of .19. (Tr. 100.) The copy of the court record introduced in evidence is illegible, and I 
have not speculated on what a more legible copy might reflect. 
 
4 
 
February 2009, he received an automatic insulin pump because his pancreas had 
stopped functioning. (Tr. 93.)  
 
 Applicant monitors his use of alcohol because of his diabetes, which was first 
diagnosed in 2007. (Tr. 56, 93.) He testified that he was not advised by medical 
personnel to abstain from alcohol, but he was advised to avoid excessive use of 
alcohol. (Tr. 93-94.) He consumes two or three beers at social occasions with friends 
two or three times a month. In his December 2009 PSI, he admitted that he “might” 
drink to the point of intoxication (five or six beers) once or twice a year. (GX 2 at 4.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in November 2009, he answered “Yes” to 
Question 22.e (“Have you EVER been charged with an offense(s) related to alcohol or 
drugs?”) (Emphasis in original.), and he disclosed the September 2008 DUI. He did not 
disclose his civilian arrests in in April 1983, May 1988, and July 1988, nor did he 
disclose his non-judicial punishment for the alcohol-related misconduct in June 1983 
and August 1986. 
 
 In his April 2011 response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant described his 
alcohol consumption as 3-4 beers on weekends. He stated that alcohol makes him 
talkative. He answered “No” to the question, “Have you ever received any medical 
treatment, counseling, or supportive treatment from a drug or alcoholic rehabilitation 
center or any other organization due to the use of alcohol?” (Emphasis in original.) (GX 
5 at 3-5.) He did not disclose the alcohol-related treatment that he received in 1988.  
 
 In Applicant’s December 2009 PSI, answers to DOHA interrogatories, response 
to the SOR, and hearing testimony, he stated that he believed that he was not required 
to list incidents that were more than 10 years old. He denied intentionally attempting to 
conceal the incidents. He testified that he had disclosed the earlier alcohol-related 
incidents in previous SCAs. (GX 4 at 8; Tr. 73-75.) His earlier SCAs were not offered as 
evidence by either side. 
 
 In addition to Applicant’s failure to list his 1983-1988 alcohol-related incidents on 
his SCA, he omitted college courses that he completed in 1997 and 1998, and in his 
PSI he told the investigator that he did not list them because they were more than 10 
years old. (GX 1 at 12; GX 2 at 2.) He erroneously listed his Navy service when asked 
to list additional periods of employment with his current employer. (GX 1 at 14.) He 
answered “No” to the question, “Have you EVER served in the U.S. military or the U.S. 
Merchant Marine?” However, he listed his Navy service elsewhere in the SCA. (GX 1 at 
17-18.) He failed to list his first marriage and divorce. (GX 1 at 20-23.) He incorrectly 
listed the date of his current marriage as November 1993 instead of November 1991. 
(GX 1 at 21.) 
 
 Applicant’s performance evaluations as a master chief petty officer from April 
2002 to April 2005 rated him as either “above standards” or “greatly exceeds standards” 
(the highest rating) in all performance traits. His performance evaluations from April 
2006 to April 2008 rated him as “greatly exceeds standards” in all performance traits. 
 
5 
 
(AX A.) He received the Meritorious Service Medal upon his retirement, four awards of 
the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal, three awards of the Navy 
Achievement Medal, four awards of the Good Conduct Medal, and numerous 
certificates of appreciation. (AX B.)  
 
 Applicant’s 20-year-old daughter testified that Applicant is very honest, loyal, a 
person of high integrity, law-abiding, and devoted to her one-year-old son. She testified 
that Applicant consumes alcohol occasionally. She has never seem him intoxicated, but 
he becomes “a little bit tipsy” after a couple of drinks. When asked to define “tipsy,” she 
testified that Applicant becomes more talkative, but he does not have slurred speech, 
stumble, or appear to be uncoordinated. (Tr. 25-32.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife of 21 years testified that he is very honest, his integrity is 
“awesome,” he meticulously follows the rules, and he always puts everything and 
everyone above himself. She described Applicant as an occasional social drinker. She 
testified that Applicant attributed his voluntary in-patient treatment and counseling in 
December 1988 to a concerned chief petty officer who helped him do what was 
necessary to prevent further problems with alcohol. (Tr. 54-55, 61.) 
 
 A coworker who served with Applicant on active duty has known him since about 
2002. He considers Applicant to be honest, trustworthy, meticulous, and a “straight-
laced guy.” Whenever he works on a project, he wants it to be perfect. He has high 
integrity and it would be inconsistent with his character to “cut corners.” (Tr. 33-43.) 
 
 An active-duty senior chief petty officer who has known Applicant for about ten 
years regards Applicant as a close friend. He has “utmost respect” for Applicant’s 
honesty, integrity, and trustworthiness. He trusts Applicant to watch over his family and 
his home whenever he deploys. He testified that when they socialize, Applicant will 
drink “two or three beers, tops” and then “call it a night.” (Tr. 45-49.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
 
6 
 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested in April 1983 for public 
drunkenness (SOR ¶ 1.a); received non-judicial punishment in June 1988 for an 
alcohol-related unauthorized absence and missing his ship’s movement (SOR ¶ 1.b); 
received non-judicial punishment in July 1985 for alcohol-related dereliction of duty 
 
7 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c); received non-judicial punishment in August 1986 for drunk driving (SOR ¶ 
1.d); was arrested in May 1988 for driving under the influence (DUI), driving with a 
suspended license, and illegal possession of liquor (SOR ¶ 1.e); was arrested in 
December 1988 for DUI and driving with a suspended license (SOR ¶ 1.f); completed a 
command-ordered alcohol rehabilitation program and its aftercare requirements in 
December 1988 (SOR ¶ 1.g); and was arrested for DUI in September 2008, fined 
$1,925, and ordered to perform 40 hours of community service and attend alcohol 
classes or counseling (SOR ¶ 1.h). 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness.” The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are 
potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual 
is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
AG ¶ 22(b): alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or 
duty in an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent; 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
AG ¶ 22(d): diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
AG ¶ 22(e): evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(f): relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant denied that his dereliction of duty in July 1985 involved alcohol, and 
Department Counsel presented no evidence that it was alcohol-related. I conclude that 
Applicant has refuted the allegation that his dereliction of duty was alcohol-related. 
Applicant also denied that his alcohol treatment and counseling at the Navy hospital in 
December 1988 was directed by his Navy superiors. I found his testimony that he 
voluntarily sought treatment credible, and I conclude that he has refuted the allegation 
 
8 
 
that his treatment was directed by his superiors. Nevertheless, AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) 
are established by Applicant’s multiple civilian arrests and military punishments for 
alcohol-related misconduct. AG ¶ 22(b) is established by Applicant’s record of military 
punishment for unauthorized absence and missing the movement of his ship due to 
intoxication. AG ¶¶ 22(d), 22(e), and 22(f) are not established, because there is no 
evidence that Applicant has ever been diagnosed with alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by any of the following 
mitigating conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 23(a): so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 23(b): the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
AG ¶ 23(c): the individual is a current employee who is participating in a 
counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and 
relapse, and is making satisfactory progress; or 
 
AG ¶ 23(d): the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program. 
 
The first prong of AG ¶ 23(a) (“so much time has passed”) focuses on whether 
the conduct was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is 
Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the 
evidence. If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any 
evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). 
 
 I conclude that AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) are established. Twenty years passed 
after Applicant acknowledged that he needed help and completed the Navy 
 
9 
 
rehabilitation program. More than four years have passed since Applicant’s most recent 
DUI. He has established a pattern of responsible drinking. He enjoys a reputation for 
honesty, trustworthiness, integrity, and adherence to the rules. He has expressed 
remorse and embarrassment for the September 2008 DUI. 
 
 Applicant’s testimony raised the question whether his diabetes may have 
contributed to his intoxication in September 2008. If so, the combination of a spike in his 
blood-sugar level and his consumption of alcohol might qualify as an unusual 
circumstance under AG ¶ 23(a). However, no medical evidence was presented on this 
issue by either party. Thus, I have not speculated about the possible interaction 
between his alcohol consumption and his diabetes. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The SOR cross-alleges the conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a-1.f and 1.h under this 
guideline. The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.”  
 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include “a single serious crime or 
multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 
31(a) and 31(c). The evidence of Applicant’s multiple instances of alcohol-related 
criminal conduct establishes these two disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Two mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
For the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b), I conclude 
the AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) are established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his SCA by failing to disclose the 
alcohol-related conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a-1.f. The concern under this guideline is set 
out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
 
10 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition is “deliberate omission . . . of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire . . . .” AG ¶ 16(a). When a falsification 
allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has the burden of proving it. 
An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at 
the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
An applicant’s level of education and business experience are relevant to determining 
whether a failure to disclose relevant information on an SCA was deliberate. ISCR Case 
No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant has extensive experience with the security clearance process. His 
embarrassment by his September 2008 DUI certainly provided motivation to minimize 
his history of alcohol-related incidents. His explanation for omitting his criminal and 
disciplinary record from 1983 to 1988 is that his mindset while completing his SCA was 
focused on a ten-year window. Consistent with this mindset, he omitted mention of 
college courses outside the ten-year window. He adhered to this ten-year mindset when 
he answered “No” to a DOHA interrogatory about previous treatment for alcohol 
problems.  
 
 Other irregularities on Applicant’s SCA, such as omission of his first marriage 
and divorce, answering “No” to a question whether he had ever served in the U.S. 
military, and listing his Navy service as a previous period of service with his current 
employer, suggest carelessness and inattention to detail. Such carelessness could 
explain his failure to notice the word “ever” in the DOHA interrogatory or the SCA. While 
such carelessness falls short of the expected behavior of a retired master chief petty 
officer, it does not necessarily equate to intentional falsification.  
 
 In addition to his distinguished military service, Applicant also has gained a 
reputation for honesty, integrity, trustworthiness, and adherence to rules and regulations 
in his civilian career. He has candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He testified 
that he disclosed his earlier alcohol-related problems on previous SCAs, and his 
testimony is not contradicted by any evidence in the record.  
 
 After considering all the evidence, including Applicant’s testimony and demeanor 
at the hearing, and his reputation for honesty and integrity, I conclude that he did not 
intentionally falsify his SCA. Accordingly, I conclude that no disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline are established. 
 
 
11 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines G, J, and E in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those 
guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served in the U.S. Navy with distinction for 27 years, and he has 
continued his service as a contractor employee for the last four years. He has held a 
security clearance for almost all of his professional life. He is devoted to his family. He is 
respected by his peers, his former shipmates, and his neighbors. He was candid, 
sincere, remorseful, and credible at the personal appearance. His concern about the 
adverse consequences of excessive alcohol use on his diabetic condition makes 
recurrence unlikely. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines G, J, 
and E, evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my 
obligation to resolve close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on alcohol consumption and criminal conduct, 
and he has refuted the allegation that he falsified his SCA. Accordingly, I conclude he 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:    For Applicant 
 
12 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
