KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: An unsatisfied debt is a continuing course of conduct for purposes of DOHA
adjudications.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 10-11083.a1
DATE: 12/18/2012
DATE: December 18, 2012
In Re:
--------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-11083
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 11, 2012, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
2
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On September 19, 2012, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Edward W.
Loughran denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge properly applied the
whole-person factors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant
has held a security clearance since 2008.  She attended undergraduate and graduate school from
1998 to 2004.  She took out student loans to pay for a portion of the costs.  She became financially
strained, and some of her debts became delinquent.  The SOR cited to six delinquent debts, including
one for $6,082, a charged-off credit card, alleged under ¶ 1(e).  In her response to the SOR,
Applicant stated that this debt had been paid in full, and she testified at the hearing to similar effect.
In her security clearance interview, however, she stated that she had tried to negotiate a settlement
of this debt but that she had not been successful.  She made a similar claim in her answer to a DOHA
interrogatory question.  At the hearing, she asserted that the interview summary did not accurately
describe her answers to the interviewer’s questions.  She testified that she had told the interviewer
that she had paid the debt and was trying to have it removed from her credit report.  The Judge gave
her 30 days after the hearing to submit corroborating evidence of her claim to have paid this debt.
She provided no such evidence.  The Judge found that she still owed the debt.
In the Analysis, the Judge entered favorable findings on five of the six alleged debts.
However, regarding ¶ 1(e), the Judge concluded that Applicant had not accepted responsibility for
it.  He stated that he found her attitude toward this debt to be “baffling.”  Decision at 8.  Finding that
the unresolved debt was ongoing, the Judge concluded that it cast doubt upon Applicant’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge stated that he had
considered Applicant’s case in light of the factors listed in Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(a).  He also
stated that he had considered her evidence of good character.  However, given what he described
as Applicant’s “steadfast refusal to accept responsibility for a debt in the face of overwhelming
evidence” (Decision at 9), he concluded that she had not mitigated the security concern raised by
¶ 1(e).   
Applicant contends that the Judge did not perform an adequate whole-person analysis of her
circumstances.  For example, she argues that the debt in question was incurred several years ago and,
therefore, is not recent.  However, an unsatisfied debt is a continuing course of conduct for the
purpose of DOHA adjudications.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-23369 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 1, 2008).
Applicant cites to record evidence, such as her character references, evidence that she is current on
her bills, her excellent work record, her having held a clearance for many years, etc.  A Judge is
presumed to have considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-07219
at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2012).  In this case, the Judge acknowledged Applicant’s character evidence.
Applicant’s brief provides no reason to believe that he did not consider the other evidence Applicant
has cited, or that he did not consider all of the evidence in the record.  Applicant has failed to rebut
3
the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record evidence.  After considering the record
as a whole, we conclude that the Judge’s whole-person analysis complies with the requirements of
the Directive, in that he considered the totality of her conduct in reaching his decision.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 08-09511 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 3, 2010).   
Applicant states that, if she loses her clearance, she is at risk of losing her job.  However, the
effect that an unfavorable decision may have on an applicant is not relevant or material to a security
clearance determination.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-01021 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 18, 2011).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record, given the Judge’s findings about Applicant’s
inconsistent statements regarding the debt in question and the lack of corroboration for her claims
to have paid the debt.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly
consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
  
Order
The Judge’s decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
