KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judges findings contained statements which were technically erroneous. 
However, the errors were harmless.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-04176.a1
DATE: 12/18/2012
DATE: December 18, 2012
In Re:
------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-04176
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Paula W. Phinney, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On February 17, 2012, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
2
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On September 19, 2012, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Roger C.
Wesley denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to consider all of
the record evidence; whether the Judge’s findings contain errors; and whether the Judge’s adverse
security clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm the Judge’s decision.  
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant
is a production supervisor for a Defense contractor.  He served in the Air National Guard and as a
civilian employee of the Guard for 22 years.  In 2010, he changed jobs, which resulted in a loss of
income.  
Applicant experienced financial problems in the 1990s.  Accordingly, he filed for Chapter
7 bankruptcy protection and was discharged in 2002.  After that discharge, however, he accumulated
more delinquent debt, in the amount of about $19,000.  Additionally, his home went into foreclosure.
He consulted a debt consolidation firm in July 2012, completing an action plan and a budget.  The
Judge stated that he shows promise concerning his debts, although the record contains little evidence
showing actual debt payment.  Applicant terminated his relationship with the debt consolidation firm
and has elected to deal with his creditors personally.  However, as of the close of the record,
Applicant had “made no documented payment progress with any of his listed consumer creditors.”
Decision at 4.  
Applicant received numerous decorations and awards during his service to the National
Guard.  He enjoys an excellent reputation among his supervisors and co-workers for his job
knowledge, team spirit, leadership, etc.  His civilian performance evaluations are excellent.
However, few of his character witnesses had detailed knowledge of his financial problems.  
In the Analysis, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial situation raised security
concerns under Guideline F.  He also concluded that Applicant had failed to demonstrate a track
record of debt repayment.  Although citing to Applicant’s evidence of good character and good duty
performance, and to evidence of his reduction in income, the Judge found that Applicant had not met
his burden of persuasion as to mitigation.   
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider evidence favorable to him.  For example,
he cites to his good character and duty performance, arguing that the Judge failed to take his
favorable evidence into account.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all of the evidence in the
record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-07219 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2012).  In this case, the Judge
made detailed findings concerning Applicant’s character evidence and his evidence of job
performance.  Applicant’s argument on appeal is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the
3
Judge considered all of the evidence in the record, including the evidence Applicant submitted in
his own behalf and cited in his brief.  
We construe Applicant’s brief as challenging the Judge’s findings regarding his debt
repayment.  We note, for example, the finding quoted above that Applicant had made no progress
with his creditors.  Applicant cites to evidence that purports to demonstrate payment of four of the
eighteen SOR debts.  Applicant Exhibit (AE) AA, does show payment on four debts, two of which
are to creditors listed in the SOR.  Taken literally, AE AA might undermine the Judge’s categorical
statement that Applicant had demonstrated no debt repayment.  However, the tenor of the Judge’s
decision was that Applicant’s presentation consisted more of promises for future action rather than
of a demonstrated track record of debt repayment.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-05390 at 2 (App.
Bd. Oct. 22, 2010) (Promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a substitute for a track
record of paying debts in a timely manner).  This perspective is consistent with the record evidence
that was before the Judge.  Therefore, even if there are errors in the Judge’s findings, these errors
did not likely influence the outcome of the case.  Accordingly, they are harmless.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 10-09281 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 5, 2012).  Applicant has cited to some Hearing Office cases
which he contends support his case for a security clearance.  We give these cases due consideration.
However, they are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 09-08099 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 14, 2012).  
The Judge’s decision is sustainable.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted
only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.” 
Order
The Judge’s decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jean E. Smallin               
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
