 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11-07357
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his deliberate failure
to file federal income tax returns as required between 2001 and 2009. His request for a
security clearance is denied.
On March 16, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed background investigation,
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent
interrogatories  to Applicant seeking to clarify or augment the information contained1
therein. Based on his responses to the interrogatories and the results of the background
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).3
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included seven documents (Items 1 - 7) proffered4
in support of the Government’s case.
2
investigation, DOHA adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest for Applicant to have access to classified information.  2
On June 13, 2012, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed at Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  Applicant timely responded to the3
SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On September 20, 2012, Department
Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the preliminary4
decision to deny Applicant’s request for a clearance. Applicant received the FORM on
October 3, 2012, and had 30 days to file a response to the FORM. Applicant did not
respond to the FORM and the case was assigned to me on November 29, 2012.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, it was alleged that Applicant did not file his federal tax returns
as required for tax years 2001 through 2009 (SOR 1.a). Applicant admitted this
allegation without explanation. In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s
admission, I have made the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 33 years old and employed as an electrician by a defense contractor.
After graduating from high school and attending community college for two years, he
enlisted in the U.S. Navy in 1999. He served on active duty until he was honorably
discharged as a first class petty officer in 2005. Applicant previously applied for and was
granted a security clearance in 2000 in connection with his military duties. From 2005
until 2010, Applicant worked for defense contractors, including his current employer, but
was also unemployed for various periods. He has been steadily employed in his current
job since July 2010. (FORM, Items 4 - 6)
When Applicant submitted his eQIP in 2011, he disclosed that he had not filed
his federal tax returns for tax years 2001 through 2009. When asked about this by a
government investigator during an April 2011 subject interview, Applicant claimed that
he did not think he was required to file returns because he had made sure that sufficient
taxes were deducted from his paychecks. (FORM, Items 4 and 5)
During previous periods of unemployment, Applicant supported himself through
personal savings. He has no record of delinquent or past-due debt, and a personal
financial statement submitted with his response to interrogatories shows that he has a
positive monthly cash flow and is likely meeting all of his regular financial obligations.
(FORM, Item 5)
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 Directive, E3.1.14.7
 Directive, E3.1.15.8
3
In his response to interrogatories, Applicant averred that he had filed returns for
the 2007 and 2010 tax years in April 2011, and that he had mailed returns for the 2008
and 2009 tax years in April 2012. He did not provide copies of those returns, but
provided IRS transcripts for his 2007 - 2010 tax year accounts showing either a refund
due or no tax owed for those years. (FORM, Item 5) 
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOHA based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Department Counsel meets its burden, it7
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  8
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).10
4
the applicant to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to9
such information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust
and confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
nation’s interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access to classified information in favor of the Government.10
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Applicant did not timely file his federal tax returns for 2001 through 2009 as
required. Complying with income tax reporting is a basic financial obligation of most
income-earning U.S. citizens. Failure to do so raises a security concern addressed, in
relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, Applicant’s conduct requires application of the disqualifying
condition at AG ¶ 19(g) (failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns
as required or the fraudulent filing of the same). 
Of the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 20, the following are pertinent to these
facts and circumstances:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and
5
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control.
Applicant has not established that his failure to file tax returns as required was
due to events or circumstances beyond his control. Rather, he claimed, during his
subject interview and in his response to interrogatories, that he did not file tax returns
for those years because he knew he had paid sufficient taxes through deductions from
his paychecks. He further claimed that he has filed some of the tax returns at issue.
However, he has not presented copies of the filed returns. He also has not explained
why he waited until after he was interviewed in April 2011, and until after he received
DOHA interrogatories in 2012, to file those returns. The IRS transcripts tend to support
his claim that he may actually have overpaid his taxes for some years. Nonetheless, it
was incumbent on Applicant, in response to the Government’s information, to establish
through sufficient reliable evidence that he has filed all of the past-due tax returns, and
that he has filed his tax returns as required since 2009. In short, after the Government
presented information to support application of the AG ¶ 19(g) disqualifying condition,
Applicant was required to show that he has corrected his past conduct and that such
omissions will not recur. He failed to do so and his conduct in this regard must be
viewed as recent and ongoing. The AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions do not apply and the
security concerns under this guideline remain.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a 33-year-old
veteran of the U.S. Navy who left active duty as a senior enlisted person. Aside from the
SOR allegation, there is no adverse information that would undermine Applicant’s
suitability for a security clearance. However, his willful failure to file tax returns for nine
years in a row is sufficient to disqualify him from access to classified information. Given
his background, it is reasonable to assume that Applicant knew or should have known
that even if he was due a refund, he was still required to file an annual return. He was
afforded multiple opportunities (in response to interrogatories, the SOR, and the FORM)
to mitigate the security concerns raised under this guideline, but he failed to do so. A
fair and commonsense assessment of available information does not alleviate the
doubts raised by Applicant’s conduct. Because protection of the national interest is
paramount in these determinations, those doubts must be resolved for the Government.
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a : Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
