 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 11-07237 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated personal conduct and financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 12, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines E, 
personal conduct, and F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of 
Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as 
amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
On July 17, 2012, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 12, 
2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 24, 2012, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on November 27, 2012. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 
 
2 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant and one witness testified. She 
submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 5, 2012.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing ¶¶ 1.b through 
1.l, 1.z, 1.bb and 1.cc. Additionally, he moved to modify ¶1.aa by deleting the number 
10 and substituting the number 8. There was no objection and his motion was granted.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since December 2010. She seeks to obtain eligibility for a public 
trust position. She graduated from college in 2003 with a bachelor’s degree in business 
administration. She has been employed continually except for a few months in 2007. 
Applicant has never been married. She has a three-year-old daughter.2  
 
 Applicant credibly stated that she kept a checkbook on a closed bank account, in 
her name, in the trunk of her car. She also kept credit card statements and bank 
statements in her car trunk. She indicated that this was her filing system. She learned 
that the checkbook was stolen and checks were written on the closed account in her 
name. She lived with the father of her child from 2003 to 2007. She later suspected, but 
had no direct evidence, that he had perpetrated the act. He does not pay child support. 
She last had contact with him when he visited their daughter last month.3  
 
 Applicant learned about many of her delinquent debts when she retrieved a copy 
of her credit report. She reported that her checkbook was stolen to the police in 2007 
and received a police report. She contacted the various creditors where the fraudulent 
checks were written and provided a copy of the police report to them. Based on the 
places where the checks were written and the counties where the retail establishments 
were located she was able to discern which debts were attributed to the fraudulent 
checks. Based on this information, Department Counsel withdrew the allegations 
believed to be attributed to the fraudulent checks. However, there are other delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR that belong to Applicant. Applicant disputed the delinquent 
debts on her credit report that she believed were from the stolen checks.4  
 
 Applicant went to court to resolve the fraudulent checks that were written against 
her closed account by her daughter’s father. Those charges were dismissed by the 
judge. However, Applicant admitted that she also wrote checks when she had 
                                                          
1
 Tr. 81-87, 138-142; GE 7, 8; AE D-17-26. 
 
2
 Tr. 23, 33-39. 
 
3
 Tr. 39-59. 
 
4
 Tr. 24-27, 39-59. 
 
3 
insufficient funds in her account. She was found guilty of 10 counts of “fraudulent check 
or stop payment, $500 or less.”5 She paid restitution to the store where she wrote the 
checks along with the service fee, and the court costs. There were other insufficient 
check charges that were withdrawn by the store after she paid restitution.6  
 
 The delinquent debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($612) was for a cable converter box that was 
not returned to the company. Applicant stated she returned the box but did not receive 
credit. She did not provide supporting documentation.7 
 
 The delinquent debts in SOR ¶ 1.m ($117), 1.n ($315), 1.s ($110), 1.w ($551), 
and 1.x ($75) are for medical services. Applicant admitted her daughter received 
medical care in the past. When she was interviewed by an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator on April 27, 2011, she indicated she was unfamiliar 
with the debts, but would look into them within the next 30 days and make 
arrangements to resolve them if they were her accounts. Applicant stated she requested 
the creditor provide her information about the debts and was advised they were with a 
collection company. She stated she contacted the creditor in 2010 and again in October 
2012. She did not contact the original medical provider regarding the debts. She stated 
she disputed the debts with the credit bureau. She did not provide any documentation to 
substantiate any of her actions.8  
 
 The delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.o ($500) and 1.p ($3,591) were incurred when 
Applicant terminated her lease before its expiration. She stated there was also some 
damage to the apartment. The debt was incurred sometime in 2005 or 2006. Applicant 
indicated she contacted the creditor in 2006 to resolve it. She has not had any further 
contact, and the debt remains unpaid.9 
 
 The delinquent debt in SOR ¶ 1.r ($11,793) is for a vehicle loan. Applicant 
purchased the vehicle in 2004. In 2006, she had an accident with the vehicle where she 
was at fault. She did not have collision insurance so she owed the creditor for the total 
remaining on the loan because the car was a total loss. During her OPM interview she 
indicated she would contact the creditor to make payment arrangements. The creditor 
wanted the full amount owed, and Applicant did not have the funds. Applicant stated 
she thought when the creditor retrieved the vehicle she had no further financial 
responsibility.10  
 
                                                          
5
 GE 5, 6; AE D pages 17-26. 
 
6
 Tr. 59-81; GE 5, 6; AE D pages 1-16. 
 
7
 Tr. 87-88; GE 7, 8. 
 
8
 Tr. 30-32, 89-91; GE 7, 8. 
 
9
 Tr. 27-30, 34-35, 38, 91-93; GE 7, 8. 
 
10
 Tr. 93-95; GE 7, 8. 
 
4 
 The delinquent debt in SOR ¶ 1.t ($717) is for bank fees on a checking account. 
In her OPM interview, Applicant acknowledged the debt and stated it had been 
delinquent since approximately 2006. She intended to contact the creditor to make 
payment arrangements. She has not taken action on the delinquent debt.11  
 
 The delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.u ($48) and 1.v ($58) are for pizza delivery. 
Applicant disputes that she owes the debts. She believes these do not belong to her 
and are for fraudulent checks. She did not provide any documentation to substantiate 
her dispute.12  
  
 In 2005, Applicant paid a credit consolidation company $300 per month to assist 
her with her delinquent debts. She was able to pay six or seven credit cards, but then 
could not afford to keep up the monthly payments to the company. Currently Applicant 
does not have any credit cards. Her mother helps her financially. Applicant stated she 
does not have a written budget, but writes down her purchases.13  
 
 Applicant failed to disclose on her public trust application that she had any debts 
over 180 days delinquent. She stated she did not intentionally fail to disclose her 
financial delinquencies on her public trust application.14 She further stated:  
 
 [A] lot of information on my credit report I was not familiar with. So at the 
time I was in the process of researching the information, and there was a 
lot of checks—a lot of information on there that I was not familiar with. So 
I was going through, and I was, you know, in the process of trying to 
validate each of the things that I saw on my credit report. So when I 
answered the question, it was not necessarily to be deliberate in saying, 
you know, I know I don’t have any debt, I knew some things were valid. I 
knew some things were not valid. But I needed to, you know, get more 
information and research before, you know, I was able to distinguish 
which things were actually mine or not.15  
 
She stated she was waiting to be contacted by the creditor for the car loan. She knew 
she terminated her lease early on her apartment and owed money, but did not know it 
was a debt or how much she owed. She stated she did not know the actual amount of 
money she owed to different creditors. She knew she had delinquent debts, but she did 
not list them because she wanted to validate them. I did not find Applicant’s 
explanations credible.16  
                                                          
11
 Tr. 95; GE 7, 8. 
 
12
 Tr. 95-97; GE 7, 8. 
 
13
 Tr. 102-104. 
 
14
 Tr. 108. 
 
15
 Tr. 24. 
 
16
 Tr. 24-25, 108-115; GE 1. 
 
5 
 Applicant’s witness testified that she is a certified financial planner and has 
worked in the investment and money management industry for 30 years. She is a friend 
of Applicant’s mother who asked her to help her daughter. She has been working with 
Applicant since June 2012 to develop a budget and resolve her financial issues. She 
believes that there is an attitude among young people, including Applicant, that if they 
do not receive a bill from a creditor that they do not owe the creditor. She believes that 
young people have to actually see a paper bill before they will pay a debt. She does not 
believe this is unusual for young people, including Applicant. She explained that the 
attitude is if it is not in front of me, then I do not have to deal with it.17  
 
 The witness indicated that since 2008, Applicant has been paying her monthly 
bills. It has been difficult to resolve Applicant’s delinquent debts because they are in 
collection and have been resold numerous times. She indicated that perhaps Applicant 
has been slow to resolve her debts because she advised her to contact the credit 
bureaus to verify her debts. The witness is going to attempt to negotiate settlements for 
Applicant on her verified debts. Applicant no longer writes checks; she only pays cash. 
She has been advised that before she makes a purchase, she must decide if the 
purchase is a “need” or a “want.” The financial advisor has met with Applicant numerous 
times and does not believe she is a future financial risk, or that she will have financial 
problems in the future. The witness anticipated that in the next 30 days they would 
begin to make progress on Applicant’s finances.18  
 
 Character letters provided by Applicant indicate that she is a hard worker and a 
“people” person. She is considered an asset to the team and has been recognized for 
her dedication. She is willing to assist others and is considered a loyal and devoted 
worker. She is an optimistic person and an outstanding person. She consistently meets 
her employer’s goals and was recognized for her achievement.19 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
                                                          
17
 Tr. 102, 116-137. 
 
18
 Tr. 116-138. 
 
19
 AE A, B, C. 
 
6 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
7 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated numerous delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 I have credited Applicant with returning her cable converter box and mitigating 
SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that remain unresolved. There 
was evidence that some of her delinquent debts were the result of fraudulent actions. 
Those issues were resolved by the judge who dismissed the charges for those checks 
and the corresponding SOR allegations were subsequently withdrawn. However, 
regarding the other debts there is insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant’s 
delinquent debts were due to unique circumstances or resulted from conditions beyond 
her control. I find AG ¶¶ 20 (a) and 20(b) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant has engaged a financial advisor who is assisting her in establishing a 
budget and eventually addressing her delinquent debts. Applicant did not provide proof 
that she has made payments towards her delinquent debts or has established payment 
plans. Through her financial advisor she apparently plans to begin to address these 
debts in the future. I find AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies.  
 
 
8 
 Applicant did not provide proof that she is making good-faith payments to pay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve her debts. I find AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant was aware that she had delinquent debts. During her OPM interview 
she indicated her intent to address the debts. She stated she is verifying certain debts 
and also disputing certain debts. She has not provided a reasonable basis for the 
legitimacy of her disputes. She has not provided documented proof to substantiate her 
disputes or evidence that she is actively resolving her debts. I find AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply.  
 
GUIDELINE E, PERSONAL CONDUCT 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. One is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Appellant was aware that she had some delinquent debts when she completed 
her public trust application. She knew she terminated her lease on her apartment and 
owed money to the creditor for the lease and for damages, and that she had not paid 
the debt. She was aware that she owed money on her car loan and other debts, but 
stated she was attempting to verify the amount owed. I did not find her testimony 
credible. I find her omissions and concealment were deliberate and intentional. The 
above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have considered all of the personal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
17. Three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
9 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Appellant did not make a prompt good-faith effort to disclose the omission before 
being confronted with the facts. Her concealment of her debts is not minor and did not 
happen under unique circumstances. She did not fully and credibly acknowledge her 
behavior or provide evidence of positive steps that it is unlikely to recur. Applicant did 
not offer a credible explanation for her failure to disclose her delinquent debts on her 
public trust application. Her actions cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and work record. I 
considered that she is a single mother who is not receiving child support. Applicant is a 
college graduate. She was unfortunate to have her checkbook stolen and numerous 
checks were fraudulently written on her account. She has not been held responsible for 
them. She wrote checks on her account that had insufficient funds and was found guilty 
on ten charges relating to them. She was aware that she had delinquent debts and did 
 
10 
not disclose them on her public trust application. After her OPM interview, she was 
aware that her delinquent debts were a trustworthiness concern. Although she recently 
sought the advice of a financial advisor, which is some mitigation, she has not taken 
sufficient action to resolve her delinquent debts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust 
position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated financial 
considerations or personal conduct trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
 Subparagraph   1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.l:   Withdrawn 
 Subparagraphs 1.m-1.y:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.z:    Withdrawn 
 Subparagraphs 1.aa:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.bb-1.cc:   Withdrawn 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
