1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-03994
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esquire
December 6, 2012
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On February 21, 2012 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline
B for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), effective after September 1, 2006. 
 
On April 27, 2012, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a decision based on a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on September 21, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October
5, 2012, and the hearing was convened on November 2, 2012. At the hearing, the
Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received without objection.
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through J, which were
also admitted without objection. The record was left open until November 9, 2012, to
allow Applicant to submit additional information regarding one issue which will be
addressed below, and Applicant’s counsel indicated that Applicant had no further
2
information on that issue.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on
November 13, 2012. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony
of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
relating to Belarus and the Ukraine.  The request and the attached documents were
admitted into evidence as Exhibits 3 and 4. Applicant’s Counsel also requested that I
take notice of some facts regarding the Ukraine in Exhibit A. The facts administratively
noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
                                            Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 43 years old. He was born in the United States. He earned a
Bachelor’s degree in Mechanical Engineering in 1999. Applicant served in the United
States Marine Corps (USMC) on active duty from 1987 to 1991, when he received an
Honorable Discharge. He also served in two different state National Guards from 1995
to 2000, and he also received Honorable Discharges from each unit in which he served.
Applicant served in the first Gulf War, in Desert Storm and Desert Shield. (Tr at 32-35.) 
Applicant’s father is deceased. His relatives, who are U.S. born citizens and
residents include his mother, two brothers, three nieces and one nephew from his
brothers, and a combination of seven aunts and uncles plus their spouses. Applicant
expressed feelings of affection towards all of his American family. (Tr at 41-44.)
Applicant is currently married and he was married previously from 2007 to 2009.
Applicant is employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security
clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
(Guideline B - Foreign Influence) 
The SOR lists four allegations regarding Foreign Influence, 1.a. through 1d.,
under Adjudicative Guideline B. At the request of Department Counsel, and based on
evidence introduced at the hearing, allegation 1.a.. was amended. Also, two additional
allegations, 1.e. and 1.f., were added to the SOR at the hearing. The SOR allegations
will be reviewed in the same order as they were listed on the SOR:
 
1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s girlfriend, a former Ukraine
Government employee, is a citizen and resident of Ukraine. As discussed above this
allegation was amended to include the following: “Your former girlfriend became your
wife on July 27, 2012, and now resides in the United States.” Applicant admitted the
initial allegation in his RSOR, and he admitted the amended allegation at the hearing.
3
Applicant’s wife worked for a local Ukrainian Government office. (Tr at 65.) Exhibit B is a
letter from his wife wherein she wrote that she worked for the Ukraine land grant office,
which is a local government office not a national government office. 
Applicant testified that his wife moved to the United States in July 15, 2012. She
currently lives with Applicant’s brother and his family in the U. S. while Applicant is
working for an American company outside of the United States.  She plans to join her
husband in whatever country he is working once she has received her Green Card. (Tr
at 37-38.) His wife’s plan is to eventually become a United States citizen and live the
rest of her life in the United States with her husband. (Tr at 50.) (Exhibit B.) Applicant
also submitted several documents to establish that his wife lives and got married in the
United States and is now applying for permanent residence here. (Exhibits C, D, E, and
F.) 
1.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s friend is a dual-citizen of Belarus and
the United States. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. Applicant first met this
person in 2007 when he hired him for a work project in the United States. (Tr at 58.)
This individual lives with his family in the United States. (Tr at 72.)   
Applicant testified that he no longer has a relationship with this individual. He
explained that his friendship with this man had not been particularly strong, and that
Applicant ended the friendship when he believed it could hurt his chances of having a
security clearance. (Tr at 45-46.) Applicant has never traveled to Belarus. (Tr at 77-78.) 
1.c. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant disclosed to his Ukrainian girlfriend
that he was applying for a security clearance. Applicant denied this allegation in his
RSOR and at the hearing he testified that he had not told his wife he was applying for a
security clearance. (Tr at 39.)
Applicant explained that when he spoke to a Government investigator he stated
that he told his wife he could not talk about his job, and he does construction overseas.
Applicant believed that the investigator may have misunderstood what he was saying,
and that was why the investigator indicated in the Personal Subject Interview (PSI) that
Applicant stated to his wife that he was applying for a security clearance. (Tr at 39.)
(Exhibit 2.) 
1.d. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant disclosed to his dual citizen friend,
referred to in 1.b., above, that he was applying for a security clearance. Applicant
denied this allegation in his RSOR, and he testified that he had not told his friend he
was applying for a security clearance. (Tr at 39-40.)
Applicant explained that when he spoke to the Government investigator he also
stated that he told his friend he could not talk about his job, and he does construction
overseas. Applicant believed that the investigator may have had the same
misunderstanding that Applicant told his friend that he was applying for a security
clearance and that was why he put it in the PSI. (Tr at 39-40.)  (Exhibit 2.) 
4
Applicant conceded that when he reviewed the PSI he had not noticed what he
considered to be the errors that stated he had disclosed to his wife and friend that he
was applying for a security clearance, and that if he had noticed it, he would have
corrected those incorrect statements. (Tr at 40-41.)  
1.e. As reviewed above, allegation 1.e. was added to the SOR at the hearing.
The amended SOR states: “Your father-in-law, your mother-in-law, and your brother-in-
law are Ukrainian citizens and residents.” Applicant admitted this allegation during his
testimony. He testified that since none of his in-laws speak English, he is unable to
communicate with them. He also stated that none of them work for the Ukranian
Government. Finally, he averred that, if his in-laws were threatened, he would never
reveal classified information to rescue them, but would rather he would reveal the threat
to his Facility Security Officer (FSO). (Tr at 46-47.) 
1.f. Allegation 1.f. was also added to the SOR at the hearing. The amended SOR
states: “You traveled to the Ukraine on approximately 10 occasions from 2009 to 2011
for the purpose of vising your girlfriend who is now your wife.” Applicant admitted this
allegation during his testimony, and he explained that his only reason for these visits
was to see his girlfriend. (Tr at 74-75.) The record was left open to allow Applicant to
submit documentation as to the exact number of trips he had taken to visit his girlfriend
in the Ukraine, but Applicant had no documentation that would establish exactly how
many trips he took. 
Applicant denied having any feelings of affection, obligation, or loyalty to the
Ukraine. He testified that he owns a home in the United States, and he has no assets in
the Ukraine or in any foreign country. He also has no intention of visiting the Ukraine in
the future.  (Tr at 49-50.) 
Mitigation
Among the documents offered into evidence on behalf of Applicant were his
records confirming his honorable service in the United States military. (Exhibit G.)
Applicant also offered 12 positive, laudatory character letters, 11 from those who know
him in his professional capacity, and one from his brother. (Exhibit I.)
Applicant also submitted financial documents, confirming that he owns a home in
the United States and that he owns significant additional assets here.  (Exhibit J.)  
Current Status of Belarus
I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding Belarus. Belarus
purports to be a democratic republic; however it is in fact an autocratic regime. Under its
constitution, the citizens have the right to vote, freedom of religion, and freedom of
travel. However, the Belarusian authorities have secretly curtailed and infringed upon its
citizens’ ability to exercise these constitutional rights, as well as workers’ rights, which
also are specifically provided by the Belarusian Constitution. 
5
United States and Belarusian relations have worsened steadily since 1998. This
is due to human rights issues and illegal sales of arms, as well as the illegal seizure of
diplomatic residences including that of the U.S. Ambassador by the Belarusian
authorities. 
Current Status of the Ukraine
I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding the Ukraine. The
Ukraine is ruled by a presidential-parliamentary form of Government. In 2008, the
United States signed the U.S.-Ukraine charter on Strategic Partnership, which highlights
the importance of the bilateral relationship and outlines enhanced cooperation in the
areas of defense, security, economics and trade, energy, security, democracy, and
cultural exchanges. 
A cornerstone for the continuing partnership between the United States and the
Ukraine has been the Freedom Support Act, from which the Ukraine has received from
the United States more than $4.1 billion since its independence. Ukraine has
contributed troops and military personnel to the missions in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
6
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding Foreign Influence: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is
associated with a risk of terrorism.
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Those that could be applicable in this case include the following: AG ¶ 7
(a) “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion.” Applicant’s wife, who is a citizen of the Ukraine, and his in-laws, who are
citizens and residents of the Ukraine makes AG ¶ 7(a) a concern to the Government. I
find that AG ¶ 7(b) “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect
sensitive information . . . and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information,” is also applicable in this case.
7
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I find that AG ¶
8(b) “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty or
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest,” is applicable to this Applicant and controlling for the following reasons:  
Applicant is a U.S. born citizen and resident. Applicant’s mother, two brothers,
three nieces and one nephew, and seven aunts and uncles along with their spouses
are all U.S. born citizens and residents. Applicant served his country honorably in the
USMC and in state National Guards. Applicant’s wife was born in the Ukraine, but is
now a U.S. resident and plans to eventually become a United States citizen. 
Applicant’s contact with and feelings for his mother-in-law, father-in-law, and
brother-in-law in the Ukraine are  extremely limited. His friendship with his friend, who is
a dual citizen of Belarus and the United States, has ended. 
  
Applicant owns a home in the United States, and he has additional assets here.
He has no assets outside of the country. Finally, Applicant received many positive
recommendations by people who know him.  Based on all of these reasons, I conclude
Guideline B for Applicant.
AG ¶ 8(c) is also applicable, “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so
casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation.”
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
  
8
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why mitigating conditions AG ¶ 8(b) and (c) apply, I find that the record
evidence leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility
and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
