 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08543 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 10, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 10, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on October 15, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 5, 2012, 
scheduling the hearing for November 28, 2012. The case was reassigned to me on 
 
2 
 
November 26, 2012. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 7 were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 7, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since October 2010. He is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time. He has a bachelor’s degree. He married in 1999 and divorced in 2004. He 
does not have any children.1 
  
 Applicant provided his ex-wife a larger amount than was required when their 
assets were divided in their divorce. He invented a product and started a limited liability 
company (LLC) to market and sell the product. He has invested heavily into the 
company to obtain a patent, but the company has yet to achieve any substantial sales 
of the product.2 
 
 Applicant worked for a company from 1991 through 2005. The company was 
downsizing in 2005 and asked for volunteers to be laid off in return for a severance 
package that included a year’s salary. As part of the severance package, the employee 
was not permitted to reapply to the company for one year. Applicant accepted the 
severance package in 2005. He hoped to reapply to the company and get his job back 
after a year. The company instituted a policy that it did not rehire their former employees 
who took the severance package. Applicant was out of work for about 18 months. He 
was unable to pay all his bills, and a number of debts became delinquent.3 
 
 The SOR alleges three unpaid judgments totaling about $38,000 and 13 other 
delinquent debts. Applicant denied owing the $8,000 state tax debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.p, stating the debt was paid by garnishment. He admitted owing all the remaining 
debts and judgments. Two of the judgments alleged in the SOR appear to have resulted 
from underlying debts that are also alleged in the SOR. The $3,305 debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.i is owed to the same collection company that obtained the $2,759 judgment alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a. The $13,104 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is owed to the bank that obtained 
the $13,493 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. There may be other duplicate accounts 
alleged in the SOR, but Applicant made no attempt to differentiate or dispute the 
allegations. When the identified duplicate accounts are omitted, the amount owed is still 
well over $100,000.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 14, 21-22, 41-42; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-21, 33, 43-44; GE 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 14-19; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3-7. 
 
4 Tr. at 33-36, 42; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-7. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant owed the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) about $10,000 and his state 
about $8,000 for tax year 2008. He paid the IRS through a payment plan and seizure of 
his tax refunds. He paid the state through garnishment and seizure of his tax refunds. 
He does not owe the IRS, but he still owes the state about $1,564 for LLC fees for tax 
years 2009 and 2010.5  
 
 Applicant has retained an attorney to file a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition on his 
behalf. He has consulted with the attorney and provided him documents, but the petition 
has not yet been filed. He has completed the financial counseling required in order to 
file bankruptcy. Applicant anticipates the petition being filed in December 2012. He 
earns a good salary, and he believes his finances will be in order after the bankruptcy.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
5 GE 3, 4; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A. Applicant’s IRS debt and state LLC debt were not alleged 
in the SOR. Any debts that were not specifically alleged in the SOR will not be used for disqualification 
purposes. They may be considered when assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in the 
application of mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
6 Tr. at 23-24; GE 2-4; AE B, C. 
 
4 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
5 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant accepted a severance package from his company, expecting to be 
rehired in a year. He was not rehired, and he was unemployed for 18 months. He has 
invested heavily into his LLC to market and sell his invention, but there has not been 
any significant sales. Neither event was outside his control. His divorce does qualify as 
a condition that was beyond his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires 
that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
  Applicant’s state and federal taxes from 2008 have been paid, but he still owes 
the state about $1,564 for LLC fees for tax years 2009 and 2010. Applicant retained an 
attorney to file bankruptcy, and he received financial counseling as a requirement of the 
bankruptcy, but the petition has not yet been filed.  
 
I am unable to find that Applicant acted completely responsibly under the 
circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his debts.7 His finances are not 
yet under control. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine 
that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 
20(b) is partially applicable. The first section of AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable; the second 
section is only applicable to the $8,000 state tax debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p. The 
duplicate debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.i are concluded for Applicant. I find that 
financial concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
                                                          
7 The Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is educated and accomplished. His debts may be discharged in 
bankruptcy, and he may go on to financial stability. However, he does not yet have a 
track record of fiscally responsible behavior.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.j-1.o:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.p:    For Applicant 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
