1 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
as amended  (Directive), and adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-06213
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition was dismissed because he failed to
appear for a scheduled court date. He has over $20,000 in delinquent debt on which he has
not made any payment. He failed to mitigate the security concern that arises from his
outstanding delinquent debts. Clearance is denied.  
On May 11, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline F (financial considerations). On
September 26, 2011, Applicant submitted an undated response to the SOR in which he
admitted all SOR allegations, except those alleged in subparagraphs 1.h, 1.i, and 1.l.
Applicant requested a decision based on the written record without a hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2 Applicant listed a two-year period of unemployment in the security clearance application he
submitted. However, when he was questioned in January 2011, Applicant stated this entry was in error and
his only period of unemployment was from January 2010 until June 2010.
3 The SOR alleges the debt identified in subparagraph 1.l is owed in the amount of $3,624. Applicant’s
credit reports list the amount owed as $3,924.
2
14, 2012, that was mailed to Applicant on September 19, 2012. Applicant was informed he
had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to submit his objections to any information
contained in the FORM or to submit any additional information he wished to be considered.
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on September 28, 2012, but did not submit
a response to the FORM or object to anything contained in the FORM within the time
allowed him. The case was assigned to me on November 29, 2012.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is 52 years old and has been employed as a truck driver by a number of
different companies since at least November 2000. His only period of unemployment was
after he was fired from a job in January 2010 for violating a company policy.2 He remained
unemployed until June 2010. Applicant was also fired from a job in January 2007, but he
was able to almost immediately find replacement employment. 
Applicant obtained a General Educational Development (GED) certificate in 1976.
He married in January 2003, and that marriage ended by divorce in June 2006. He has no
continuing financial obligation to his ex-wife. Applicant did not indicate in anything he
submitted that he has any children or other dependents. 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in September 2009. The petition
was dismissed in December 2009 due to Applicant’s failure to appear for a scheduled court
date. He explained that his failure to appear was because he was on the road driving and
there had been a lack of coordination with his company’s dispatcher to arrange for him to
be able to appear. There is no indication in the record that he has done anything to
reinstate the dismissed petition or refile for bankruptcy protection.
Applicant’s credit reports disclose 11 delinquent accounts, owed in the combined
amount of $20,535,3 that have either been submitted for collection or charged off as bad
debts. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied three of the alleged debts claiming he
either did not recognize them or thought they might belong to his ex-wife. He did not submit
any evidence in support of those claims. Applicant has not made any payment on any of
the alleged delinquent debts. Applicant’s delinquencies date as far back as 2007.
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his divorce and unemployment. He did
not explain how the end of a relatively short marriage in which there were no children born
and from which he has no continuing financial obligation to his ex-wife impacted his ability
to remain current on his debts. His period of unemployment certainly affected his ability to
4 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.
5 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 
6 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
7 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).
8 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.
9 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
10 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
3
pay his debts. However, some of his delinquent debts preceded that period of
unemployment, and he has not made any effort to pay any of his debts despite having been
employed since June 2010.
Applicant’s uncle, a retired Army chaplain, wrote a letter on Applicant’s behalf in
which he supports Applicant’s application for a security clearance. He believes Applicant
is an outstanding man, possessed of high values and principles, who would never pose a
risk to national security.
 
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision
must be a fair and impartial decision based upon the relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6
of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or
against clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be
followed whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Considering the
evidence as a whole, Guideline F (financial considerations), with its disqualifying and
mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case. 
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.4 The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.5 The burden of
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,6
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.7 “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the
evidence.”8 Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.9 Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable
clearance decision.10
11 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.
12 Id. at 531.
13 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.
4
No one has a right to a security clearance11 and “the clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”12  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to
classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.13     
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . .
(Adjudicative Guideline [AG] 18)
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in September 2009, but allowed
that petition to be dismissed when he failed to appear for a scheduled court date. He has
over $20,000 in delinquent debt that has either been submitted for collection or charged off
as bad debt. He has not satisfied any of his delinquent debts. Disqualifying Conditions (DC)
19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and DC 19(c): a history of not meeting
financial obligations apply.
In part, Applicant attributes his financial problems to his divorce. His marriage ended
after three and one-half years, and there is no evidence to indicate any children were born
of that marriage. Applicant does not have any continuing financial obligation to his ex-wife.
There is no evidence he has any dependents. He did not explain how the end of a relatively
short marriage in which there were no children born and from which he has no continuing
financial obligation to his ex-wife impacted his ability to remain current on his debts.
Further, that marriage ended over six years ago and Applicant has not done anything other
than file a bankruptcy petition, which he allowed to be dismissed to resolve any of his
delinquent debts. 
Applicant also partly attributes his delinquent debts to his six-month period of
unemployment. However, while that period of unemployment effected Applicant’s ability to
pay his debts at that time, almost two and one-half years have passed since he was
unemployed. Further, some of his delinquent debts preceded that period of unemployment.
Applicant has not made any payment on any of his delinquent debts since he regained full-
time employment, and it cannot be said he has acted responsibly in regard to his delinquent
debt. I have considered all mitigating considerations and conclude that none apply. 
5
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole-person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the
financial considerations security concern. He has not overcome the case against him nor
satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Guideline F is decided against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-l: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

