 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07747 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 22, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On June 13, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on October 12, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
November 2, 2012, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on November 14, 
2012. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
 
2 
 
through 4. Applicant testified and offered Appellant’s Exhibit (AE) A. The record was left 
open until December 3, 2012, for Applicant to submit additional matters. He timely 
submitted AE B. After the record closed, Applicant submitted another document that 
was marked as AE C. AE A through C were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s memorandum and email forwarding Applicant’s post-hearing 
submissions were marked as Hearing Exhibits (HE) 1 and 2. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 26, 2012.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
At the hearing, Applicant affirmatively waived the 15-day notice requirement in 
Paragraph E3.1.8 of the Directive.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old software test engineer who works for a federal 
contractor. He has been working in his current position for about 7 years. Due to the 
expiration of a government contract, his employer changed to another contractor in 
August 2012. He graduated from high school in 1995 and earned a bachelor’s degree in 
2005. He is currently studying for a medical degree. He has never been married and 
has no children. Since May 2006, he has held a security clearance without incident.2  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s two mortgage loans totaling $138,000 were 
placed for collection. Those loans were listed as delinquent on his credit reports 
obtained on April 6, 2011, and April 6, 2012. In his Answer to the SOR, he denied both 
allegations and indicated that a short sale of the property was pending.3 
 
 In March 2003, Applicant purchased a home for $149,000. This was his primary 
residence. He was the sole owner. The home had two fixed mortgage loans. The 
interest rate was seven percent on the first mortgage loan and nine percent on the 
other. His total monthly mortgage payments were about $1,400.4 
 
 After purchasing the home, Applicant resided there with his girlfriend. She was 
employed and contributed about $300 to $400 per month to their living expenses, which 
included the mortgage payments. At that time, his annual income was about $40,000. 
He stated that the mortgage payments were about half of his monthly income. After 
residing together in the home for a year and a half, Applicant and his girlfriend 
terminated their relationship, and she moved out. At that point, he became solely 
responsible for the mortgage payments. In 2010, he stopped making the mortgage 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 11-12. 
2 Tr. at 6-7, 30-31; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1. 
 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1- 4. 
 
4 Tr. at 23-29, 31; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, GE 2-4. 
 
 
3 
 
payments. About two months after stopping those payments, he moved from the home 
to an apartment closer to his place of work.5 
 
 During an Office of Personnel Management interview in May 2011, Applicant 
reportedly stated that he “no longer wanted the expense [of the home] or to spend the 
time to keep up the maintenance on the residence.” In that interview, he acknowledged 
that, although he could afford to make the mortgage payments, he no longer wanted to 
do so. After consulting with an attorney, he decided his best option was to let the home 
go into foreclosure. He acknowledged that a foreclosure would be a negative mark on 
his credit record, but indicated that mark would eventually go away. He described the 
home as a “dead-end investment.” In response to DOHA interrogatories, he also stated 
that he stopped making the mortgage payments on the advice of an attorney to begin 
the foreclosure process.6 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant provided a letter from an attorney who was 
representing him in a short sale of the home. The attorney’s letter stated in part: 
 
Although [Applicant] could afford to make the mortgage payments at the 
time [of the purchase], his financial situation changed which ultimately 
prevented him from making the mortgage payments to [both mortgage 
holders]. While [he] was residing in the Property, [he] received financial 
assistance from a co-tenant to supplement the monthly expenses related 
to the Property. Unfortunately, the tenant moved out and [Applicant] was 
left to cover all of the expenses related to the Property. [He] also incurred 
additional expenses related to his long commute from the Property to his 
place of employment. According to [Applicant], the long commute to and 
from work became physically draining and was impacting his work 
performance. [He] decided that it would be in his best interests to relocate 
to an apartment closer to his place of employment in order to reduce the 
stress and impact of the commute. [Applicant] has been unable to find a 
suitable tenant for the Property and ultimately decided that it was in his 
best interests to short sale the Property.7  
 
In his Answer, Applicant also stated, “At no time, did I walk away and wash my hands of 
this situation.”8 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified that he could afford to make the mortgage 
payments after his ex-girlfriend moved out. He also indicated that his commute from that 
home to his place of employment was about one hour each way. He stated that he had 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 25-46; GE 2. 
 
6 GE 2.  
 
7 Tr. at 23-46; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
8 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
 
4 
 
no health problems that would exacerbate his work commute. When asked why he 
vacated the home, he responded: 
 
I think there were several contributing factors. Some of it was -- it did 
remind me of the failed relationship, which I am not proud to admit, but 
yeah. The commute tired me out. I wanted to have some kind of social life 
or activity after work and I found that hard to do. And the maintenance on 
the house was a lot more than I expected.9 
 
 Before stopping the mortgage payments, Applicant did attempt to refinance the 
first mortgage loan, but those efforts were unsuccessful. After moving out of the home, 
he did not attempt to rent it because it was in poor condition and renting it was not 
economically feasible. Two months before the hearing, the first mortgage holder 
indicated to him that it planned to initiate foreclosure proceedings.10 
 
 In October 2011, Applicant hired an attorney to represent him in a short sale of 
the home. In March 2012, he entered into an agreement with a realtor listing the 
property for a short sale. At the time of the hearing, Applicant had received two short 
sale offers. The first offer was made in April 2012, and withdrawn in July 2012. The 
second offer in the amount of $38,000 was made in September 2012. The first 
mortgage holder submitted a counteroffer of $45,000, which the prospective buyers 
accepted in October 2012. At the time of the hearing, the short sale was still pending 
final approval. The second mortgage holder agreed to accept $2,500 of the proceeds 
from the short sale as full settlement for that mortgage. On December 5, 2012, the first 
mortgage holder advised that the short sale had been finally approved. As part of that 
short sale, the second mortgage holder will receive $2,500 and the first mortgage holder 
will waive the right to pursue collection for the deficiency arising from the sale. The first 
mortgage holder indicated that it will report the deficiency from the sale to the Internal 
Revenue Service on a 1099 Form. The date for the closing of the short sale is not 
known.11 
 
 Applicant has no other delinquent debts. In April 2012, he submitted a Personal 
Financial Statement (PFS) that reflected he had a net monthly remainder of $861. The 
PFS indicated that he had a monthly rent payment of $903, but did not mention the 
mortgage payment obligations. It also indicated that he had $52,685 in a 401(k) plan.12 
 
  Applicant submitted a reference letter from a co-worker who described him as a 
trustworthy and well-balanced individual. The co-worker indicated that he has lent 
money to the Applicant and was always paid back promptly.13  
                                                          
9 Tr. at 34. 
 
10 Tr. at 25-46; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2. 
 
11 Tr. at 23-46; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, GE 2; AE A-C. 
 
12 Tr. at 29; GE 2 
 
13 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
5 
 
 Policies  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 In 2010, Applicant intentionally defaulted on two mortgage loans totaling about 
$138,000. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
 
7 
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s home significantly decreased in value due to a downturn in the real 
estate market. At the time of the hearing, the property was worth about $45,000, which 
was approximately 67 percent less than the $138,000 he owed on the mortgage loans. 
Even though he had the financial means to make the mortgage payments, he decided 
to stop making them in 2010 so that the property would go into foreclosure. After 
consulting with an attorney, he listed the home for a short sale. Shortly after the hearing, 
a short sale offer on the home was finally approved. Although this short sale will relieve 
him of the financial obligations arising from the two mortgage loans, such a sale neither 
constitutes a “good-faith” resolution of those loans nor eliminates the security concerns 
resulting from his default on them.14 Contrary to his assertion in his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant did “walk away” from his legal obligations on the mortgage loans. His willful 
default on those loans continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(c) applies, but does 
not mitigate the security concerns in this case.   
 
 Although the downturn in the real estate market was a condition beyond the 
Applicant’s control, his financial problems were the result of his decision to stop making 
the mortgage payments when he was able financially to make them. In making his 
decision to strategically default on the two mortgage loans, he placed his personal 
interests over his legal obligations and did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances.15 AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.   
 
 Applicant denied the alleged debts. However, he provided no documents to 
substantiate that he had a reasonable basis for disputing the legitimacy of those debts. 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
                                                          
14 See ISCR Case No. 99-0201 (App. Bd. Oct 12, 1999) (“[T]he concept of ‘good faith’ requires a 
showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to 
duty or obligation. Such standards are consistent with the level of conduct that must be expected of 
persons granted a security clearance.”) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No. 02-30304 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 
2004)(relying on a legally available option, such as Chapter 7 bankruptcy, is not a good-faith effort) 
(citations omitted); ISCR Case No. 99-9020 (App. Bd. Jun 4, 2001) (relying on the statute of limitations to 
avoid a debt is not a good-faith effort). Likewise, when an applicant intentionally defaults on mortgage 
loans while being financially able to make the mortgage payments, reliance later on a short sale to get out 
from underneath mortgage loans does not amount to a “good-faith” resolution of those loans.   
15 As used here, “strategically default” means a decision by the borrower who has the financial 
means to make the monthly mortgage payments, but chooses not to do so and, instead, intentionally 
defaults (i.e., stops making payments) on the mortgage loans.   
 
 
8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a mature, hard-working individual. A co-worker described him as 
trustworthy. Nevertheless, he willfully defaulted on his legal obligation to pay two 
mortgage loans. His decision to default on those loans reflected poorly on his judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It calls into question his willingness to follow the rules for 
properly handling and safeguarding classified information if doing so might conflict with 
his personal interests. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                      
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
