 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-05850 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding sexual behavior and 
personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 29, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on March 12, 2012.2 DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
him on May 16, 2012, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative 
                                                          
1
 Item 5 (SF 86, dated December 29, 2009). 
 
2
 Item 6 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated March 12, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why 
DOHA was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on May 25, 2012. In a sworn statement, dated June 
8, 2012,3 Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the Government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on November 1, 2012, and 
he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the FORM on November 9, 2012. He timely submitted a response to which 
there was no objection. The case was assigned to me on December 18, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted a portion of one of the factual 
allegations pertaining to sexual behavior (¶ 1.a.) as well as two other factual allegations 
pertaining to personal conduct (¶¶ 2.b. and 2.c.). Applicant’s admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied the remaining allegations or portions 
thereof. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon 
due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since October 
2008, has been serving as a strategy consultant.4 He had previously been a program 
and project manager with another employer from June 1999 until October 2008. He has 
never served in the U.S. military.5 He was apparently granted a secret security 
clearance in June 1986,6 but a subsequent application for a top secret security 
clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) with another 
agency or department was denied in April 2008.7  
 
                                                          
3
 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated June 8, 2012). 
 
4
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 13-14. 
 
5
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 18. 
 
6
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 38. 
 
7
 Item 7 (Letter from Senior Adjudication Officer, dated June 20, 2008). A clearance decision statement 
(CDS) was previously issued against Applicant alleging criminal conduct pertaining to his previous downloading and 
viewing of nude images of underage females. No mitigation was found, and he was deemed ineligible for access to 
SCI. He never filed an appeal of that decision. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Applicant attended a university from September 1977 until June 1981, and 
received a bachelor’s degree in in June 1981. He attended another university from 
January 1982 until May 1984, and received a master’s degree in May 1984.8 Applicant 
was married in 1988 and divorced in 2000.9 He has two sons (born in 1990 and 1993). 
 
Sexual Behavior 
 (SOR ¶ 2.b.): In approximately October or November 1991, while testing a new 
Internet connection on a company computer, Applicant deliberately misused the 
information technology system (IT system) by downloading a series of pornographic 
images onto the company computer in the office.10 (SOR ¶ 2.c.): Four years later, in 
approximately September 1995, he again misused the IT system on two separate 
occasions within days of each other by downloading erotic stories onto a company 
computer.11 There were no adverse consequences of his actions, and as far as he is 
aware, no one else was aware of what had occurred. There is no evidence that 
Applicant misused employer IT systems since the last incident 17 years ago. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): There is some controversy regarding Applicant’s next involvement 
with pornography. At one point he stated that two years after that latest misuse of the 
company IT system, during an evening at home in the summer of 1997, Applicant 
decided to see for himself how bad and easily accessible child pornography actually 
was.12 He subsequently corrected himself, blaming a faulty recollection, and stated the 
next involvement with pornography was actually “probably in 2001.”13 Regardless of the 
actual date, he used a news reader to navigate to a specific Internet location and 
downloaded about six pictures at random.14 He described his experience as follows:  
Except for one, the pictures I saw were of pre-pubescent girls, dressed but 
in poses similar to fashion magazine poses. One picture was of a group of 
undressed and partially dressed children in a room. These children were 
not posed and looked like refugees. None of the pictures showed genitalia 
and none of the pictures I saw included any sex acts of any kind. It is not 
clear to me that any individual picture would actually count as 
pornographic outside the context in which I found them. I looked no 
further. That was the only time I deliberately looked for child pornography. 
                                                          
8
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 12-13. 
 
9
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 21. 
 
10
 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated June 8, 2012), at 1; Item 6, supra note 2, at 4.  
11
 Item 4, supra note 10, at 1; Item 6, supra note 2, at 4. 
12
 Item 6, supra note 2, at 3; Item 9 (Applicant’s Affidavit, dated December 17, 2010), at 1. 
13
 Applicant’s Response to the FORM, dated December 7, 2012, at 2. 
14
 Item 6, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
4 
                                      
 
I do not have a sexual preference for underaged individuals, and have not 
seen any pornographic pictures of particularly young individuals since that 
one occasion.15 
Applicant also noted:  
The only other content I’ve seen that might be considered child 
pornography has been while viewing Internet pornography at home, 
principally by downloading pictures from [erotic] newsgroups. I have 
occasionally stumbled upon images of women (all clearly post pubescent) 
who could possibly have been as young as 16, but could also have been 
in their 20s and made up to look younger. In all cases the files were either 
mislabeled or ambiguously labeled and I couldn’t have known what the 
image was until it was decoded. The frequency was perhaps once or twice 
a month at first, then with decreasing frequency as I mastered the filtering 
functions on my newsreader. Since 2008, I have virtually eliminated all 
borderline pictures due to my use of improved filtering on my newsreader 
and my less frequent viewing of Internet pornography.16 
During his routine security processing performed by another government agency 
in 2008, Applicant purportedly stated that since 2001:  
he actively searched for, and downloaded, child pornography onto his 
personal computer approximately once every three months. . . .[H]e 
actively searches for pornographic images of prepubescent females on 
newsgroups forums. In these sites [Applicant] stated that there are titles 
such as “younger women.” [Applicant] stated he views images of girls as 
young as twelve or sixteen engaged in sexually provocative poses or 
engaged in sexual intercourse. . . . [F]rom 2004 – 2006 he viewed 
Japanese anime and Hen Tai pre-pubescent images. . . . [M]any of these 
images are elementary school ages and are sexual in nature. . . . [H]e also 
saw comic book style Japanese anime that contained approximately 200 
pages. . . . [H]e has received SPAM mail of pictures of underdeveloped 
girls engaged in sex.17 
                                                          
15
 Item 6, supra note 2, at 3; Item 4, supra note 10, at 1. 
16
 Item 6, supra note 2, at 3. 
17
 Item 8 (Written Crimes Report Referral, undated, attached to Letter from Office of General Counsel (of 
another government agency), dated May 3, 2012. The narrative presented in Item 8 is an undated and unsigned 
version of statements purportedly made by Applicant during his security processing. The cover letter, seemingly 
addressing Fed. R. Evid. 803 (6), Records of Regularly Conducted Activity, stated that it is a true copy “from the 
original record” maintained by the Office of Security in the regular course of business, made by personnel with 
knowledge of the act or event recorded to make a record to be maintained. A signed, written, and authenticated 
statement by Applicant or the interviewer/drafter of the entire statement or record was not included in the Item 
submitted. Furthermore, while the summary may be a true copy of a portion of the original record, there is no 
evidence reflecting the accuracy of the original record, or how the “personnel with knowledge of the act or event 
 
5 
                                      
 
It should be noted that “Japanese anime” is a shortened version of what is 
normally characterized as Japanese cartoon animation figures. They are not 
photographs of actual human figures. “Hentai,” or “Hen Tai,” is a pornographic version 
of Japanese anime. E-mail “SPAM” is actually junk e-mail or unsolicited bulk e-mail.  
That same other government agency denied Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance, with access to SCI, based on Applicant’s alleged criminal conduct, as 
described below:  
During your security processing, you reported that you have been viewing 
images of underage individuals since approximately 2001. The last time 
was in March 2007. You reported you intentionally sought out sexually 
developing underage females but could not always determine their age. 
You did this via numerous newsgroups and websites on the internet 
containing these images among the adult pornography. You also revealed 
that you have masturbated while viewing these images. You mentioned 
you first viewed nude photos of children at a New York bookstore in 
1986/1987.18 
Applicant was not given access to the other government agency’s report. As to 
the accuracy of what he purportedly said during that 2008 investigation, Applicant 
denied several of those statements. As to the Written Crimes Report Referral (Item 8), 
Applicant contends there was miscommunication with the investigators that apparently 
resulted in the erroneous rendition of his comments:  
The first sentence conflates two separate responses. First is the one event 
on which I deliberately sought out examples of child pornography and 
second is the frequency in which I inadvertently encountered it as a result 
of mislabeled files.  
I believe a significant source of the miscommunication with the . . . 
investigators was what I perceived as their lack of familiarity with 
difference between the Internet and the World Wide Web. I repeatedly 
tried to explain that I was principally getting my pornography from usenet 
newsgroups and not web sites. Thus, it would be more accurate to say 
that I used “usenet newsgroups.” 
Unlike a web interface which delivers complete pictures to the browser, to 
view a picture from a newsgroup involves downloading the file segments, 
then decompressing and reassembling the segments. The user cannot 
know what the file contains until the processing is complete. Newsgroup 
spammers post files to multiple newsgroups at once with ambiguous or 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
recorded” obtained such knowledge. Accordingly, in the absence of the “best evidence,” which was purportedly made 
following the interview, it is difficult to test the reliability or trustworthiness of the documents submitted. 
18
 Item 7, supra note 7, at 1. 
 
6 
                                      
 
non-informative names. Consequently, I would download a mislabeled file 
from a group such as . . . that turned out to be younger women engaged in 
some sexual act along with a reference to the spammers web site. In 
those pictures, the women would sometimes be slender and made up to 
look like a teenager (e.g., wearing a cheerleader uniform). It was in 
reference to these images that the investigators asked me to speculate 
about the age of the models. My recollection is that I stated they were 
clearly post-pubescent and agreed, after some prompting, that they could 
have been as young as twelve (on the basis that about when puberty 
starts) but looked closer to eighteen. In any case, these images were not 
what I was expecting, but I did not know that until after I had downloaded, 
decoded, and processed them. 
I do not recall receiving SPAM mail with pornographic pictures. I think this 
is a reference to the spam newsgroup postings mentioned above. The 
mention of “underdeveloped girls” refers to the use of slender models with 
small breasts and shaved pubic regions.19  
As to the Letter from the Senior Adjudication Officer (Item 7), Applicant contends 
that his mention of March 2007 referred to inadvertent material included among the 
adult pornography he received, not something he deliberately sought.20 He also denied 
ever being sexually stimulated by, or masturbating to, images of children. He did 
mention during his interview that he had touched himself briefly to see if his body had 
any reaction to the images, but he had no sexual response at all.21 Applicant contends 
he does not have “a prurient interest in child pornography,” as follows:  
while I occasionally enjoy adult heterosexual pornography, once and only 
once in my life I searched out child pornography on the web out of 
curiosity. I did not like it and it does not arouse me. Any other instances in 
which I may have seen underaged women on the web, was purely 
inadvertent and unintentional.22  
Aside from the appearance of the women in the images, Applicant did not know if 
they were underage. Furthermore, in the absence of copies of the images in issue, 
there is no evidence other than mere speculation that the images downloaded or viewed 
by Applicant were, in fact, of underage children. Applicant has never been charged by 
the police with possession of child pornography.  
  
                                                          
19
 Applicant’s Response to the FORM, supra note 13, at 2-3. 
20
 Applicant’s Response to the FORM, supra note 13, at 2. 
21
 Applicant’s Response to the FORM, supra note 13, at 2. 
22
 Applicant’s Response to the FORM, supra note 13, at 4. 
 
7 
                                      
 
Personal Conduct 
            In addition to the personal conduct issues related to Applicant’s misuse of IT 
systems in 1991 and 1995, the SOR alleged that Applicant falsified material facts during 
an interview conducted by an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) and memorialized in an Affidavit signed by Applicant on December 17, 2010. 
(SOR ¶ 2.d.) During the interview, and in the Affidavit, Applicant stated that he had 
deliberately sought out child pornography on only one occasion, and that occasion 
occurred in the summer of 1997. It is also alleged that he falsified material facts in his 
Response to DOHA Interrogatories, dated March 12, 2012, when he made the same 
statement regarding child pornography. (SOR ¶ 2.e.) The basis, and sole source, of the 
evidence supporting the falsification allegations are the two documents submitted by the 
other government agency.  
It was reported that Applicant had stated during interviews conducted by that 
other government agency in about 2007, that from 2001 until at least March 2007, 
Applicant had actively searched for sexually developing underage females and 
downloaded child pornography onto his personal computer. He purportedly did so 
approximately once every three months. The summary also indicated that Applicant had 
admitted that he actively searched for pornographic images of prepubescent females 
and viewed images of girls as young as twelve or sixteen engaged in sexually 
provocative poses or engaged in sexual intercourse. 
            Based on the contents of the summary, Department Counsel contends that 
since his 2007 interview, Applicant “repeatedly lied about the full extent of his 
experience with child pornography, claiming that he deliberately searched for child 
pornography on only one occasion during the summer of 1997.” 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”23 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”24   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
                                                          
23
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
24
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
8 
                                      
 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”25 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.26  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”27 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”28 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
                                                          
25
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
26
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
27
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
28
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
  
The security concern for Sexual Behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12:  
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 13(a), sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether the individual has been 
prosecuted is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 13(c), sexual behavior that 
causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress may raise 
security concerns. In addition, sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects 
lack of discretion or judgment is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 13(d). Applicant’s 
history of downloading and viewing nude and pornographic images of what he believed 
to be prepubescent girls in provocative poses in 1997 or 2001 (as stated by Applicant), 
or between 2001 and 2007 (as stated by the other government agency), is documented 
in his statements, affidavit, answer to the SOR, his answers to interrogatories, and the 
evidence submitted by the other government agency. Applicant’s behavior, whether it 
occurred on one occasion or on several occasions, would appear to be of a criminal 
nature, it reflected a lack of discretion or judgment, and it made him vulnerable to 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. AG ¶¶ 13(a), 13(c), and 13(d), apply.  
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from sexual behavior. Under AG ¶ 14(b), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or 
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. If the behavior 
no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress, it is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 14(c). Similarly, if the sexual behavior is strictly private, 
consensual, and discreet, AG ¶ 14(d) may apply.  
 
AG ¶ 14(b) partially applies. The sole source of the evidence related to 
Applicant’s sexual behavior is himself, as there were no second parties, identified 
victims, or arrests. Unfortunately, Applicant’s statements pinpointing the period of his 
downloading or viewing of images of underage females are inconsistent. Those actions, 
 
10 
                                      
 
according to him, either occurred in 1997 or in 2001. The memoranda submitted by the 
other government agency offer different facts and dates commencing in 2001 and 
continuing until 2007. The deliberate downloading and viewing of the images either 
occurred 15 years ago or 11 years ago if Applicant is correct. That behavior last 
occurred 5 years ago if the other government agency is correct. Applicant has offered 
several sworn statements describing in detail his sexual behavior over the years. He is 
steadfast in his denial that the deliberate downloading of the images of prepubescent 
females occurred on more than one occasion. He has acknowledged that, on occasion, 
when he was merely viewing adult pornography in the privacy of his home, several 
images of underdeveloped women did appear.  
Applicant explained that the females shown were either mislabeled or 
ambiguously labeled, and they appeared to be underdeveloped girls. With prompting 
from interviewers, he conceded the women could “possibly” have been as young as 16, 
but he believed they were older women made up to look younger. There is no 
conclusive evidence that the images downloaded and viewed by Applicant were, in fact, 
of prepubescent girls, and mere speculation leading to a conclusion to the contrary is 
rejected. The information from the other government agency disputes Applicant’s 
explanations.  
As noted above, there is no signed, written, and authenticated statement by 
Applicant or the interviewer/drafter of the entire statement. While the summary 
submitted may be a true copy of a portion of the original record, there is no evidence 
reflecting the accuracy of the original record, or how the “personnel with knowledge of 
the act or event recorded” obtained such knowledge. In the absence of the “best 
evidence” which was purportedly made following the interview, it is difficult to test the 
reliability or trustworthiness of the documents submitted, and after considering all of the 
conflicting evidence, I conclude that the sworn statements are more reliable than 
unsigned, undated, summaries. 
The other government agency also referred to Applicant’s viewing adult 
pornography, Japanese cartoon animations, and Hentai in the privacy of his own home. 
That activity does not involve criminal behavior, and does not indicate a personality or 
emotional disorder, or reflect a lack of judgment or discretion. Nevertheless, Applicant 
did, at least on one occasion, deliberately download and view pornographic images of 
prepubescent females. That activity did involve criminal behavior. Since there is no 
evidence to indicate such behavior has continued since 1997 or 2001 (as contended by 
Applicant), or 2007 (as alleged in the SOR), considering either of the periods, it appears 
that it is unlikely to recur, and no longer casts doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
  
AG ¶ 14(c) applies. Two government agencies are aware of Applicant’s sexual 
behavior from his past solely because he informed them of it. That sexual behavior no 
longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress.  
 
AG ¶ 14(d) does not apply. While Applicant’s sole incident of downloading and 
viewing of the images of the prepubescent females took place in a private and discreet 
 
11 
                                      
 
location – his home – and was not openly broadcast to others, and no criminal action 
was ever proposed or taken against Applicant for his actions, prepubescent children – 
essentially exploited victims – cannot, under the law, consent to such behavior.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(b), security concerns may be raised by: deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative.  
  
Similarly, security concerns may be raised under AG ¶ 16(c) if there is: 
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information. 
Also, it is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(e) when there is: 
Personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . .  
On one occasion in 1991 and again on two occasions in 1995, Applicant 
downloaded pornographic images or erotic stories onto the company computer in his 
office. In doing so he misused the IT system. In 1997 or 2001, he deliberately 
downloaded and viewed nude and pornographic images of what he believed to be 
prepubescent girls in provocative poses. As recently as 2007, he downloaded and 
viewed adult pornography as well as Japanese cartoon images and animations and 
Hentai images and animations. While there is evidence of credible adverse information 
provided by Applicant regarding his downloading and viewing of pornographic images of 
prepubescent females, as well as evidence of his downloading and viewing adult 
pornography and cartoon pornography, there is insufficient evidence to conclude that 
 
12 
                                      
 
Applicant deliberately provided false or misleading information concerning the issue of 
child pornography. To the contrary, with the exception of the actual year in issue (1997 
or 2001), Applicant has been consistent in his rendition of the facts. Disagreeing with 
summarized unverified information in the record does not establish that he deliberately 
lied. A summary of an interview prepared by an unknown person does not have the 
same indicia of reliability as an affidavit.  Accordingly, AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) have been 
established, but AG ¶ 16(b) has not.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(c) may apply if the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Similarly, AG ¶ 17(d) may apply if: 
 
The individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
Also, if the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, AG ¶ 17(e) may apply. In addition, AG ¶ 17(f) 
may apply if the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
As to Applicant’s self-reported misuse of his employer’s IT system in 1991 and 
1995, as noted above, there were no adverse consequences of his actions, and there is 
no evidence that Applicant misused employer IT systems since the last incident 17 
years ago. Notwithstanding Department Counsel’s position that Applicant has had a 
problem following rules and regulations dating back to include those incidents, that 
issue is no longer of current security significance. 
As to the child pornography issue, the deliberate downloading and viewing of the 
images either occurred 15 years ago or 11 years ago if Applicant is correct, or 5 years 
ago if the other government agency is to be believed. Applicant is steadfast in his denial 
that the deliberate downloading of the images of prepubescent females occurred on 
more than one occasion. He has acknowledged that, on occasion, when he was merely 
viewing adult pornography in the privacy of his home, several images of 
underdeveloped women did appear. He no longer seeks out child pornography, and it 
has never caused him to experience a sexual response.  
 
As noted above, the Government concluded that since Applicant’s statements 
disagree with the information submitted by the other government agency, Applicant 
must now be lying. The summary of an interview prepared by unknown persons at some 
unspecified time after the interview, without any indication that the contents were 
verified as accurate by Applicant or the drafter of the summary, when the original 
 
13 
                                      
 
transcript of the interview – the best evidence of what was actually said – is still 
available, is essentially unsubstantiated, and does not have the same indicia of 
reliability as an affidavit. An unsubstantiated or unverified summary may contain 
inaccuracies such as those stated by Applicant. Slight variations of words or responses, 
as well as the selected portions of an entire document, may convey entirely different 
impressions and may lead to substantial misinterpretation. Applicant has consistently 
refuted the contents of the summary of an existing file submitted by the other 
government agency. Applicant has taken positive steps to both alleviate the 
circumstances or factors that caused his untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation, and 
such behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 17(e), and 17(f) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.29       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s sexual behavior and 
personal conduct. Applicant misused his employer’s IT system in 1991 and 1995. He 
subsequently downloaded to his own computer and viewed selected images of what he 
believed to be prepubescent girls in provocative poses. He contends he did so on only 
one occasion. There is some information that he may have done so more frequently, but 
that information is not entirely reliable. Applicant routinely viewed adult pornography. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s sexual behavior and personal conduct occurred some time ago, and there is 
no evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature. There is no evidence of a 
                                                          
29
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
personality disorder. The conduct was not openly or indiscreetly engaged in. No criminal 
action was ever proposed or taken against him for his actions. The sexual behavior is 
unlikely to recur. Under the evidence presented, I have no questions about Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) 
through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant  
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
