 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case: 11-08158 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
Department Counsel: Braden M. Murphy, Esq. 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns raised under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Her eligibility for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
On October 5, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 7, 2012, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the guidelines for Financial Considerations and 
Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On October 2, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR in writing (AR) and elected to 
have a hearing. On October 25, 2012, DOHA assigned the case to me. On November 6, 
2012, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the case for November 20, 2012. The 
case proceeded as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 6 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) 
1 through 3 and A through D into evidence without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript on November 29, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the factual allegation contained in paragraph 1.d, and denied 
those contained in paragraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f of the SOR on the basis that 
she paid or disputed the debts. She denied the allegation contained in paragraph 2.a. 
(AR.) Her admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact herein.  
 
 Applicant is 29 years old and unmarried. She has 5-year-old twins for whom she 
is the sole supporting parent. She graduated from high school in 2001. She attended 
college through 2006, when she left having finished most of her coursework. She 
completed her bachelor’s degree in science and management in 2010. She is enrolled 
in a master’s program in engineering management.  
 
 While attending college in the summer of 2006, Applicant worked for her current 
employer through an internship program. In January 2007 she obtained a full time 
position with that company. She is a quality program engineer. Her employer is aware of 
her security clearance issues. She stated that she receives good performance reviews 
and has received raises every year based on them. (Tr. 23.) 
 
 Applicant attributed her delinquent debts to being “young and irresponsible.” (Tr. 
28-29.) She was in college when several debts became delinquent and did not 
appreciate the consequences of mismanaging them or her finances. (Tr. 29.)  
 
 Applicant has not participated in a formal credit or financial counseling course, 
but has taken accounting and finance-related classes as part of her college 
management degree. (Tr. 24.) She also is in the process of purchasing a home and has 
been working with a loan manager to clear up any credit problems. (Tr. 24.)   
 
 Applicant submitted her budget. Her annual salary is between $57,000 and 
$58,000, which does not include money earned for overtime. (Tr. 26.) Her net monthly 
income is $3,075 and expenses are $1,685, leaving $1,390 remaining at the end of the 
month. (AE 2.) Since June 2011 she has lived with her mother and shared expenses. 
(Tr. 27-28.)  
 
 The SOR alleged six delinquent debts that totaled $19,664, of which $18,531 
related to an automobile repossession. The debts became delinquent between 2004 
and 2011. The status of each debt is listed on AE1, and is as follows: 
 
 
3 
 
 
 1.a. The Torres/ComEd debt for $130 was paid in July 2012. (AE C.) 
 
 1.b. The Midland/T-Mobile debt for $545 was paid in August 2012. (AE B.) 
 
 1.c. The $200 debt owed to a village for a traffic ticket was paid in October 
2012. (AE A.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant said she paid the $186 debt owed to LVNVFUNDG for an 
alarm system that was on her mother’s old home. She cannot find her 
canceled check. (Tr. 32.)  
  
 1.e. Applicant said she paid $72 debt owed to Hollywood Video. She 
cannot verify the payment because the store closed and there is no 
company to contact. (Tr. 34.) 
 
 1.f. Applicant is disputing the Citi/Financial Auto loan for $18,531. This 
debt arose while she was in college and after her mother stopped paying 
the monthly bill when her mother started going through a divorce. When 
Applicant discovered the problem, she did not have the funds to pay it and 
she voluntarily returned the automobile. Later she learned that the 
automobile was sold. Prior to March 2012, she made a $50 payment on the 
account one month and then sent another $50 payment, which the 
company returned to her. She has been trying to negotiate a settlement of 
the account since March 2012. She objects to the amount of the debt. She 
received three settlement offers from the creditor: $12,727, $4,818 and 
$2,545. She has money in a savings account to pay the debt, but wants 
documentation to verify the account and amount owed. (Tr. 38-44; AE D.) 
 
 In October 2009, Applicant completed an e-QIP. She was asked, “Section 26: 
Financial Record: b. Have you had any possessions or property voluntarily or 
involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed?; f. Have you defaulted on any type of loan?; g. 
Have you had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency?; h. Have you had an 
account or credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as 
agreed?; m. Have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?; and n. Are you 
currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” She answered “No” to those 
questions and failed to list the automobile repossession and her other delinquent debts.   
 
  Applicant acknowledged that she did not include the information, but denied that 
she intentionally falsified the e-QIP. At the time, she was financially immature. She had 
not paid attention to credit issues and was unaware of any delinquent debts. This was 
the first e-QIP she submitted, and she did not appreciate the importance of checking her 
credit history in order to accurately fill out the form. She had never reviewed a credit 
report until she met with an investigator shortly after filing the e-QIP. She did not 
understand that voluntarily returning the automobile was considered a voluntary 
repossession, and was required to be disclosed. She did not receive any guidance from 
her employer in regard to completing the form. (Tr. 30, 52-59; AR.) 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant submitted a letter of recommendation from her manager, who has 
known her for seven years. She has observed Applicant grow in maturity and character. 
She considered her to be “a most valued member” of the team. (AE 3 at 2.) Applicant’s 
friend and co-worker also provided a letter of recommendation. She, too, has known 
Applicant for seven years and has found her to demonstrate leadership abilities and a 
commitment to her position. (AE 3 at 1.) 
  
  Applicant testified candidly and credibly. She displayed a thorough understanding 
of her financial status and obligations. She acknowledged that she has student loans for 
her undergraduate degree that are deferred while she completes a master’s degree. 
Her employer is paying for that degree. Her credit status has improved. (Tr. 63-64.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
5 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
The security concerns pertaining to Financial Considerations are set out in AG ¶ 
18: 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying, two of which are raised by the evidence in this case: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Applicant began accumulating delinquent debts while she was in college, which 
she did not begin to resolve until 2012. From 2004 through 2011 she was unable or 
unwilling to repay the debts alleged in the SOR, creating a history of moderate financial 
irresponsibility. 
After the Government raised these potential disqualifying conditions, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns 
under this guideline. AG ¶ 20 includes four conditions that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising under this guideline: 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
Applicant admitted that her financial problems resulted from financial immaturity 
and a failure to manage her debts and money. AG ¶ 20 (b) does not apply. Although 
she has not participated in formal credit counseling, she has taken accounting and 
finance-related college courses. She is also working on her credit status with a 
mortgage lender in order to obtain a loan and purchase a home. Based on her good 
faith payment of five small debts, attempts to resolve the largest delinquent debt, and 
her budget, there are clear indications that her finances are under control, warranting 
the application of AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d). She provided proof that she has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the largest SOR-listed debt, while attempting to resolve it. 
AG ¶ 20(e) has application.   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to Personal Conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
The SOR alleged in ¶ 2.a that Applicant falsified her answers to questions listed 
in Section 26 on her October 2009 e-QIP because she failed to disclose information 
regarding an automobile repossession and delinquent debts. The Government 
contended that her omissions may raise security concerns and be disqualifying under 
AG ¶ 16:  
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Applicant denied that she intentionally omitted information about her financial 
situation. When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the government has 
the burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or 
prove an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge 
 
7 
 
 
must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining 
holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
Applicant testified that she did not complete the e-QIP accurately due to her 
financial immaturity and lack of experience with filling out the form. She did not receive 
any direction from her employer prior to submitting it and had never reviewed her credit 
report before being shown one by the investigator. After listening to her testimony and 
observing her demeanor, I find that her explanation for the omission of information is 
credible and that she did not intentionally falsify the e-QIP, but instead made a negligent 
mistake. Hence, the evidence does not establish deliberate falsification and this 
Guideline is found in her favor.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a candid, intelligent and 
responsible 29-year-old woman. She sufficiently impressed her employer, while still in 
college, that the company offered her a position in 2007 where she continues working 
today. She acknowledged that five years ago she had little appreciation for the 
importance of financial management, but has sufficiently matured in that aspect as a 
result of this proceeding and having young children. Her budget will easily 
accommodate the outstanding delinquent debt that she is in the process of negotiating.  
There is no other derogatory information in the file. The likelihood of a recurrence is 
minimal, given her financial acumen and recognition that similar problems could affect 
her employment opportunities. She has removed any potential for pressure, coercion, 
 
8 
 
 
exploitation, or duress, and is no longer at any risk for having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns arising from financial considerations and personal 
conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:        For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:                   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
  
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
