 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )  ISCR Case No. 11-00180 
                                                            )                          
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John V. Berry, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Remand Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of all evidence in the record of this case, and after 
carefully observing Applicant and assessing his demeanor and credibility, I conclude 
that Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                 Statement of the Case 
 
As the employee of a defense contractor, Applicant completed and signed an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on April 15, 2010. In 
September 2010, he was interviewed about a civil court action by an authorized 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM). On July 27, 2011, 
Applicant provided notarized responses to interrogatories posed by the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On September 29, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
 
2 
 
 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 18, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 
29, 2011. I convened a hearing on January 6, 2012, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses, introduced two exhibits, and offered 
facts in two compilations of state code citations for administrative notice. The 
Government’s exhibits were marked as Exhibit (Ex.) 1 and Ex. 2 and entered in the 
record without objection.1 Applicant did not object to notice of the facts in the documents 
offered for administrative notice, which were marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 and HE 
2 and included in the record without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, 
called two witnesses, and offered 15 exhibits, which were marked as Ex. A through Ex. 
O and admitted to the record without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr. 1) of 
the hearing on January 10, 2012.  
 
On March 8, 2012, I issued a decision denying Applicant a security clearance. 
My decision found that Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns 
alleged in the SOR, but he failed to mitigate security concerns under the personal 
conduct adjudicative guideline. On June 19, 2012, DOHA’s Appeal Board remanded my 
decision for further action, noting that the doctrine of collateral estoppel was not 
appropriately applied in my decision and, accordingly, Applicant should be permitted to 
submit additional information that might clarify and mitigate the conduct alleged in the 
SOR.   
 
 At the direction of the Appeal Board, I convened a hearing on September 26, 
2012, to consider new evidence from Applicant’s civil trial regarding his underlying 
conduct. The new evidence included civil trial pleadings, direct and cross-examination 
testimony of Applicant, testimony of a computer forensic expert, the parties’ closing 
arguments, and the jury verdict form. Additional evidence considered included 
Applicant’s employment agreement, his position of trust letter, and the opinion of the 
state Supreme Court, affirming in part, reversing in part, and remanding the verdict of 
the trial court in the civil proceeding against Applicant and other defendants. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced eight exhibits, which were 
marked as Government exhibits (Ex.) 1 through Ex. 8 and entered in the record without 
                                            
1 For consistency and clarity, the exhibits entered in the record at the January 6, 2012, hearing are 
identified as follows: for the Government: Ex. 1-1 and 1-2; and for Applicant: Ex. 1-A through 1-O. The 
transcript of the January 6, 2012 hearing is identified as Tr. 1.  
 
 
3 
 
 
objection.2 Applicant testified, called two additional witnesses, and introduced six 
exhibits, which were marked as Applicant’s exhibits (Ex.) A through Ex. F and entered in 
the record without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until 
close of business October 10, 2012, so that additional documentation could be provided 
for the record. The Government introduced two additional exhibits, Ex. 9 and Ex. 10, 
which were entered in the record without objection. Applicant introduced one additional 
exhibit, which was marked as Ex. G and entered in the record without objection. DOHA 
received the second transcript (Tr. 2) on October 16, 2012.  
 
                                                     Findings of Fact 
 
 The previous decision in this matter, including all testimony and exhibits, is 
incorporated in this remand decision by reference. Additionally, after careful review of 
the exhibits submitted and the testimony offered by the parties at the September 26, 
2012 hearing. I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old, married, and the father of two adult daughters. He is 
employed as a senior program manager by a government contractor. A high school 
graduate, he enlisted in the military in 1976. He rose to the highest levels of the enlisted 
ranks and was subsequently commissioned as an officer, a position in which he also 
excelled. He retired from the military in 2000, and he received an honorable discharge. 
He held security clearances during his military service and as a civilian contractor. (Ex. 
1-1; Ex. 1-2; Ex.1- A; Tr. 1: 63-67, 86, 112.) 
 
 In 2000, after his military retirement, Applicant went to work for a small 
technology company. As an employee of the technology company, Applicant, on July 
17, 2000, signed the following position of trust letter provided to him by his employer: 
 
In the course of carrying out your duties and responsibilities as an 
employee of [name of company] you may have access to sources of 
sensitive, company-private and/or personnel and financial information and 
data (hereafter referred to as data). [Name of company] trusts you to use 
this data appropriately. The data, wherever and however derived, is for 
official use only in the performance of your assigned duties. You have the 
direct responsibility of protecting this data from unauthorized disclosure. 
You are not to make this data available in any form to any unauthorized 
person, company or entity without prior written approval of [the company’s] 
President. Any violation of the Trust could subject you to immediate 
dismissal without recourse and without severance pay. 
 
                                            
2 Again, for consistency and clarity, exhibits entered in the record at the remand hearing are further 
identified as follows: for the Government: Ex. 2-1 through Ex. 2-10; and for Applicant: Ex. 2-A through 2-
G.  
 
 
4 
 
 
I understand the sensitivity of the Position of Trust to which I am assigned 
and the severity of the penalty for any violation of such trust. (Ex. 2-3.) 
 
 As the employee of the small technology company, Applicant also signed an 
employment agreement, which contained a nondisclosure admonition, specified at 
paragraph VI: 
 
In the course of his/her employment, Employee will have access to 
Company confidential records, data, formulae, specifications, customer 
lists, personnel records, financial information and personal information 
owned by [name of company] and used in the course of its business. 
During his/her employment by [name of company] and thereafter, 
Employee will not directly or indirectly disclose or use any such 
information except as required in the course of [name of company] 
employment. Unauthorized disclosure of any such information may result 
in termination for cause. All records, files, drawings, documents, 
equipment and the like, relating to [name of company’s] business which 
Employee shall prepare or use [or] will come into contact with, shall 
remain [name of company’s] sole property and shall be promptly returned 
to [name of company] in the event of dismissal or termination of 
employment by either [name of company] or the Employee. (Ex. 2-3.) 
 
 At his remand hearing, Applicant stated that he did not believe the nondisclosure 
agreement applied to him when he was an employee of Company A. He said he 
concluded this because he thought the presiding judge at his civil trial ruled that it was 
not transferable and it was too broad. However, the jury in his civil trial found that the 
nondisclosure agreement provisions did apply to Applicant during his tenure at 
Company A. This finding was not addressed by the final amended order of the trial 
court, and it was not overturned by the state supreme court. (Ex. 1-2; Ex. 2-8; Tr. 2: 
111-114.)  
 
 Paragraph VIII of the employment agreement that Applicant signed also stated: 
 
This Agreement shall not be terminated by the voluntary or involuntary 
dissolution of [name of company] or by any merger or consolidation where 
[name of company] is not the surviving or resulting corporation, or upon 
any transfer of all or substantially all of the assets of [name of company]. 
In the event of any such merger or consolidation or transfer of assets, the 
provisions of this Agreement shall be binding on and shall insure to the 
benefit of the surviving or resulting corporation or the corporation to which 
such assets shall be transferred. (Ex. 2-3.) 
 
 On April 2, 2001, Applicant also signed the company’s electronic media 
acknowledgement form, which provided as follows: 
 
 
5 
 
 
As an employee of [name of company], I have read the Company policy 
regarding use of Company provided electronic media and services. I 
recognize and understand that all electronic media and services such as 
computers, e-mail, telephones, voice mail, fax machines and the Internet, 
are the property of [name of company] and are to be used for conducting 
the Company’s business only. I understand that limited, occasional, or 
incidental use of electronic media (sending or receiving) for a personal 
purpose is permitted, but must not interfere with my productivity, the 
productivity or rights of other [company] employees, or the business of the 
company. Further, I understand that the Company has the ability to 
monitor and access my use of these systems and services and that the 
Company can override any password for the purpose of system security. I 
agree not to access a file or retrieve any stored communication other than 
where authorized unless there has been a prior clearance by the 
authorized Company representative. 
 
I am aware that the Company reserves and will exercise the right to 
review, audit, intercept, access and disclose all matters on the Company’s 
electronic media and services at any time, with or without employee 
notice, and that such access may occur during or after working hours. I 
am aware that the use of Company-provided passwords or codes does 
not restrict the Company’s right to access electronic media. I waive the 
right to assert claims of invasion of privacy or any other claims arising out 
of or pertaining to the use of electronic media against [name of company]. 
I am aware that violations of this policy may subject me to disciplinary 
action up to and including termination of employment. (Ex. 2-2.) 
 
 The small technology company was purchased between 2000 and 2001 by 
Company A, a defense contractor. Applicant continued to work as a manager and 
supervisor at Company A until 2009. As an employee of Company A, Applicant did not 
sign a new nondisclosure agreement. (Ex. 1-1; Tr.1: 70.) 
 
 In his work at Company A, Applicant directed the work of between 30 and 35 
employees who were program managers. There came a time when Applicant became 
aware of morale problems at Company A. Employees were not able to receive bonuses, 
and the company reduced its contributions to employee retirement accounts. A larger 
business was considering the purchase of Company A. A number of employees left 
Company A and sought employment elsewhere.3 (Tr. 1: 67, 105.) 
 
 Applicant learned that a former colleague and friend in Company A, who had left 
Company A in January 2008, was establishing a government services division at 
Company B, another government contractor.  Another individual, also a personal friend 
                                            
3 Applicant estimated that of the 250 employees in the work group at Company A, 50 to 75 left for other 
positions during this time. (Tr.1: 103.) 
 
 
6 
 
 
of Applicant’s and a former colleague at Company A, was in a leadership position at 
Company B.4 Additionally, Applicant was the direct supervisor of still another individual 
who left Company A and accepted employment at Company B. Applicant and several 
individuals in this group had met and served together in the military. As government 
contractors, they worked on projects they had become familiar with during their military 
service. (Ex. 1-1; Ex. 2-6; Tr. 1: 81-82, 116-118, 135, 145-149; Tr. 2: 152-155, 216-
222.) 
 
 In May 2009, Applicant sent his resume to his former colleague and old friend, 
the individual establishing the government services division at Company B. The 
individual responded by sending Applicant an offer of employment, which Applicant 
accepted. Applicant was also a friend of the individual who was hired to recruit and fill 
other positions at Company B. This individual expressed interest in hiring Applicant’s 
deputy. Applicant provided him with his deputy’s telephone number. Applicant also 
attended a lunch with his deputy and an official at Company B, but he stated that he 
was not present when discussion of his deputy’s possible employment with Company B 
occurred. However, the Company B official sent Applicant a proposed benefits package 
for his deputy and asked him to transmit it to him. Applicant and the Company B officials 
denied an intent to actively recruit, poach, or “raid” Company A employees. (Tr. 1: 134-
135; Tr. 2:103-112, 161-165, 178-185.)  
 
 Applicant resigned from Company A on June 5, 2009. At an exit interview, he 
returned to an official of the company the following equipment provided him by his 
employer: a blackberry, two cell phones, a pager, and one computer. He also handed 
over his iPhone provided by the employer to the individual he thought would succeed 
him as program director. He signed a statement, provided by his employer, 
acknowledging that he had returned all property belonging to the employer, and he had 
not retained  
 
any, property and information belonging to [Company A] and/or relating to 
[Company A’s] business, including but not limited to [Company A]-issued 
computers, hand-held and other electronic devices; project and customer 
information; financial and accounting information; information concerning 
[Company A] employees; and all other tangible and intangible property, 
documents, files and other information belonging to, or relating to the 
business of [Company A]. (Ex. 2-4.) 
 
 In an interview with an authorized investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management in September 2010, Applicant stated that when he left his job with 
Company A, he took with him a personal 20 gigabyte hard drive. At his January 6, 2012 
hearing, Applicant testified that he took with him his personal 20 gigabyte hard drive, 
which he had used while employed for nine years at Company A. Applicant stated that 
he used the personal hard drive because the equipment provided by his employer 
                                            
4
 This individual left Company A around 2004. He later served as an Assistant Secretary in the Executive 
Branch of the U.S. Government. (Ex. 1-B; Tr.1: 81-82, 101-102.)  
 
7 
 
 
lacked sufficient memory to store the information he wished to archive. He explained 
that he used the hard drive to store pictures, family data, recipes, and archived e-mails.  
He stated that there were also some power point presentations belonging to Company 
A on his hard drive. He put the hard drive in the trunk of his automobile when he left 
Company A. Later, on the advice of counsel, he turned the hard drive over to Company 
A for forensic examination. Applicant stated that the forensic examination revealed that 
there was no classified information on his personal hard drive. (Ex.1-2; Tr.1: 70.) 
 
 Applicant claimed that he left Company A on good terms. He was responsible for 
directing two large programs serving military clients. He asserted that he appropriately 
transferred his duties to other managers and sent a farewell e-mail to those employees 
who reported to him. (Tr.1: 70-71.) 
 
 In late June 2009, within two weeks of assuming his new position at Company B, 
Applicant and the three other former senior employees of Company A were named as 
defendants, along with Company B, in a civil complaint brought against them by 
Company A. Company B retained counsel, which represented the company, Applicant, 
and the other three defendants. (Ex. 1-2; Tr.1: 68, 87.) 
 
 The civil complaint alleged that Applicant had breached his fiduciary duty to 
Company A and breached his employment contract (non-disclosure agreement) with 
Company A. The civil complaint also alleged that Applicant violated a state computer 
crimes act and that he, along with the other named defendants, violated a state 
business conspiracy act. Additionally, the civil complaint alleged that Applicant and his 
co-defendants were liable on a claim for civil conspiracy and that Applicant was liable 
on claims of misappropriation of trade secrets and conversion. (Ex. 1-2.) 
 
 I take administrative notice of the applicable state uniform trade secrets act, 
which defines “misappropriation” as follows:  
  
1. Acquisition of a trade secret of another by a person who knows or has reason to 
know that the trade secret was acquired by improper means; or  
 
2. Disclosure or use of a trade secret of another without express or implied consent          
by a person who 
 
a. Used improper means to acquire knowledge of the trade secret; or 
 
b. At the time of disclosure or use, knew or had reason to know that his knowledge 
of the trade secret was  
 
(1) Derived from or through a person who had used improper means to acquire it; 
 
(2) Acquired under circumstances giving rise to a duty to maintain its secrecy or limit 
its use; 
 
 
8 
 
 
(3) Derived from or through a person who owed a duty to the person seeking relief to 
maintain its secrecy or limit its use; or 
 
(4) Acquired by accident or mistake. (HE 1) 
 
 The state statute defines “improper means” to include “theft, bribery, 
misrepresentation, use of a computer or computer network without authority, breach of 
a duty or inducement of a breach of a duty to maintain secrecy, or espionage through 
electronic or other means.”  (HE 1) 
   
 The state statute further states: “If willful and malicious misappropriation exists, 
the court may award punitive damages in an amount not exceeding twice any award 
made under subsection A of this section [specifying terms for money recovery of 
damages] or $350,000 whichever amount is less.” Additionally, the statute provides: “If 
the court determines that (i) a claim of misappropriation is made in bad faith, or (ii) willful 
and malicious misappropriation exists, the court may award reasonable attorneys’ fees 
to the prevailing party.” (HE 1) 
 
 I also take administrative notice of the applicable state business conspiracy act, 
which reads, in pertinent part: 
 
A. Any two or more persons who combine, associate, agree, mutually 
undertake or concert together for the purpose of (i) willfully and 
maliciously injuring another in his reputation, trade, business or 
profession by any means whatever or (ii) willfully and maliciously 
compelling another to do or perform any act against his will, or 
preventing or hindering another from doing or performing any lawful 
act, shall be jointly and severally guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
Such punishment shall be in addition to any civil relief recoverable 
under [Code citation omitted]. 
 
B. Any person who attempts to procure the participation, cooperation,  
agreement or other assistance of any one or more persons to enter 
into any combination, association, agreement, mutual understanding or 
concert prohibited in subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a 
violation of this section and subject to the same penalties set out in 
subsection A. (HE 2) 
 
 The statute defines “damages” to include loss of profits, and it authorizes 
recovery of treble damages and attorneys’ fees upon a finding of willful and malicious 
injury by conspiracy to reputation, trade, business, or profession. (HE 2)  
   
 Applicant and his co-defendants were represented by counsel hired by Company 
B. During preparation for trial, Applicant met individually with counsel for several hours. 
In these pre-trial consultations, Applicant insisted that he had done nothing wrong. (Tr.1: 
87-88.) 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant’s case was tried in civil court before a jury. The trial ran for 11 days. At 
trial, Applicant was called to testify, and he did so for approximately 45 minutes. He was 
then cross-examined for approximately 20 minutes. His position remained that he had 
done nothing wrong.5 (Tr.1: 87-90.)   
 
 At the trial, Applicant admitted that in the first half of 2009, he and his friend at 
Company B discussed gathering together a group of like-minded individuals to do 
government contracting work that would include projects similar to those carried out by 
Company A. The friend at Company B asked Applicant to identify individuals who would 
make good members of the new government contracts consulting group. Applicant told 
his deputy he was accepting a position with Company B. Applicant also told his friend at 
Company B that his deputy would be a good choice for the group being assembled. (Ex. 
2-6.) 
 
 One Company A employee who learned of Applicant’s intended move to 
Company B complimented him by saying that the work he did for Company A would 
follow him to Company B. After hearing this, Applicant sent an e-mail to his friend at 
Company B informing him of the compliment. (Ex. 2-6.) 
 
 Company A was planning to re-compete for a contract it held with the military.  
However, Applicant informed his friend at Company B that Company A had not 
developed a strategy to guide its proposal for the re-compete. Applicant assisted his 
friend at Company B in identifying Company A employees who might be recruited by 
Company B in submitting a competitive offer on the contract. On May 29, 2009, the 
Company B official sent an e-mail proposing June 4, 2009, as a date for several 
Company A employees to meet with him to discuss the re-compete contract. E-mails 
identified at trial by Applicant as either written by him or received by him demonstrated 
his active involvement in this activity. (Ex. 2-6.) 
  
 Also at the trial, a computer forensic expert called by plaintiff Company A testified 
that her analysis of Applicant’s Company A computer revealed that on June 2, 2009, 
approximately three days before Applicant resigned from Company A to go to work at 
Company B, a 100-gigabyte hard drive had been attached to his computer and five 
folders created. One of the folders was labeled “Company B.” A June 3, 2009, remote 
image analysis of the files on the 100-gigabyte hard drive and the files on Applicant’s 
Company A computer revealed that several hundred files were copied from the 
company computer to the 100-gigabyte hard drive. The computer analysis also showed 
that once copied to the 100-gigabyte hard drive, the files were deleted from Applicant’s 
computer and then also deleted from the computer’s recycle bin.6 Applicant 
acknowledged that he copied the files from his Company A computer to the 100-
                                            
5 In colloquy with Department Counsel at his January 6, 2012 hearing, Applicant denied any wrongdoing 
as an employee of Company A and Company B. When asked by his counsel to explain the conduct 
involved in the claim of conversion, Applicant replied: “I don’t even know what conversion is.” (Tr. 1: 72, 
85-86.)  
 
6 Applicant deleted a total of 1,400 files from his Company A recycle bin. (Ex. 2-B.)  
 
10 
 
 
gigabyte hard drive. A later analysis of Applicant’s assigned computer at Company B 
did not reveal any of the files that Applicant had copied from his Company A computer 
to the 100-gigabyte hard drive. At the trial, it was alleged and established that the 
materials copied to the 100-gigabyte drive included Company A’s proprietary 
information and trade secrets. It was also alleged and established that Applicant and the 
current and former employees of Company A and its predecessor company who went to 
Company B formed a core group of senior government contractors who planned to use 
information taken from Company A in order to compete for a lucrative government 
contract previously held by Company A. (Ex 2-5; Ex. 2-6; Ex. 2-B; Ex. 2-E; Tr. 2: 72-
73,110-117.) 
 
 At his remand hearing, Applicant stated that on June 2, 2009, he had copied 
Company A material onto the 100-gigabyte hard drive to leave for the individual he 
believed would succeed him at Company A. Applicant testified that he placed the 100-
gigabyte drive on his desk when he left Company A. The list of items Applicant returned 
to Company A when he left contains no mention of a 100-gigabyte drive. The individual 
Applicant identified as his successor at Company A was Applicant’s deputy for several 
years. (Ex. 2-4; Tr. 2: 72-73.) 
 
 When Applicant left Company A, his deputy was on vacation. Applicant’s former 
deputy at Company A appeared as a witness at the remand hearing and testified that at 
the end of May 2009, he submitted a letter of resignation to Company A in order to take 
a position, along with Applicant, at Company B. He further stated that he already had all 
the information he needed in order to assume duties as Applicant’s successor, and he 
had no need for any Company A information that might have been placed on the 100-
gigabyte drive. Applicant’s former deputy also stated that he never received the 100-
gigabyte hard drive. Applicant was unable to account for the whereabouts of the 100-
gigabyte hard drive. (Tr. 2:126, 231-235.)  
 
 At his remand hearing, Applicant was reminded on cross-examination that at his 
January 6, 2012, DOHA hearing he had stated several times that he had done nothing 
wrong. Counsel then asked Applicant what his position was at the time of his remand 
hearing. Applicant replied: 
 
While, I would say my position today is I feel I did nothing wrong. I took a 
20-gig hard drive. I didn’t do any conversion. I didn’t do anything. I didn’t 
move anything to [Company B]. The drive I took with me is my own 
personal drive. I didn’t think about what was on that drive. Not at all. 
Everything that I did at [Company A] was to further the job that [Company 
A], moving, you know, moving the 100 documents to the 100 hard drive 
was to, to help the program office. So, yes, I mean I’ve been found liable 
by the jury and have not been exonerated, in your words, but, you know, I 
still feel that I didn’t move documents to [Company B]. I didn’t conspire 
with anybody. I didn’t poach people. I didn’t do those things. (Tr. 2: 137.)  
 
 
11 
 
 
 The civil jury found that Applicant was liable in money damages on the following 
claims: for breach of fiduciary duty, in the amount of $217,800, with an award of punitive 
damages of $217,800; for breach of contract (non-disclosure agreement), in the amount 
of $217,800; for violation of a state computer crimes act, in the amount of $217,800, 
with punitive damages of $217,800; for violation, along with the other named 
defendants, of a state business conspiracy act, in the amount of $12,341,535; for civil 
conspiracy, along with the other named defendants, in the amount of $4,113,845, with 
punitive damages of $12,341,535; for misappropriation of trade secrets, in the amount 
of $1,028,461, with punitive damages of $1,028,461; for conversion, in the amount of 
$12,920, with punitive damages of $25,840. (Ex. 2-7; Ex.1- 2.) 
 
 After the completion of the trial, both parties filed motions, and the circuit court 
judge reviewed the motions and the jury verdict. In October 2010, the judge entered 
final judgments against Applicant on the jury’s findings. The final judgments ordered by 
the judge were as follows: 
 
Applicant, along with the other named defendants, jointly and severally, 
was ordered to pay damages of $12,341,535 for violations of the state 
business conspiracy act;   
 
Applicant was ordered to pay $350,000 in punitive damages awarded 
against him individually; and 
 
Applicant, along with the other names defendants, jointly and severally, 
was ordered to pay plaintiff’s attorney fees totaling $1,408,877. (Ex. 2.)  
    
 After receiving the final judgments, Applicant and his co-defendants met with 
their counsel, continued to assert that they had done nothing wrong, and requested that  
their attorneys file an appeal. The attorneys filed an appeal of the decision to the state 
supreme court, which agreed to hear their appeal in April 2011. The attorneys 
representing Applicant and his co-defendants filed their opening brief in May 2011, and 
the opposing party filed its reply brief in July 2011. (Ex. 1-2, enclosure 2, enclosure 3. 
enclosure 4; Ex. 1-F; Ex. 1-G; Administrative Notice Document 4; Tr. 1:15, 73, 91-92.) 
 
 The appeal identifies five assignments of error. Two assignments of error cited 
abuse of discretion by the trial judge on the issue of opinion testimony by plaintiff’s 
expert witness and failure to permit rebuttal testimony by the defendants’ expert 
witness. One assignment of error challenged the trial court’s failure to set aside 
damages based upon a specific model of goodwill damages; another assignment of 
error alleged trial court error in failing to set aside the jury verdict awarding duplicative 
trebled and punitive damages. The fifth assignment of error alleged that the trial court 
erred in failing to set aside damages that were costs of litigation. The defendants’ 
liability under the state uniform trade secrets act and the state business conspiracy act 
was not challenged on appeal. (Government Administrative Notice Document 4.)    
 
 
12 
 
 
 The state supreme court ruled in these matters on June 7, 2012. It held that 
Company A’s evidence was insufficient, as a matter of law, to support an award of lost 
goodwill damages resulting from the conspiracy, and the trial court erred when it 
refused to set aside an award of damages relating to Company A’s lost goodwill. The 
supreme court upheld the trial court’s awards of trebled and punitive damages in favor 
of Company A. The supreme court also affirmed the trial court’s awards to Company A 
for computer forensics damages and affirmed an award of $350,000 in punitive 
damages against each of the defendants on Company A’s trade secrets claim. Because 
the computation of damages had been modified, the supreme court remanded the 
award of attorneys’ fees relating to Company A’s statutory business conspiracy claim. 
No modifications or changes were made to the trial court’s findings of Applicant’s 
liability. (Ex.2-8.) 
  
 Three of Applicant’s co-defendants testified as witnesses at his DOHA hearings. 
One of the witnesses was the chief executive officer and president of the company 
where Applicant is now employed. The other witness is a vice president of the company 
and Applicant’s supervisor. When discussing the civil judgment against them, one of the 
witnesses stated that he believed he had done nothing wrong. The other witness stated 
he did not know why Company A brought the lawsuit against him and the other co-
defendants. The witness who was president of the company stated that Applicant was 
the assistant facility security officer at the company. The witnesses spoke highly of 
Applicant and stated that he was reliable and followed rules and regulations. (Tr. 1:116-
150; Tr. 2: 211-212.) 
 
 Applicant also offered four letters of character reference. The authors of the 
letters were former colleagues and friends who had known Applicant for many years. 
These individuals praised Applicant’s outstanding military record, strong work ethic, high 
moral character, reliability, and trustworthiness. (Ex. B; Ex. C; Ex. D; Ex. E.) 
 
 At his remand hearing, Applicant testified that he has thought about the issues 
related to his case every day for over three years. He stated that he was well-respected 
at Company A and always tried to be honest and above board. (Tr. 2: 94-96.) 
   
                                                           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
 
13 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
   
 
 
14 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c. states that Applicant has filed an appeal of the civil judgments   
alleged in the SOR. Applicant admitted this allegation. However, the allegation, as 
framed, does not specify conduct that raises a security concern under Guideline E. 
Accordingly, I conclude SOR ¶ 1.c. for Applicant. 
 
 However, the remaining Guideline E allegations in the SOR do raise security 
concerns. As the former employee of two defense contractors (Company A and 
Company B) and the current employee of a third defense contractor, Applicant seeks a 
security clearance. In June 2010, after an 11-day civil trial, at which he was represented 
by counsel, testified, and was cross-examined, a jury found against Applicant on the 
following claims: breach of fiduciary duty; breach of contract; violation of a state 
computer crimes act; violation, in concert with other defendants, of a state business 
conspiracy act; civil conspiracy, in concert with other defendants; misappropriation of 
trade secrets; and conversion. The action was brought against Applicant by his former 
employer, Company A.  
  
 Applicant’s personal conduct raises security concerns under Guideline E 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d). AG ¶ 16(c) reads: “credible adverse 
information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse 
determination under any other single guideline, but, which, when considered as a 
whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information. AG ¶ 16(d) reads: “credible adverse information that is 
not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations.” 
 
 
15 
 
 
  Two Guideline E mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of this case. 
Applicant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(c) if “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(d) 
might apply if “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.”  
 
  As a federal contractor and high-level manager and supervisor, Applicant was 
entrusted not only with classified and sensitive information, but also with Company A’s 
trade secrets and proprietary information. Soon after he left Company A and went to 
work for Company B, Company A brought a civil action against Applicant and others 
alleging civil conspiracy, conversion, breaches of contract and fiduciary duty, as well as 
violations of his state’s computer crimes act, business conspiracy act, and trade secrets 
act. A jury found Applicant liable for willful and malicious misappropriation of Company 
A’s trade secrets. The presiding judge assessed him $350,000 in punitive damages. 
Along with three co-defendants and Company B, Applicant was assessed joint and 
several damages for violating his state’s business conspiracy act. Additionally, he and 
his co-defendants and Company B were also ordered to pay plaintiff’s attorney fees. 
Applicant insisted he “had done nothing wrong” at his January 2012 DOHA hearing and 
at his September 2012 remand hearing. However, in their appeal to the state supreme 
court, Applicant and his co-defendants did not contest their liability as found by the jury 
and confirmed by the judge in their civil trial.       
 
  Applicant’s personal conduct, which involved failure to follow rules and 
regulations for safeguarding his employer’s trusted information, was not minor, so 
remote in time, so infrequent, or occurred under such unique circumstances that it was 
unlikely to recur and therefore did not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. (AG 17(c).)  
 
  Applicant insisted he had done nothing wrong. The trial record contained e-mails 
that Applicant admitted he sent and received as he participated in efforts to recruit a 
group of Company A employees who would go to work for Company B. As Company B 
employees, they planned to compete for a contract they had worked on as employees 
of Company A. At his civil trial, Applicant admitted he attached a 100-gigabyte hard 
drive to his Company A computer and copied hundreds of company files to that external 
drive. He then deleted hundreds of files from his computer and from his computer’s 
recycle bin. He claimed he left the 100-gigabyte hard drive at Company A when he left 
so that his successor, his deputy, could use the company information to carry out his 
duties. Nothing in the record substantiated his claim. When he copied the company files 
on June 2, 2009, Applicant had reason to know that his deputy had given notice to 
Company A at the end of May and had, like Applicant, accepted employment with 
Company B. Moreover, the deputy testified that he had all the information he would 
have needed to carry out his increased responsibilities on his own Company A 
 
16 
 
 
computer, and he had no need of the information Applicant had copied to the 100-
gigabyte hard drive. He also stated he never received the 100-gigabyte hard drive. 
 
  Applicant was unable to account for the whereabouts of the 100-gigabyte hard 
drive. He did not identify it or turn it over to Company A at his exit interview. None of the 
files he copied appeared on his Company B computer. 
 
   Applicant failed to demonstrate that he understood the gravity of the conduct for 
which the jury found him responsible. He repeatedly insisted he had done nothing 
wrong, and he failed to demonstrate that he understood what had caused his unreliable 
conduct. He was unable to ensure that such behavior was unlikely to recur. (AG ¶ 
17(d).) I conclude, therefore, that neither of the applicable personal conduct mitigating 
conditions applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a distinguished 
military record, and he is considered to be a valued employee by his current and former 
colleagues. However, Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising from his 
personal conduct as a defense contractor. His former employer, Company A, made 
several serious allegations against Applicant. Those charges were adjudicated in an 11-
day civil jury trial. Applicant was represented by counsel; he testified and was cross-
examined. After the jury returned a verdict against Applicant and his co-defendants, the 
presiding judge reviewed the record, affirmed the jury’s findings of liability, and entered 
final judgments specifying money damages. While Applicant denied any wrongdoing, he 
failed to rebut or mitigate the allegations, which raised security concerns about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to follow rules.  
 
17 
 
 
Applicant joined with others to misappropriate his employer’s proprietary and 
trade secret information. He participated in activities to encourage other employees of 
Company A to accept employment with Company B.  
 
Applicant’s reason for copying hundreds of files containing proprietary and trade 
secret information from his Company A computer to a 100-gigabyte hard drive was not 
credible. He said he copied the files on June 2, 2009, to the 100-gigabyte hard drive to 
give to his deputy so that he could carry out Applicant’s duties at Company A after 
Applicant left to work at Company B. However, Applicant had good reason to know that 
his deputy had resigned from Company A at the end of May 2009 to join him as an 
employee of Company B.  Further, his inability to account for the 100-gigabyte external 
drive raises serious concerns about his truthfulness, reliability and judgment.  
 
After a thorough review of the evidence in the record of this case, and after 
carefully observing Applicant and assessing his demeanor and credibility, I conclude 
that Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the personal conduct 
adjudicative guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:           AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a(1) - 1.a(7):    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b(1) - 1.b(3):    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:            For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   For Applicant7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
7
 Although the Guideline F allegation was concluded for Applicant in the March 8, 2012, decision and was 
not appealed, I include it in the Formal Findings in this case to complete the record.  
 
18 
 
 
                                        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
