 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07014 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Curran K. Porto, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 3, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On July 27, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on October 12, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
November 7, 2012, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on November 16, 
2012. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
 
2 
 
through 5. Applicant testified and offered documents marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 
A. The record was left open until November 30, 2012, for Applicant to submit additional 
matters. She timely submitted documents that have been marked as AE B through J. All 
exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s email 
forwarding Applicant’s post-hearing submission was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 29, 2012.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
At the hearing, Applicant affirmatively waived the 15-day notice requirement in 
Paragraph E3.1.8 of the Directive.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since 1990. She graduated from high school in 1977. She married 
in 1978 and divorced in 2005. She has no children. For the past 22 years, she has held 
a security clearance without incident.2  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had 12 delinquent debts totaling about $51,263. 
Those debts were listed on credit reports obtained on August 4, 2010, and March 21, 
2012. In her Answer, Applicant admitted five of the allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, 
1.g, and 1.h) and denied the other allegations. Her admissions are incorporated herein 
as findings of fact.3 
 
 For many years, Applicant worked two jobs. She attributed her financial problems 
to the loss of her part-time job. She had worked at that second job from December 1994 
to December 2007. She lost that job after the company went through a downsizing 
following several mergers. She relied on the income from the second job to pay bills and 
other expenses. When she lost that job, she was not able to meet all of her financial 
obligations and a number of debts, including her mortgage, became delinquent.4 
 
 Prior to the hearing, Applicant paid the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.i, and 1.k. 
She also provided proof that, on March 18, 2012, she made a $420 payment towards 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a and a $30 payment towards the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g. She indicated 
that she paid the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.e and provided a receipt showing a medical 
debt of $230 was paid in July 2012. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e is no longer listed on her 
most recent credit report, although it could not be confirmed that the receipt provided 
was for that debt.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 8-9. 
2 Tr. at 65-66; GE 1, 3. 
 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 4, 5. 
 
4 Tr. at 25-26, 50-51, 53-55; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1, 3. 
 
5 Tr. at 35-42, 46; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2; AE E, G-J.  
 
3 
 
  After falling behind on her monthly mortgage payments of $1,600 (SOR ¶ 1.f), 
Applicant attempted to arrange a mortgage loan modification. The mortgage holder 
initially refused to modify the loan and threatened to proceed with a foreclosure. In May 
2012, she filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. After that filing, the mortgage holder agreed to a 
loan modification. At the time of the hearing, Applicant was participating in a 90-day trial 
period for that modification. She testified that she had already made two monthly 
payments of $1,149 under the modification. This modification also provides that the 
mortgage payments will be made directly to the mortgage holder and not as part of her 
monthly Chapter 13 payments.6 
 
 Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition reflected that she had $55,334 in total 
assets and $125,899 in total liabilities, including her mortgage loan. Her unsecured 
debts totaled $14,746. Her bankruptcy will last 60 months. She is required to pay the 
trustee $992 for the first three months, $100 for the next three months, and then $309 
for the remaining months. At the time the record in this proceeding closed, she made 
the three $992 payments and two of the $100 payments. She had not missed any 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy payments.7 
 
 Schedule F of Applicant’s bankruptcy petition listed all of the delinquent accounts 
that were reflected on her most recent credit report. The bankruptcy petition included 
the debts in SOR ¶ 1.a, 1.g, and 1.h, which were her largest unsecured debts. She 
testified that those debts would be paid fully under the terms of the Chapter 13 
bankruptcy plan.8 
  
 From a review of Applicant’s credit reports and her bankruptcy documents, I find 
the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d are duplicates of the debt in SOR ¶1.g, which is listed 
in the bankruptcy. Each of those debts is from the same original creditor. Her most 
recent credit report only listed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g, which supports the determination 
the ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d were duplicates. Her most recent credit report also reflected that the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.j had a zero balance and had been transferred to another creditor, but 
it did not re-appear on that credit report.9 
 
  Applicant disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.l. She indicated that she had no 
knowledge of this debt. She thought it may have been a debt arising from her prior 
marriage. As part of the bankruptcy, the creditor was given notice of its right to make a 
claim and failed to do so. This debt does not appear on her most credit report.10 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
6 Tr. at 25-26, 31, 39, 51-61; GE 3; AE A, C, D.   
 
7 Tr. at 22, 25-26, 55-61; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1, 2; AE A, C, D, F. 
 
8 Tr. at 22, 29; AE A, D. 
 
9 Tr. at 12-13, 28-31, 36-39, 41-42, 45-49; GE 2; AE A, D, E, I. The parties agreed that the debts 
in SOR 1.d and 1.g were duplicates. Undoubtedly, if the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.j were listed on 
her most recent credit report, those debts would have been listed in her bankruptcy petition. 
 
10 Tr. at 33, 43-46; AE E, J. 
 
4 
 
Applicant participated in credit counseling as a prerequisite to filing bankruptcy. 
She also received financial counseling from other sources and participated in a debt 
consolidation program for about six months. She earned $44,499 in 2011. Her 
bankruptcy petition reflected that her average monthly income was $2,767 and her 
average monthly expenses were $2,639, which left her a monthly net remainder of 
$127.11 
 
 Policies  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
11 Tr. at 61-62; GE 2, AE C, D. 
 
 
5 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that she was unable or unwilling to 
satisfy for an extended period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
In 2007, Applicant lost her second job and was unable to pay all of her debts. 
The loss of that job was a condition beyond her control. Before the hearing, she paid 
three of her delinquent debts. She also attempted to modify her mortgage loan, but the 
creditor initially refused such a modification and threatened foreclosure. After filing 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy, the creditor agreed to a mortgage loan modification. At the time 
of the hearing, she was participating in a trial period for that modification and making 
her modified mortgage payments. Her bankruptcy included her largest debts, and she 
was making her monthly bankruptcy payments. The debts in the bankruptcy will be paid 
in full. Some of her smaller debts were not included in the bankruptcy because they 
were no longer listed on her credit report or the creditors did not file bankruptcy claims. 
She received financial counseling and presented sufficient evidence to show that her 
financial problems are being resolved and are under control. While bankruptcy is 
intended to provide a person with a fresh start financially, it does not immunize an 
applicant’s history of financial problems from being considered for their security 
significance.12 After reviewing the reasons leading to the bankruptcy, I find her decision 
to file for bankruptcy protection was a reasonable and responsible action. AG ¶¶ 20(b) 
and 20(c) apply. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) partially apply. 
 
The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d were duplicates of the one in SOR ¶ 1.g. 
Applicant disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.l and it no longer appears on her credit report. 
AG ¶ 20(e) applies to SOR ¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.l.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                                          
12 See e.g., DISCR Case No. 87-1800 (February14, 1989) at p.3 n. 2 (“Although bankruptcy may 
be a legal and legitimate way for an applicant to handle his financial problems, the [administrative judge] 
must consider the possible security implications of the history of debts and problems that led to the 
bankruptcy”).  
 
7 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is a hard-working individual. She worked two jobs for many years. She has 
held a security clearance for over 22 years without incident. She encountered financial 
problems when she lost her second job. Since then, she has taken responsible steps to 
address her financial difficulties. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under 
Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a–1.l:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                              
   
    
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
