 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06480 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems dating back to 1999. He presented 
no documentary evidence of efforts to resolve his delinquent debts. The evidence fails 
to establish Applicant’s financial responsibility in the resolution of his delinquent debts. 
He does not have a viable plan to resolve his delinquent debt, and he is not in control of 
his financial situation. Moreover, he falsified his November 2011 security clearance 
application. The record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 5, 
2010. On May 18, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 Applicant answered 
the SOR on June 27, 2012, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
                                            
1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the 
 
2 
 
 
 
The case was assigned to me on September 18, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on September 20, 2012, scheduling a hearing for October 17, 2012. At the 
hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were received without 
objection. (GE 7 was marked and made part of the record, but it was not admitted.) 
Applicant testified, and submitted no documentary exhibits. (Tr. 21) DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 22, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i, 1.m through 
1.r, and 1.t through 1.v. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.j through 1.l and 1.s. His admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the evidence, including his 
testimony and demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old security guard employed with a government contractor. 
He served in the U.S. Army from 1985 until September 1989, achieved the rank of 
sergeant (E-5), and received an honorable discharge. Applicant was awarded a 
Bachelor of Theology degree in 1995, a Master of Divinity degree in 1997, and a Doctor 
of Divinity degree in 2012. (Tr. 6-7) He has been a pastor for 29 years. 
 
Applicant married in December 1986, separated in 2006, and divorced in May 
2007. He has two sons, age 25 and 21, and a daughter, age 23. Applicant remarried in 
April 2011. He and his spouse share financial responsibilities in their household.  
 
Applicant worked in different capacities for numerous government contractors 
from 1999 to present, including security officer from February 2001 until January 2002; 
lead installer (Internet and telephone services) from January 2002 until November 2003; 
and project manager for a large corporation from January 2003 until November 2006. 
Applicant was terminated from his project manager position because of unprofessional 
conduct. The government contractor categorized Applicant as ineligible for rehire. (GE 
6) Applicant denied knowing that he was terminated from his employment or that he 
was deemed ineligible for rehiring. 
 
Applicant worked as a senior project requirements analyst from November 2006 
until November 2007, and as senior information technology manager from January 2008 
until October 2008. Applicant was unemployed from November 2007 until January 
2008, and from October 2008 until November 2009. He worked as a network 
administrator from November 2009 until December 2009 (temporary position). He also 
worked as a security officer supervisor for a company from November 2009 until July 
2010. While in this last job, Applicant received a written reprimand for viewing 
unauthorized and inappropriate material on the company’s computer in July 2010. 
                                                                                                                                             
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Apparently, he interfered with the company’s internal investigation when he appealed 
the reprimand outside of his company, and he was terminated from his position. (Tr. 32-
34)  
 
Applicant has been employed as a security enforcement officer with a 
government contractor since July 2010. He was earning approximately $4,800 a month 
($21 hourly rate). He has been on medical leave since July 11, 2012. Applicant 
explained that he is a disabled veteran with a 10 percent disability rating. He is currently 
receiving medical treatment through the Veterans’ Administration. 
 
Applicant possessed a security clearance at the secret and top secret levels with 
access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) from 2001 until 2008. There is no 
evidence to show that he has compromised or caused others to compromise classified 
information. Outside of the security concerns alleged in the current SOR, there is no 
evidence that Applicant had any other security issues of concern. He testified that he 
always passed his lifestyle polygraph examinations. 
 
Applicant submitted his SCA in November 2010. Section 13 of the SCA, asked 
Applicant to disclose whether in the last seven years he had been fired from a job; quit 
the job after being told he would be fired; left a job following allegations of misconduct, 
unsatisfactory performance, or under unfavorable circumstances; or whether he had 
been laid off by an employer. Applicant was also asked whether he received a written 
warning, or was officially reprimanded, suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in the 
work place.  
 
Applicant answered “No” to all the above questions and failed to disclose that he 
was terminated from his job in 2006. He also failed to disclose that in July 2010 he 
received a written reprimand, and was terminated from his position. Applicant explained 
that he did not disclose his 2006 termination because he was not aware he was 
terminated or declared ineligible for rehire by his employer. 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in April 2011. During the 
interview, he was asked whether he had any employment issues with any of his 
numerous employers, and to state the reasons why he left his jobs. Applicant told the 
investigator he never had any employment issues, and that he always left his jobs 
seeking better employment conditions and opportunities. Applicant failed to disclose 
that he was terminated from his job in November 2006, and that he received a 
reprimand and was terminated from another job in July 2010. Applicant denied he was 
terminated from his employment in 2006, or that he had any issues with that employer. 
During the interview and at his hearing, Applicant claimed he was unaware that he is 
considered ineligible for rehire by that employer.  
 
After he was confronted with his 2010 termination, Applicant admitted he 
received a written reprimand for watching unauthorized and improper material on his 
company’s computer during work. He was later terminated for improper use of the 
computer and for interfering with the company’s internal investigation. Applicant denied 
 
4 
 
 
any wrongdoing. He believes he was treated unfairly and unprofessionally by that 
company, and that he was not allowed to defend himself. He told the investigator that 
he did not disclose his written reprimand and termination because he did not know how 
to list his employment issues in his SCA. He also believed he did not engage in any 
misconduct, so he did not disclose it. (GE 2) 
 
In his answers to the November 2010 SCA financial questions, Applicant stated 
that in the last seven years he had financial problems that included property 
repossessed, defaulting on a loan, bills turned over to collection agencies, and credit 
cards suspended or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed. He also disclosed he was 
evicted from rental apartments for his failure to pay rent, and that he was currently over 
90 days delinquent on some debts.  
 
The subsequent background investigation revealed the 22 delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR, totaling approximately $24,800. Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.j 
through 1.l, and 1.s (totaling $1,060), because he did not recognize the creditors. He 
never contacted the creditors to determine if those debts were valid. 
 
Applicant explained that his financial problems were the result of a contentious 
divorce in 2007, and his periods of unemployment and underemployment. After his 
divorce, he was left with large legal fees and a past-due child support obligation that he 
was required to pay in a lump sum. He did not have sufficient income to pay for his day-
to-day living expenses, child support obligations, and his legal fees.  
 
Applicant was unemployed from around December 2008 until November 2009. 
He was laid off from a job paying $85,000 a year when his employer lost some 
contracts. (Tr. 47) He received unemployment benefits, but the $800 a month he 
received was not sufficient to pay for his child support obligations and his day-to-day 
living expenses. His car was repossessed, he was evicted, and other debts became 
delinquent. He then worked a temporary position as a network administrator from 
November 2009 until December 2009. When he could not support himself, Applicant 
relocated to another state and moved in with his parents trying to save money and to 
find a job to pay his debts. 
 
Applicant’s credit reports show that he was carrying numerous delinquent debts 
before he separated from his wife and before he was unemployed. (GEs 3, 4, and 5) In 
November 2011, Applicant purchased a used 2007 Lexus ES 350. His current spouse 
drives a 2007 vehicle purchased in 2012. During his November 2010 interview, 
Applicant told the investigator that he had taken a credit counseling class. He also said 
that he had started to contact his creditors to inform them of his financial problems, and 
that he was planning on filing bankruptcy protection in July 2011.  
 
In his responses to the August 2011 DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated he 
intends to resolve his delinquent debts by filing for bankruptcy protection. He has not 
filed bankruptcy because he does not have the money to pay the bankruptcy legal fees. 
(Tr. 57) Applicant has been on medical leave (not working) because of health problems 
 
5 
 
 
since July 2012. Applicant did not present documentary evidence of any payments, 
contact with creditors, or of any efforts to resolve his delinquent obligations before or 
after receipt of the SOR. He failed to pay relatively small debts under $200. He stated 
that he was working at an hourly rate of $21 an hour. His income was not sufficient for 
him to pay for his day-to-day living expenses and to pay his debts. 
 
Applicant testified that he takes his job and his obligations to the Government 
seriously. He admits responsibility for his mistakes. He acknowledged that he has had 
financial problems for many years, but believes that his financial problems were caused 
by circumstances beyond his control. Applicant acknowledged that he needs to improve 
his decision-making process. He believes that he will have trouble paying his debts on 
his current salary. He would like to resolve his debts, but it will take time to do so. He 
promised that as long as he is employed he will continue to pay his debts. 
 
Applicant considers himself to be honest, trustworthy, and a dedicated employee. 
He is punctual and knowledgeable. He also considers himself to be a loyal American 
and a good worker. He would like to continue his service to his country and to resolve 
his delinquent financial obligations. He needs his security clearance to retain his job, 
and more importantly to find a better paying job that will give him the ability to pay all of 
his delinquent debts. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
6 
 
 
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems that date back to 1999. His financial 
problems continue to present as evidenced by the 22 delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR, totaling about $24,800. Two of the financial considerations disqualifying 
conditions apply: AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and AG ¶ 19(c): 
a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s evidence fails to fully establish the applicability of any mitigating 
condition. His financial problems are ongoing, he has extensive delinquent debt, and the 
evidence fails to show that he acted responsibly in the resolution of the debts, or that he 
acquired the debt under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant’s divorce, medical disability, and his periods of unemployment and 
underemployment may be considered as circumstances beyond his control that 
contributed to, or aggravated, his financial problems. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s 
evidence failed to show that he acted responsibly in the acquisition of his debts or in his 
efforts to resolve his debts. He presented no documentary evidence of payments made, 
contacts with creditors, or of any efforts to resolve his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies, in part, but does not mitigate the financial considerations concerns. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) applies because Applicant participated in financial counseling. 
However, it does not mitigate the financial considerations concerns. Considering the 
number of debts, the small value of some of the debts, the aggregate total of the debts,  
and his lack of efforts to resolve his debts, I cannot find that there are clear indications 
that his financial problems are being resolved or under control.  
 
 Questions remain about Applicant’s current financial situation and his ability and 
willingness to resolve his delinquent debts. Considering that Applicant has been 
employed since July 2010, and that he receives some disability payment, he failed to 
provide a reasonable explanation for his failure to address even his smallest debts. On 
balance, the evidence available is not sufficient to establish that Applicant has a track 
record of financial responsibility. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e) do not apply because Applicant 
failed to submit documentary evidence of efforts to resolve his debts, or to dispute the 
legitimacy of his debts. The remaining mitigating condition (AG ¶ 20(f)) is not applicable 
to the facts of this case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant falsified his November 2010 SCA when he deliberately failed to 
disclose that he was terminated from his employment in 2006 and 2010, and that he 
was issued a written reprimand for work-related misconduct in 2010. He also made 
false statements to a government investigator when he told the investigator that he 
never had any employment issues, that he was never reprimanded for misconduct, and 
that he was never terminated from his employment. 
 
  Applicant’s false statements and falsifications trigger the applicability of the 
following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant claimed that he was not aware he was terminated and declared 
ineligible for rehire by his employer in 2006. After he was confronted by the government 
investigator, he admitted he received a written reprimand and was terminated from his 
job in 2010. He explained that he omitted his 2010 reprimand and termination because 
he was not involved in any wrongdoing. He believes he was treated unfairly and 
unprofessionally, and he was not allowed to defend himself. Additionally, he claimed he 
did not know how to report such employment issues in the SCA. Having observed his 
demeanor while testifying and analyzed his testimony in light of all the evidence 
available, Applicant’s claims of lack of knowledge and honest mistake are not credible. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns. Considering the record as a whole, I find that none of the Guideline E 
mitigating conditions apply. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply because he did not correct his 
falsifications before he was confronted with the facts. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply 
 
9 
 
 
because making a false statement is a felony in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001. The 
remaining mitigating conditions are not raised by the facts and are not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s false statements and falsifications show lack of judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. His 
behavior raises questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant honorably served four years in the Army. He is a technically proficient, 
punctual, and dedicated employee. He has significant experience working for 
government contractors while possessing a security clearance. Except for the current 
security concerns, there is no evidence of any problems or concerns while he 
possessed a security clearance. He is a good father, husband, and practicing pastor of 
29 years. 
 
Notwithstanding, the record evidence fails to establish that Applicant showed 
financial responsibility in the resolution of his delinquent debts. Because of his extensive 
experience working for federal contractors and years holding a security clearance, 
Applicant knew or should have known about the importance of maintaining financial 
responsibility and about the requirement to the honest and truthful in his answers to the 
SCA questions. Applicant’s financial problems and his deliberate failure to disclose 
relevant and material information on his 2011 SCA adversely affects his credibility and 
evidence of extenuation and mitigation.  
 
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant does not have a viable plan to 
resolve his delinquent debt, and he is not in control of his financial situation. Moreover, 
because he falsified two SCAs, Applicant demonstrated a lack of suitability for a security 
clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.v:     Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
