 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08087 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 19, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On July 20, 2012, Applicant answered the 
SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On 
 
2 
 
 
August 30, 2012, Department Counsel compiled a File of Relevant Material (FORM) 
that contained documents identified as Items 1 through 7.  
 
On September 5, 2012, DOHA forwarded to Applicant a copy of the FORM with 
instructions to submit any additional information and objections within 30 days of its 
receipt. Applicant received the FORM on September 11, 2012, and did not submit any 
objections or additional matters within the allotted time. The case was assigned to me 
on November 29, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2006. He earned an associate’s degree in 2006. He has 
never been married and has no children. This is the first time that he has sought a 
security clearance.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant had ten delinquent debts totaling $28,061. Those 
debts included nine medical accounts and one credit card account. In his Answer to the 
SOR, he admitted all of the alleged debts. His admissions are incorporated as findings 
of fact.2 
 
 During an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview on May 9, 2011, 
Applicant reportedly stated: 
 
[He] got into a four wheeler accident in 4/07. [He] broke his wrist, 
shoulders, and ribs. There was no alcohol involved in the incident. [He] hit 
an unseen hole and flipped the four wheeler. [He] went to [N] Hospital and 
then was transferred to [R] Hospital. . .  [He] set up a payment plan with 
[R] Hospital. [He] filed for a grant program at [N] Hospital to help pay his 
bills. [He] also filed for this at [R] Hospital. [He] was accepted at [N], but 
denied at [R]. [His] payment [plan] was to pay $25 to each account and 
hospital. Originally [there were] only two accounts and [he] paid a total of 
$50 a month. For some reason later in 2007 the two accounts were split 
into seven accounts each requiring $25 a month payments. [He] 
attempted to find out why the accounts were split and did not pay all eight 
accounts while he was attempting to get information. [He] did not get an 
explanation from the hospital. [He] felt the hospital owed him an 
explanation. [He] paid two of the accounts but not the other six. A few 
months later the accounts were sent into collections. [He] has not been 
receiving bills on the accounts in collections. [He] would begin paying 
again now that he is able if he were receiving bills.3   
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
2 Items 1 and 3. 
3 Item 5. 
 
3 
 
 
During the OPM interview, Applicant also admitted “to not being responsible with his 
bills when he should have been better.”4   
 
Applicant missed work from April to July 2007 as a result of that accident. He 
provided no documents showing he made the payments mentioned in his OPM 
interview. In his Answer to the SOR, he stated: 
 
I set up Payment arrangements for twenty five dollars a month in the 
month of April, which is what I started sending in monthly in the first 
quarter of 2012. I did not send in a payment in April because I thought with 
it being the middle of the month and I elected to have my payment in by 
the middle of the month that the arrangement would start in May. As a 
result [the collection agency] cancelled my arrangement. I am still sending 
in twenty five dollars a month and will continue working with them to get 
an arrangement made.5   
 
Seven of the nine medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i) are owed to 
one collection agency. Applicant provided copies of money orders showing he made 
three $25 payments to that collection agency. One of those money orders is dated May 
13, 2012. The dates on the other two money orders are illegible, but are presumed to be 
payments made in June and July 2012.6  
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant also stated the credit card debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.j was charged off. He indicated that, if he knew what collection agency was 
handling that credit card account, he would set up payment arrangements to satisfy that 
debt. He indicated that he would contact the original creditor during the following week 
to set up those arrangements.7  
 
In his security clearance application, Applicant disclosed no derogatory 
information other than his delinquent debts. In May 2012, he submitted a personal 
financial statement that reflected his net monthly income was $1,398, that his total 
monthly expenses were $1,185, that his monthly debt payments were $180, which left 
him a net monthly remainder of $33. He presented no letters of reference or other 
character evidence.8  
 
 
                                                          
4 Item 5. 
5 Item 3. 
6 Items 1, 6, and 7. 
7 Item 3. 
8 Items 4 and 5. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
 
5 
 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts over an extended period that he was 
either unable or unwilling to pay. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Four financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing, significant, and cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 In April 2007, Applicant was involved in a vehicle accident in which he broke a 
number of bones. As a result of that accident, he accumulated a number of medical bills 
and missed about three months of work. The vehicle accident was a condition beyond 
his control that contributed to his financial problems. Nonetheless, he has not 
established that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. His injuries occurred 
over five years ago. He has been continuously employed for almost all of that 
intervening period. In April 2012, he established a payment arrangement with a 
collection agency, but failed to submit the first payment promptly. The collection agency 
cancelled the payment arrangement. Thereafter, he made three $25 payments to the 
collection agency, which holds seven of the delinquent medical debts. He provided no 
documentary proof of action taken to resolve the other three debts. In his OPM 
interview, he admitted that he should have acted more responsibly in the handling of his 
bills. He provided no proof of financial counseling and failed to establish that his 
financial problems are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
AG ¶ 20(b) and 20(d) partially apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Besides the SOR allegations, there is no information in the FORM that would 
undermine Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. Nevertheless, he has failed to 
establish that he is financially responsible. In particular, he failed to present a 
meaningful track record of payments towards the delinquent debts or a realistic plan for 
resolving them. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. Therefore, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a–1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
