1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
         )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-09334
Applicant for Security Clearance
Appearances
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The SOR was undated. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 31, 2012. DOHA issued
a notice of hearing on November 9, 2012, scheduling the hearing for December 4, 2012.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-13 were admitted into evidence, without objection.
Applicant testified, and submitted Applicant Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 11, 2012. Based on a review
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
      1At the hearing, the Government withdrew SOR allegations 1.g and 1.i in their entirety. SOR allegation 1.c
was amended to state for “an account in collection.”
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), with explanations.  
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 21) After
completing the ninth grade, he began working.  He has been with his current employer
since February 2011. This is his first application for a security clearance. (GX 1)
Applicant was married for 30 years and has two adult children. He and his wife
had marital difficulties, and they separated in 2006. His wife remained in the home, and
Applicant left all the marital possessions to his wife. His divorce was final in November
2007. 
Applicant owned his own concrete business for approximately 20 years (from
March 1988 until April 2008). He had no financial issues until the economy faltered in
2006. Subcontractors owed him money, and he could not collect from them. (Tr. 25) He
lost his equipment, but he was able to maintain his business until 2008.  Applicant’s ex-
wife maintained the business records and handled the financial affairs for the business
as well as for the marriage. Applicant did not know the amount of debt that accumulated
during the marriage. After his marriage ended and he understood his financial situation,
he now believes that his wife overspent on items. He admitted that they perhaps lived
beyond their means.  
When Applicant could no longer maintain his business, he immediately looked for
work. From April 2008, he worked for a home-improvement company for about eight
months. He was laid off in January 2009, and remained unemployed until January 2010.
(Tr. 17). He found seasonal work with a landscape company for approximately three
months but was again laid off in January 2011. He was unable to receive full
unemployment compensation as he had not sufficient time with the employer. He found
day jobs until his current employment. 
Applicant’s wife remained in their home until it went into foreclosure. He had no
ability to pay any debts for several years because he was not working in a steady job
with sufficient income. He went to an attorney and was advised to file for bankruptcy. He
paid the fee of $2,400. Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in August 2012. The
debts were discharged in November 2012. (AX A) He completed the debt-education
counseling that is part of the process. (Tr. 35) 
The SOR listed delinquent debts that amounted to approximately $230,000,
which included a home foreclosure, credit card debts, and judgments related to his
business. 1(GX 3-12) The majority of the debt was from the business. The delinquent
accounts accrued from 2006 until 2008. The debts alleged in the SOR have been
discharged in the Chapter 7 bankruptcy case.
3
Applicant was candid that his wife took care of the “book work” in the company.
He took care of the rest of the labor in the business. He thinks that perhaps $30,000 to
$40,000 was owed to him by other builders. When he and his wife had a company
meeting, he learned the extent of the financial problems. (Tr. 26) Due to the acrimony
with the separation and divorce, Applicant did not receive any financial help from his
wife, nor did she provide him with documentation concerning the debts.
Applicant lives with his girlfriend who works as a dispatcher. She and her mother
bought a home recently. Applicant’s name is not on the mortgage or on any other
household bills. He knows that they live within their means. They do not go out to eat
very often. The household bills are not in his name. He uses his salary to pay for half
the household expenses. 
 Applicant currently earns approximately $20 an hour. He has no other delinquent
debts. He has no credit cards or account in his name. He gives his paycheck to his
girlfriend, and she pays the bills. He keeps $60 a week for gas money. He does not
have a savings account, but intends to start a retirement account with his employer. He
has a small net remainder each month.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in
the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
      2 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).
      3 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
      4 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      5 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
      6 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).
      7 Id.
4
Department Counsel. . . .”2 The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance
of evidence.3 The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.4 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”5 “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”6 Any reasonable doubt
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.7 The decision to deny an individual a
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
5
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches
of trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
Applicant admits to the debts in the amount of $230,000. His business was
forced to close in 2008. He did not have the ability to pay any of the debts. He filed for
Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2012. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to raise
disqualifying conditions ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
6
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts;
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Applicant owned a business for approximately 20 years. He and his wife were co-
owners. His wife handled the bookkeeping, and Applicant worked the business. In 2006,
financial difficulties started due to the nature of the economy. Applicant was owed
money from other builders, but he was not able to collect the money. He kept the
business running until 2008. During that time, he and his wife separated.  When the
business ceased, Applicant began looking for steady work, but was not successful. He
was unemployed for one year, he had seasonal work, and at one point he did not
receive unemployment. He was divorced in 2007 and had legal bills related to the
divorce. Applicant took the advice of an attorney and filed for bankruptcy as soon as he
could afford the fee. He filed for Chapter 7 in August 2012. The majority of the debt was
related to the failed business. His debts were discharged in November 2012. He
received debt counseling. Applicant has no new debt. Applicant was candid that he
worried about the labor side of business. He realized too late that his wife was
overspending. He is now working full time. He is living with his girlfriend. His name is not
on the mortgage. He pays his share of the household expenses. Although Applicant
could have been more active in the financial side of the business or the marriage, there
is no law that Applicant must handle financial matters. He has not accrued any new
debt. His name is not on any of his girlfriend’s accounts or the mortgage. He
understands the importance of living within his means. I find that Applicant’s financial
considerations concerns are mitigated. 
 
7
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He owned a concrete
business that he successfully operated for almost 20 years. After 30 years of marriage,
he and his wife separated, and their divorce was final in 2007.He raised two children.
Applicant could not maintain his business due to the downturn in the economy in 2006.
His business closed in 2008. He worked in various jobs, but did not find steady full-time
employment until February 2011. He filed bankruptcy on the advice of his lawyer. His
debts, most of which were related to the business, have been discharged. He has no
new debt. He has received debt-education counseling. He understands the importance
of living within his means. He has mitigated the security concerns under the financial
considerations guideline. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Withdrawn
Subparagraph h: For Applicant
8
Subparagraph 1.i: Withdrawn
Subparagraphs 1.j:-1.r: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
