 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13281 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 21, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B, foreign influence. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 30, 2012, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
 
2 
 
 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on November 8, 2012. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant and he received it on November 14, 2012. Applicant was given an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
responded in writing on November 27, 2012 (Reply). Department Counsel asserted an 
objection on a document dated November 30, 2012, however, she later stated that there 
was no objection to the Reply submitted by Applicant. The case was assigned to me on 
December 11, 2012.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning India.1 
Department Counsel provided supporting documents that verify detail and provide 
context for these facts in the Administrative Notice request. See the India section of the 
Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, for the material facts from Department Counsel’s 
submissions on India. Applicant also provided facts about India in his Reply, and 
although he did not formally request that I take administrative notice of facts about India, 
I will do so.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.2 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations, to wit, that his 
mother, father, father-in-law, and mother-in-law are all residents and citizens of India, 
and that he owns residential property in India valued at about $39,000. Those 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He was born in India and became a United States 
naturalized citizen in 2010. He came to the United States in August 1997 to earn a 
master’s degree in computer engineering. He has resided here ever since. He is 
married and his wife was also born in India. They were married in 2002. She obtained 
her U.S. citizenship at the same time as Appellant. They have two daughters who were 
born in the United States and are U.S. citizens.4   
                                                          
1 FORM p. 2. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). 
 
3 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
4 Items 4-5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 1997 to further his education. He did this 
by attaining a master’s degree. He stayed in this country and worked in the private 
sector for several telecommunications companies. He became a homeowner in 2004. In 
2005, he and his wife were granted permanent residence status. He is very active in his 
local community including membership in the local PTA and participating in local 
community activities. Since becoming a citizen in 2010, he and his wife voted in the 
2012 national election. He sold his first home and bought a second home in 2010. He 
sold his second home when he moved to his current location and is in the process of 
building a home there. His children do not speak Indian and have been taught only 
American customs. Both he and his wife have well-paying jobs, with a combined income 
of about $200,000 annually. Applicant traveled to India in 2005, 2007, 2010 and twice in 
2012, to visit his ailing mother and for her funeral. All the previous visits were to see 
family. He only has a U.S. passport and renounced his Indian citizenship. His brother 
and his family are all residents and citizens of the United States.5 
 
 Applicant has the following relatives who are residents and citizens of India:  
 
 1. His father is 66 years old and is a retired general manager for a regional utility 
company in India. He lives in India. The company he worked for was not associated with 
the Indian government or the military. He currently receives a retired pension that 
provides for his financial needs.  Applicant has telephone contact with his Father a few 
times a month, but his work is never discussed.  
 
 2. His mother was a resident and citizen of India; however, she passed away in 
March 2012.  
 
 3. His father-in-law and mother-in-law reside in India. His father-in-law is 62 
years old and is retired from a manufacturing company. He has never worked for the 
Indian government or been a part of the Indian military. His mother-in-law is 53 years 
old, is a housewife, and has never worked outside the home. Applicant has limited 
contact with his in-laws. He possibly talks to them three to four times a year by 
telephone. His wife talks to them by telephone about twice a month. They do not rely on 
Applicant or his wife for any financial support.  
 
 In 2002, after he was married, he purchased a plot of land (1,800 sq. ft.) in India 
for investment purposes. In 2006, he purchased a small apartment (1,000 sq. ft.) in 
India to have a place to stay when he visited his parents. He believes the value of both 
properties is less than the $39,000 he invested. He listed the property for sale with a 
local realtor. He does not intend to keep the property or to use it as a permanent 
residence.6 
 
 
                                                          
5 Reply; Item 7. 
 
6 Reply; Items 4, 7. 
 
 
4 
 
 
India 
  
I take administrative notice of the following facts. India is a democratic republic 
with a cooperative relationship with the United States. The United States recognizes 
India as key to strategic U.S. interests, and has sought to strengthen its relationship 
with India. The United States and India have been committed to a strategic partnership 
that has seen expanded cooperation in the areas of civilian nuclear activities, civilian 
space programs, and technology trade. The United States is India's largest trading 
partner and investment partner. The U.S Secretary of Homeland Security, Janet 
Napolitano, visited India in May 2011 to hold the first round of dialogue concerning 
operational cooperation, counter-terrorism technology transfers, and capacity building 
with the India Home Minister.  
 
Notwithstanding, differences remain between the two countries, including 
concerns about India’s nuclear weapons program, abuses of human rights (although, 
the Indian government is considered to generally respect the human rights of its 
citizens), and its refusal to sign weapons non-proliferation treaties. Of grave concern is 
India’s increasing cooperation and partnership with Iran and its military forces. Despite 
advancements in the United States-Indian relations, India has been identified by the 
U.S. intelligence community as one of the most active collectors of sensitive U.S. 
economic, industrial, and proprietary information. The United States has sanctioned 
Indian scientists and chemical companies for transferring to Iran weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD)-related equipment and/or technology. Additionally, there are 
numerous documented cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export of 
U.S. restricted, dual use technology to India.7 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
7 FORM; Reply. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
6 
 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, which could subject the individual to heighted risk of foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply because of Applicant’s relationships with his father, 
father-in-law, and mother-in-law, who are living in India. AG ¶ 7(d) applies because of 
Applicant’s wife’s relationship with her Indian parents. AG ¶ 7(e) applies because of his 
property holdings in India.      
 
Applicant communicates with his father on a monthly basis. His contacts with his 
in-laws are not as frequent; however, there is a rebuttable presumption that a person 
has ties of affection for, or obligation to, their immediate family members. Applicant has 
not attempted to rebut this presumption. Applicant’s relationships with his relatives living 
in India are sufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” His relatives in India create a concern about 
Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to 
help those relatives. For example, if the Indian Government or terrorists in India wanted 
to expose Applicant to coercion, it could exert pressure on his father and his in-laws. 
Applicant would then be subject to indirect coercion through his relationship with his 
relatives and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in India is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
 
7 
 
 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of India with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his relatives living in India do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist his relatives living in India who might be coerced by 
terrorists or other Governmental entities in India.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”8 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from India 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or his 
relatives living in India, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
Although Applicant’s communications with his relatives, other than his father, living in 
India are infrequent, he continues to feel an obligation to them and affection for them. 
Applicant’s concern for his relatives is a positive character trait that increases his 
trustworthiness; however, it also increases the concern about potential foreign 
influence. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence to raise the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant has limited contact with his relatives, other than his father, who live in 
India. His foreign relatives have no government affiliations and are financially self-
sufficient. Applicant has fully assimilated himself and his family into the American way of 
life. He and his wife are responsible, tax-paying, home owning, citizens of the United 
States. They are raising their children using American customs rather than Indian 
customs. Because of his deep and longstanding loyalties in the United States, Applicant 
was able to fully meet his burden of showing that he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c), are applicable. 
 
Applicant has substantial property and other interests in the United States, which 
include his employment in the United States, and his status in the local community. 
These interests are sufficient to overcome whatever minor property interest Applicant 
has in India (which is currently listed for sale), such that it could not be used to 
influence, manipulate, or pressure the Applicant. AG ¶ 8(f) also applies.  
 
In sum, Applicant has met his burden to show it is unlikely that he will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of his family members and the 
interests of the United States. His longstanding ties in the United States convince me 
that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States’ 
interest. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
9 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support approval of Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards denial of his clearance at this time. Although Applicant’s relatives live in India, 
he has fully established himself over the last 15 years with strong ties to the United 
States. Therefore, he provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
