 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-02878  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 5, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines B (foreign influence) and C (foreign preference). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 18, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 21, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 26, 2012, scheduling the hearing for 
 
2 
 
December 3, 2012. The hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 12, 2012.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1 was admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were admitted 
without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Iran. Applicant’s objection to part of the request was overruled, 
and the request was approved. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The 
facts administratively noticed are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing the allegations 
under Guideline C. The motion was granted without objection by Applicant. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is applying for 
a security clearance for the first time. She has never been married, and she has no 
children.1  
 
 Applicant was born in Iran to Iranian parents. Her father lived and worked in the 
United States in the 1970s. He married a U.S. citizen and had three children, who were 
born and have lived their entire lives in the United States. They are Applicant’s half-
siblings. Her father and his American wife divorced. He moved back to Iran and married 
Applicant’s mother, who was Iranian. They had Applicant and two younger children. 
Applicant’s father planned for the family to move to the United States, and the children 
learned English at an early age.2 
 
 Applicant received her bachelor’s degree from an Iranian university. She 
immigrated to the United States with her family after college. She attended graduate 
school in the United States and earned a master’s degree and a Ph.D. Her sisters are 
also well educated and attended U.S. institutions. Her father became a U.S. citizen 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17, 29; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 18, 23-28; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
3 
 
more than 10 years ago. Applicant, her mother, and her two siblings became U.S. 
citizens a few years ago.3 
 
 As discussed below, Iran continued to consider Applicant and her family as 
Iranian citizens after they became U.S. citizens, and it does not recognize their U.S. 
citizenship. Her parents own a property in Iran valued at about $50,000. They have 
returned to Iran on a few occasions to facilitate the sale of the property. They used their 
Iranian passports on the trips. They will have to return to Iran to close the sale of the 
property. Once that is accomplished, they will no longer have a reason to return to Iran. 
Applicant does not believe that either of her siblings will return to Iran.4 
 
 Applicant’s maternal and paternal grandparents have all passed away. She has 
some aunts, uncles, and cousins in Iran, but neither she nor her parents are close to 
those relatives. She is close to her half-siblings. Applicant returned to Iran for several 
visits before she became a U.S. citizen. She has not returned since she became a U.S. 
citizen. She relinquished her Iranian passport and does not plan to return to Iran.5 
  
 Applicant has a friend who is an Iranian citizen attending graduate school in the 
United States. Most of his family are U.S. citizens or U.S. permanent residents. He has 
applied for permanent residency, and he plans on becoming a U.S. citizen. It is unlikely 
that he will return to Iran as he is a member of a religion that has been subject to 
discrimination.6 
  
 Applicant does not own any foreign assets. She has a good job, and she has 
U.S. investments and assets. She volunteers in her community. She and her family 
enjoy the freedom and opportunities available in the United States. She credibly testified 
that her loyalty and allegiance are to the United States.7  
 
Applicant submitted a number of character letters. The authors praised her 
excellent job performance, work ethic, honesty, compassion, trustworthiness, kindness, 
responsibility, loyalty, professionalism, judgment, and integrity.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 19-20, 25-28, 35, 40-43; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
4 Tr. at 20-23, 26-27, 41-43, 46-52; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, C, D. 
 
5 Tr. at 23, 30-32, 35, 41, 44-45, 49, 52-55; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE H. 
 
6 Tr. at 35-36, 53-58; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
7 Tr. at 33-39, 52, 58; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE E, F. 
 
8 AE G. 
 
4 
 
Iran 
 
 Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The United States has not had 
diplomatic relations with Iran since 1980, and nearly all trade and investment with Iran 
has been prohibited. Iran has sought to illegally obtain U.S. military equipment and 
other sensitive technology. The United States has defined the areas of objectionable 
Iranian behavior as: 
  
 Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD);  
 Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; 
 Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and 
 Its dismal human rights record. 
 
 The United States has designated and characterized Iran as the world’s leading 
state sponsor of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. 
Iran has sought to make the United States suffer political, economic, and human costs. 
Further, Iran has engaged in efforts to sow violence and undermine stability in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, including lethal support for groups that are directly responsible for 
hundreds of U.S. casualties. 
 
 The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary 
executions, including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary 
arrest and detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; 
severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement 
and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and 
legal and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.  
 
 The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens who were born in Iran and the children of Iranian 
citizens, even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian, 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter/depart Iran using their U.S. 
passport; they even had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or departure. 
U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian government. 
Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. Hotel rooms, 
telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personal possessions in hotel 
rooms may be searched. 
 
 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
6 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make 
the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign 
person, group, government, or country. 
 
  Applicant’s parents and siblings are dual citizens of Iran and the United States. 
Her friend is an Iranian citizen who is residing in the United States. Iran is a country that 
is clearly hostile to the United States.9 Iran is considered the world’s leading state 
sponsor of terrorism; it commits espionage against the United States; and the 
government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses against its 
people. Applicant’s foreign friend and her family’s dual citizenship create a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. It also 
creates a potential conflict of interest. Applicant’s travel to Iran made her vulnerable to 
exploitation, pressure, and coercion by the Iranian government. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 
7(i) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007). 
 
7 
 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant has been in this country since she began graduate school, and she has 
been a U.S. citizen for several years. Applicant’s father lived in the United States and 
had an American family before he married Applicant’s mother. Applicant is close to her 
three half-siblings who were born and live in the United States. All of Applicant’s 
immediate family are U.S. citizens and residents. Applicant has not traveled to Iran 
since she became a U.S citizen. She relinquished her Iranian passport and does not 
plan to return to Iran. Her siblings, like Applicant, are highly educated and 
accomplished. Applicant and her family value the freedom and opportunities provided in 
the United States that are not available in Iran. Her parents will likely return to Iran one 
final time to sell their property. I find that it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of the United States and the interests 
of the Iranian government, a terrorist organization, or her Iranian friend and family 
members. I further find there is no conflict of interest, because Applicant has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in America, that she can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) is partially 
applicable. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iran, a country that is clearly 
hostile to the United States, and the heavy burden an applicant carries when he or she 
has family members in a hostile country. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism. Iran is the world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism, conducts espionage 
against the United States, and has a dismal human rights record. Applicant was sincere, 
open, and honest at the hearing. Her friend and family members all live in the United 
States. Her family members are all U.S. citizens, and her friend will be applying to 
become a U.S. citizen. These facts minimize any potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
