 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-05203 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is close to his parents, younger brother, and two sisters, who are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant has completed over 200 combat 
missions with U.S. forces in Afghanistan as a linguist, showing bravery, loyalty, and 
fidelity to the United States. His Afghan family is immigrating to the United States. 
Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 8, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On October 17, 
2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of 
reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence) 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                             
continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted for Applicant. 
 
On November 5, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (HE 3) On November 21, 2012, Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed. On December 12, 2012, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
Department Counsel and Applicant discussed setting the hearing because of 
Applicant’s deployment schedule to Afghanistan. (Tr. 11-12) Applicant waived his right 
to 15 days of notice of the date, time and location of his hearing. (Tr. 13) On December 
12, 2012, DOHA sent notice of the hearing. Applicant agreed to proceed with the 
hearing on December 18, 2012, and the hearing was held as scheduled. I received the 
transcript of the hearing on December 31, 2012. There were no post-hearing documents 
submitted as proposed exhibits.    
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits, and Applicant offered 
four exhibits. (Tr. 17, 19-20; GE 1-3; AE A-D) Applicant and Department Counsel did 
not object to my consideration of any exhibits, and I admitted GE 1-3 and AE A-D. (Tr. 
17-18, 20)  
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Afghanistan. (Tr. 13-14; HE 4, AN Request) Department Counsel provided supporting 
documents to show detail and context for those facts. (HE 4, Ex. I to IX) Applicant did 
not object, and I granted Department Counsel’s request. (Tr. 14) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c, and 
he partially admitted the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.b. (HE 3) He also provided mitigating 
evidence. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 27 years old. (Tr. 5, 21) In 2004, he graduated from high school in 
Afghanistan. (Tr. 5-6, 21-22) For three years, he worked for the United Nations in 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information.  
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                             
Afghanistan because of his expertise in English and other languages, mathematics, and 
computer science. (Tr. 22-24) Next, he worked for a U.S. corporation that provided 
security guards for U.S. installations in Afghanistan. (Tr. 24-25)  
  
In June 2008, Applicant moved to the United States on a fiancé visa, and that 
same month, he married a U.S. citizen, who was an Afghan linguist. (Tr. 26, 28-29, 41) 
In August 2010, he became a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 28) In January 2011, he was divorced. 
(Tr. 32) He is not currently married, and he does not have any children. (Tr. 33) He has 
taken some college preparation classes in the United States. (Tr. 5-6) A Department of 
Defense contractor employs him as a linguist and cultural advisor. He does not currently 
hold a security clearance. (Tr. 6) 
 
Shortly after arriving in the United States, Applicant began working for a Defense 
contractor in role playing for U.S. military pre-deployment training exercises. (Tr. 29-30) 
From September 2009 to June 2010, he deployed to Afghanistan as a linguist for U.S. 
forces. (Tr. 30) In December 2010, he began working for his current employer. (Tr. 31) 
From April 2011 to October 2012, he deployed to Afghanistan, and he returned to 
Afghanistan in late December 2012. (Tr. 31) 
 
Applicant’s father is a university professor in Afghanistan. (Tr. 33) His father 
applied for a U.S. visa to immigrate to the United States. (Tr. 34) Applicant’s mother is a 
high school mathematics teacher in a big city in Afghanistan. (Tr. 33) His mother came 
to the United States in 2012 and stayed with Applicant and his girlfriend for two months. 
(Tr. 39) In May 2012, his mother received her U.S. green card, and she applied for visas 
for Applicant’s father, 12-year-old brother, 14-year-old sister, and 17-year-old sister. (Tr. 
27, 34-36; SOR response) His father and siblings living in Afghanistan are waiting for 
their U.S. visa interviews. (Tr. 35) Applicant expects all of his immediate family 
members, except for one brother living in India, to be living in the United States by the 
end of 2013. (Tr. 28, 36) 
 
Applicant communicates with his mother about once a month and with his father 
about three or four times a year. (Tr. 36, 39-40) When he is in Afghanistan, he rarely 
communicates with his parents, and he only visited them once in 2010 because of 
safety issues. (Tr. 36-38) His parents are not aware of his work location or his type of 
work in Afghanistan. (Tr. 36) He does not plan to visit his family again while they are in 
Afghanistan. (Tr. 38) He has given his mother small amounts of money to purchase gifts 
for his siblings. (Tr. 41) He does not own any property in Afghanistan. He owns a rental 
property in the United States. (Tr. 42)  
 
Applicant’s annual linguist salary during his first tour in Afghanistan was 
$185,000, during his second tour in Afghanistan, it was $205,000, and during his 
pending tour in Afghanistan, it will be $140,000. (Tr. 43) His pay this tour is lower 
because he will be in a training position and will not leave the U.S. installation. (Tr. 45) If 
he receives a security clearance, he will be assisting in more dangerous missions, and 
he is likely to receive greater pay. (Tr. 45)       
 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                             
Applicant’s 26-year-old brother is a resident of Norway; however, he is currently 
studying in India. (Tr. 35) He will be studying in India for about three more years. (Tr. 
46) Another of Applicant’s brothers has six months of study in India remaining, and then 
he intends to move to the United States. (Tr. 47)  
 
When Applicant is not in Afghanistan, he lives with his girlfriend of two years. (Tr. 
49) She is a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 49) She was born in the United States, and she has a 
bachelor’s degree. (Tr. 50) She has a good relationship with Applicant’s mother, and her 
parents provided character references for Applicant. (Tr. 51; AE C, D)  
 
In sum, Applicant lived in Afghanistan the first 20 years of his life, moved to the 
United States, became a U.S. citizen, and then returned to Afghanistan, where he 
served for three years in a combat zone on behalf of the U.S. Government. (Tr. 44) He 
completed more than 200 combat missions. (SOR response) He wants to continue to 
support the U.S. military. (Tr. 44) He promised “to protect the United States with honor 
and distinction.” (Tr. 44) If he learned that his family was having trouble in Afghanistan, 
he would contact his facility security officer. (Tr. 43) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant provided character references from three U.S. Army captains, a major, 
a lieutenant colonel, and three civilians. (SOR response; AE A-D) The lieutenant colonel 
(LTC) was a U.S. Army cavalry squadron commander, who went on over 50 combat 
missions with Applicant, including air assault missions to remote areas along the 
Pakistan border. (SOR response) The LTC described Applicant as an extraordinary 
linguist, who provided essential communication skills on a variety of missions. “He was 
an integral part of our team from the beginning as he skillfully facilitated numerous 
shuras and jirgas with high ranking [Afghan] leaders.” (SOR response) A major and the 
other officers made similar remarks about Applicant’s contributions to mission 
accomplishment. The major stated: 
 
I cannot overstate how important [Applicant] has been to our mission. He 
has developed key relationships with important tribal leaders, district Sub-
governors, and district Chiefs of Police in our Area of Operations (AO); he 
is a tremendous asset to this command. He is a likeable, respectful, 
sincere young man who inspires trust and confidence in all who meet him. 
All the key people in our AO knew his voice over the telephone and 
recognize and trust him; he is a crucial asset for us. (SOR response)      
 
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is approximately the size of 
Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran 
borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country 
which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                             
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically elected 
president. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the 
Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from Afghanistan, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of 
the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies.   
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists 
including al-Qaeda and the Taliban continue to assert power and intimidation within the 
country. Safety and security are key issues because these terrorist organizations target 
United States and Afghan interests by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, 
car-jacking, assaults, and hostage taking. At this time, the risk of terrorist activities 
remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record remains poor and violence 
is rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents 
continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. 
Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from 
violence.  
 
The United States-Afghan relationship is summarized as follows: 
 
After the fall of the Taliban, the U.S. supported the emergence of a broad-
based government, representative of all Afghans, and actively encouraged 
a [United Nations] role in the national reconciliation process in 
Afghanistan. The U.S. has made a long-term commitment to help 
Afghanistan rebuild itself after years of war. The U.S. and others in the 
international community currently provide resources and expertise to 
Afghanistan in a variety of areas, including humanitarian relief and 
assistance, capacity-building, security needs, counter-narcotic programs, 
and infrastructure projects. 
 
During his December 1, 2009 speech at West Point, President Barack 
Obama laid down the core of U.S. goals in Afghanistan: to disrupt, 
dismantle, and defeat al-Qaeda and its safe havens in Pakistan, and to 
prevent their return to Afghanistan. . . . [T]he United States plans to 
remain politically, diplomatically, and economically engaged in 
Afghanistan for the long term.    
 
(U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, Nov. 28, 2011 at 13) The 
United States has more combat troops deployed to Afghanistan than to any other 
foreign country. The U.S. Government plans to withdraw U.S. combat troops from 
Afghanistan in the next two years. The United States’ extraordinary commitment to 
Afghanistan is balanced against the inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in 
Afghanistan to citizens and residents of Afghanistan and Afghan Government problems 
developing and complying with the rule of law. 
 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                             
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                             
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline B (foreign influence).  
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. Applicant, his parents and siblings were all born in 
Afghanistan. His parents, youngest brother, and two sisters all currently live in 
Afghanistan. He has frequent contact with his mother. He provides money for gifts for 
his family living in Afghanistan, and he cares about their welfare. He admitted that there 
are safety issues for his family in Afghanistan, just as there are for hundreds of other 
Afghan linguists supporting U.S. forces, with family living in Afghanistan. Thousands of 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                             
U.S. and coalition armed forces and civilian contractors serving in Afghanistan are 
targets of terrorists or the Taliban, along with Afghan civilians who support the Afghan 
Government and cooperate with coalition forces. Applicant’s family is not receiving any 
special protection from terrorists or the Taliban from the Afghan or U.S. Governments.  
 
The mere circumstance of close family ties with a family member living in 
Afghanistan, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, 
a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The 
relationship of Afghanistan with the United States places a significant but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his family members living in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant 
should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose between 
loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family member living in Afghanistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Afghanistan has an enormous 
problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with family members living in 
Afghanistan creates a potential conflict of interest because this relationship is 
sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist family members in 
Afghanistan by providing sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel 
produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with his family living in 
Afghanistan and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
 
  9 
                                                                                                                                             
exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential 
application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has frequent contact with 
his mother and less contact with his father and three siblings living in Afghanistan. His 
loyalty and connections to his family living in Afghanistan are a positive character trait. 
However, for security clearance purposes, those same connections to his family living in 
Afghanistan negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), and Applicant failed to 
fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his 
relatives who are Afghanistan citizens] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. In June 2008, Applicant moved to the United States 
on a fiancé visa. In August 2010, he became a U.S. citizen. He has taken some college 
 
  10 
                                                                                                                                             
preparation classes in the United States. Department of Defense contractors have 
employed him as a linguist and cultural advisor since 2009. Most importantly, Applicant 
wants his security clearance so that he can return to Afghanistan and assist U.S. Armed 
Forces in a more dangerous combat environment. He has offered to continue to risk his 
life to support the United States’ goals in Afghanistan. He has shown his patriotism, 
loyalty, and fidelity to the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family living in 
Afghanistan, and indirectly, his family’s relationships with other Afghan citizens living in 
Afghanistan. He frequently communicates with his mother living in Afghanistan. There is 
no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Afghan Government, or those 
conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his family in 
Afghanistan to coerce Applicant or his family for classified or sensitive information.2 As 
such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant or his family would be specifically 
selected as targets for improper coercion or exploitation. On the other hand, Applicant 
has conceded that his family, like every other family living in Afghanistan, is already at 
risk from terrorists and the Taliban. 
 
While the Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of 
evidence that entities in Afghanistan have targeted Applicant’s family, if such record 
evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier evidentiary burden to mitigate 
foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ 
huge investment of manpower and money in Afghanistan, and Applicant has supported 
U.S. goals and objectives in Afghanistan. Applicant and his family living in Afghanistan 
are potential targets of terrorists and the Taliban because of Applicant’s own activities 
and support for the United States, and Applicant’s potential access to classified 
information could theoretically add some risk to Applicant and his family from lawless 
elements in Afghanistan.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Afghanistan. Applicant is not 
required to report his contacts with family members living in Afghanistan. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has limited application because there is no evidence that Applicant has 
any interest in property or bank accounts in Afghanistan. However, this mitigating 
condition can only fully mitigate the disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 7(e), which 
provides, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” All of Applicant’s assets are in the 
United States.   
  
In sum, Applicant’s connections to family living in Afghanistan are significant and 
greater than his current family connections to the United States; however, his U.S. 
Government employment, performance of linguist duties in a combat zone, and U.S. 
                                            
2There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
  11 
                                                                                                                                             
citizenship are more significant than his connections to his family living in Afghanistan. 
His connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome the 
foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B. Foreign influence concerns 
under Guideline B are mitigated; however, assuming AG ¶ 8(b) is not applicable, 
security concerns are separately mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
   
There are foreign influence security concerns arising from Applicant’s parents, 
brother, and sisters being citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant, his parents, 
and his siblings were born in Afghanistan. He frequently communicates with his mother 
and to a lesser extent his father and siblings in Afghanistan. His family in Afghanistan is 
at a greater risk due to Applicant’s position as a linguist and, if his clearance is granted, 
there is a theoretical increase in the risk to his family in Afghanistan.    
 
The factors weighing towards approval of Applicant’s security clearance are more 
substantial than the factors weighing against its approval. There is no evidence that 
Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or committed 
any security violations. The most significant factor is that Applicant went on more than 
200 combat missions in Afghanistan and made substantial contributions to the U.S. 
military at great personal risk. He wishes to return to Afghanistan and serve with U.S. 
Armed Forces as a linguist and translator, risking his life as part of his duties on behalf 
of the U.S. combat forces in Afghanistan. He is fully aware of the risks to himself, and 
he is also aware that his family members in Afghanistan are at risk from terrorists and 
the Taliban. All these circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will 
recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or 
insurgent group to coerce or exploit him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. 
 
  12 
                                                                                                                                             
Feb. 5, 2008). Applicant does not own property in Afghanistan. When he was 
naturalized as a U.S. citizen, he swore allegiance to the United States. His desire for 
employment as a translator and recommendations from three U.S. Army captains, a 
major, a lieutenant colonel, and three civilians document his outstanding performance 
as a translator, loyalty, trustworthiness, and reliability, and they weigh heavily towards 
approval of his security clearance.  
 
A Guideline B decision must take into consideration the geopolitical situation and 
dangers in Afghanistan.3 The Taliban and terrorists cause Afghanistan to be a very 
dangerous place. The Taliban and terrorists continue to threaten the Afghan 
Government, the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed Forces, and those who 
cooperate and assist the United States. The Afghan Government does not fully comply 
with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many instances. Applicant’s linguist duties 
in Afghanistan will be personally dangerous. The United States and Afghan 
Governments are allies in the war on terrorism. The United States is committed to the 
establishment of a free and independent Afghan Government. Afghanistan and the 
United States have close relationships in diplomacy and trade.      
 
I have carefully assessed Applicant’s demeanor and sincerity at his hearing, and 
I find his statements to be credible. I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in 
Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and 
the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
Applicant has carried his burden and foreign influence concerns are mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
