1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-00138
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On August 20, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B
(Foreign Influence) and Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on
September 1, 2006. 
In a response to the SOR dated September 13, 2012, Applicant admitted all
allegations raised under the two guidelines and requested a determination based on the
written record. The Government compiled a Form of Relevant Material (FORM) on
September 25, 2012. The FORM included a request that I take administrative notice of
certain facts regarding the country at issue (Israel). Applicant did not respond to the
FORM in the time allotted. I was assigned the case on November 29, 2012. Based
upon a review of the exhibits and testimony, security clearance is denied.
2
Administrative Notice
The Government requested administrative notice of certain facts and materials
regarding the State of Israel. It referenced materials issued by U.S. Governmental
entities, such as the U.S. Department of State, to support its request and proffered
summary. Based on those materials and summaries, currently referenced and
previously submitted, I note the following facts:
A parliamentary democracy with a modern economy, the State of Israel achieved
independence in 1948. Since that time, it has faced numerous conflicts with its
neighbors. Several groups operating within Israel have been designated as Foreign
Terrorist Organizations (FTO). United States citizens have been injured or killed by
such terrorists in the past. Moreover, in 1985, a U.S. Naval intelligence employee was
sentenced to life in prison for selling classified documents to Israel. Israel was cited as
an active collector of proprietary information in 2000. In 2009, a U.S. citizen pled guilty
to conspiracy to act as an unregistered agent of Israel after being arrested on suspicion
of giving classified documents concerning military equipment and systems to Israel
between 1979 and 1985. There have been other cases involving the illegal export, or
attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to Israel. In addition,
Israel has become a major global leader in arms exports, and has been known to sell
sensitive U.S. and Israeli technologies to third party countries, most notably China.
Despite these factors, commitment to Israel’s security and well-being has been a
cornerstone of U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East since Israel’s creation 1948. The
two share strong ties related to history, culture, and mutual interests. The two work
together in multiple joint efforts with regard to education, economics, and the war
against terrorism.
Ongoing hostilities with its neighbors has created a volatile atmosphere in and
around Israel. Israel’s military is the Israel Defense Force (IDF). Conscription is
universal for all Jewish people over the age of 18, although exemptions do exist.  Male
citizens are required to serve for at least three years.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 30-year-old business administrator who has worked for the same
defense contractor since April 2011. She was born in Israel to parents of Israeli
citizenship. Applicant has been in the United States since at least 1999. In May 2004,
she became a United States citizen. Since that time, she has considered herself a dual-
citizen of both the U.S. and Israel. She has never attempted to renounce her Israeli
citizenship. In 2007, Applicant married a United States citizen. The couple has since
had two children. In 2009, she earned a bachelor’s degree from an American university.
Since 1998, Applicant has visited Israel about nine times. Each visit varied in
duration from about 11 to 42 days in length. Applicant maintains an Israeli passport. It
was acquired or renewed in April 2007. It expires in April 2017. There is no indication
that she intends to relinquish, destroy, or surrender the foreign passport.
 FORM, Item 4 (Security Clearance Application), at 25 of 39.1
3
The majority of Applicant’s family remains in Israel. Her parents are citizens and
residents of Israel. The reason is unclear, but Applicant noted that for legal reasons, her
father “is no longer a resident of the United States and is no longer able to come here
to even visit.”  Applicant’s sister is a citizen and resident of Israel. Her maternal1
grandmother and paternal grandparents are citizens and residents of Israel. Applicant
has an uncle who is a citizen and resident of Israel who is an official in the Israeli
military. Another uncle who is a citizen and resident of Israel is retired from the Israeli
military. A third uncle is a resident and citizen of Israel. Scant information is provided
about these individuals, including their current positions, their contact with Applicant,
and their involvement with foreign powers.
In relying solely on the written record, little more is known about Applicant and
her contacts abroad. Information regarding her current life in the United States is
equally slight. The FORM contains no interrogatories or other documents that might
tend to supplement the available information.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions, which are required in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to
classified information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead,
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” All available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be and were considered in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching my
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence submitted.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).3
 Id.4
 Id.5
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.6
4
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access4
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily5
a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the6
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline B – Foreign Influence
The concern under Guideline B is that foreign contacts and interests may be a
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest. Consideration should be given to the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to,
5
such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target U.S. citizens to
obtain protected information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
At issue is the State of Israel. The United States and Israel share significant
cultural and historical ties, as well as mutual interests. Although terrorist activity occurs
in Israel, it is not conducted by the state, but rather by FTOs. However, Israel has been
cited as a collector of proprietary information and an illegal recipient of classified
information. Consequently, close scrutiny is warranted.
Applicant’s parents, sister, maternal grandmother, paternal grandparents, and
three uncles are residents and citizens of Israel. One of those uncles is an official in the
Israeli military, while another uncle is retired from that military force. Based on the
limited information available, Applicant maintains contacts with these foreign kin. Such
facts are sufficient to give rise to Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 7(a)
(contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion) and
AG ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, or government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person,
group, or country by providing that information). With disqualifying conditions thus
raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to address how her circumstances are sufficient to
raise one or more of the mitigating conditions noted at AG ¶ 8(a)-(f).
In responding to the SOR with direct admissions without explanations, the record
regarding Applicant’s relationships with her family in Israel is sparse. However, the
Appeal Board has determined that family ties in a foreign country raise a prima facie
security concern that requires an applicant to present evidence in rebuttal, extenuation,
or mitigation sufficient to meet the burden of persuasion that it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance. The few facts disclosed
about these relatives are insufficient to raise any of the mitigating conditions available
under Guideline B. Therefore, none of the Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions, such
as AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and
the interests of the U.S.) and AG ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because
the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government,
or country is so minimal, or the  individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest) are applicable.  
 AG ¶ 9.7
 AG ¶ 10(a). 8
6
Guideline C – Foreign Preference 
The concern regarding foreign preference is that when an individual acts in such
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the U.S., then he or she
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
of the U.S.  Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying7
include the exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  Here,8
Applicant obtained or renewed an Israeli passport in 2007, after becoming a U.S.
citizen in 2004. That act constitutes the exercise of a right or a privilege of foreign
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen. Therefore, Foreign Preference Disqualifying
Condition AG ¶ 10(a) (exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship
after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This
includes, but is not limited to (1) possession of a current foreign passport) applies. With
a disqualifying condition thus raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate security
concerns.
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are provided
under AG ¶ 11:
a) dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or
birth in a foreign country;
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual
citizenship;
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen
or when the individual was a minor;
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant
security authority; and
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.
Here, dual-citizenship is not directly addressed as a concern in the SOR. Rather,
the cited security concern arises from her acquisition of a current Israeli passport after
becoming a United States citizen, and her continued retention of that passport, which
does not expire until 2017. Due to the limited information provided by Applicant in this
proceeding, her intentions with regard to this instrument are unknown. In light of the
scant available facts, there is insufficient information to raise any of the available
mitigating conditions.
 
7
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an
overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and
the whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
In so doing, I note that the available information regarding Applicant, her family, and her
Israeli passport are limited. However, it is clear that Applicant is an educated, 30-year-
old, emigrant from Israel. She has been a U.S. citizen since 2004. She married a U.S.
citizen, and the couple now has two young children. Little more is known of Applicant’s
family life in the United States.
Information regarding Applicant’s Israeli passport and her foreign relatives is
equally scant. In these cases, when disqualifying conditions are raised, the burden
moves to an applicant to provide additional information or evidence tending to mitigate
the security concerns raised. Here, what is known is that Applicant obtained an Israeli
passport in 2007, after she became a U.S., citizen. It is also known that Applicant has
extensive family who are living in and citizens of Israel, including two uncles with current
or former affiliations with the Israeli military. Applicant’s failure to provide additional
information about her passport and about these kin make it difficult to judge them in
terms of the applicable guidelines. This process demands that any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of national security. Here, Applicant failed to mitigate such concerns. Consequently,
clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a-1.g: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
