 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 12-04507 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Elizabeth L. Newman, Esq. 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence. Accordingly, Applicant's request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) setting forth security concerns under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 Applicant signed 
his notarized Answer to the SOR on August 29, 2012, in which he admitted all of the 
allegations under Guideline B. He also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on September 21, 2012, and the 
case was assigned to me on September 27, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
                                                 
1 
See Executive Order 10865 and DoD Directive 5220.6. Adjudication of this case is controlled by the 
Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
October 17, 2012 for a hearing on October 29, 2012. Applicant waived the 15-day 
notice requirement. However, federal government offices were closed on the hearing 
date because of hurricane conditions. On November 2, 2012, a second notice was 
issued, re-scheduling the hearing for November 28, 2012. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Department Counsel offered two exhibits, which I admitted as Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant testified and offered the testimony of two additional 
witnesses. He offered 10 exhibits, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through 
J. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 7, 2012. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 I take administrative notice of facts relating to India. They are set forth in 
documents offered by Department Counsel, marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and 
Applicant, marked as HE II. The facts administratively noticed are limited to matters of 
general knowledge and not subject to reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 42 years old, was born in India. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
science and mathematics, and a master’s degree in business administration.  He came 
to the United States in 1996, at the age of 26, and earned a master’s degree in 
computer science in 1997. He became a U.S. citizen in August 2006. Between 2000 
and 2010, he worked on defense projects for various employers. He is currently a 
subject matter expert for a defense contractor, where he has been employed since 
2010. He held an interim security clearance from 2010 to 2012. His job involves 
financial management of software applications. He married an Indian citizen in 2000. 
She has become a U.S. citizen, and currently works for a defense contractor. Their two 
children, a nine-year-old daughter and a three-year-old son, are native-born U.S. 
citizens. Applicant, his wife, and their children, are not dual citizens of India and the 
United States. When Applicant became a U.S. citizen, he contacted the Indian embassy 
and had his Indian passport cancelled. (GE 1; AE I; Tr. 25-33, 68-69, 95-96) 
 
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of India. His father, 78 years old, is 
retired, but previously worked for an insurance company. His mother, 75 years old, has 
always been a homemaker. Neither has had any connection with the Indian government 
or military. They live in an area of India that has not experienced acts of terrorism. 
Applicant’s parents came to the United States in 2003, when his son was born, and 
stayed with Applicant for about six months. Applicant has traveled to India five times in 
the 16 years he has lived in the United States. He speaks with them once or twice per 
month. They know his occupation, but are unaware that he works for the government or 
is applying for a security clearance. His contact with his parents has decreased in the 
 
 
3 
16 years he has been in the United States. He testified that if he were threatened with 
harm to his parents, he would report the threat to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
(GE1, 2; Tr. 33-37, 70-72) 
 
Applicant is the youngest of five boys. His four brothers are citizens and 
residents of India and all of them live in the same town as his parents. Their 
occupations are bank officer, real estate agent, insurance salesman, and partner in a 
company that manufactures veterinary medicines. Applicant last saw his brothers during 
a visit to India in 2010. He talks with his oldest brother about monthly by telephone, and 
the other three brothers about twice per year. None of his brothers have connections 
with the Indian government or military. None has ever questioned him about his work. 
Three of his brothers are married, and his sisters-in-law are all homemakers. Applicant 
does not expect an inheritance from his parents. Because his brothers are all older than 
him, live in India, and care for his parents, they will receive any inheritance from his 
parents. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 36-41, 63-65, 73) 
 
Applicant's wife’s parents are citizen-residents of India. Their ages are between 
65 and 70. His father-in-law runs a small farm, and his mother-in-law is a homemaker. 
They live in a small village about 150 miles from Applicant's parents. Applicant does not 
speak with them, but his wife talks with them about once per month. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 41-44) 
 
As of the date of the SOR, Applicant owned a house in India valued at $260,000. 
He purchased it as an investment in early 2006, before he became a U.S. citizen. He 
rented it for $500 per month, and was losing money on it. When the real estate market 
crashed, he could not sell the property. Applicant provided documentation showing that 
in August 2012, he transferred his interest in the property to his mother-in-law. His in-
laws are refurbishing it. They will use it when they travel to the city to see Applicant's 
father-in-law’s doctors. (GE 2; AE C; Tr. 49-51, 65-66, 76-77)  
 
Between October 2004 and July 2006, Applicant purchased four undeveloped 
lots in India. The real estate market was on the upswing, returns on investment were 
high, and Applicant could purchase the lots in India at lower cost than in the United 
States. He purchased them for $8,000 to $20,000 each. In August 2012, Applicant 
transferred his interest in the lots to his mother-in-law. (AE D, E, F, G; Tr. 51-53, 65-66) 
 
Applicant's wife has three sisters who are citizen-residents of India.2 Applicant 
testified that if his mother-in-law passed away, she would most likely distribute the 
properties to her daughters in India. He also stated that his wife has no intention of 
accepting a lot through inheritance from her mother. (Tr.65-67) 
 
Applicant also maintained two bank accounts in India. The balance in the larger 
account was $213,000, and the other was $185. He opened the bank accounts in 2010. 
During his security interview in January 2012, he stated that he kept the funds there 
because he might build a home for retirement. However, at the hearing, Applicant stated 
                                                 
2
 Applicant's sisters-in-law through his wife are not alleged in the SOR. 
 
 
4 
he now has no intention of retiring to India. He provided documentation from each bank 
showing that the accounts are closed. He testified that, once he learned that the 
accounts were a security concern, he transferred the funds from both accounts to his 
U.S. bank account. Because of the exchange rate at the time of the transfer, Applicant 
lost almost $30,000 by transferring the funds. (GE 2; AE A, B; Tr. 44-49, 74-78) 
 
Applicant’s salary is $107,000 annually, and his wife’s is $83,000. He owns a 
home in the United States, with a market value of $736,000, with his equity valued at 
$330,000. His savings and checking accounts in U.S. banks amount to approximately 
$284,000. The funds in Applicant's 401(k) account total $206,000. He also owns 
personal goods valued at approximately $257,000. Applicant's son is actively involved in 
school and sports. Applicant voted in the recent elections. He is involved in religious 
and community activities, such as raising funds for veterans and his son’s school. (AE J, 
I: Tr. 53-62, 73-74) 
 
Applicant's witness is a retired Air Force Chief Master Sergeant who has held a 
security clearance since 1976. He oversaw Applicant's work on a daily basis during 
implementation of a defense department finance project. He described Applicant as 
trustworthy, dependable, and an outstanding performer. (Tr. 79-86) Applicant's second 
witness is the president and managing principal of a defense contracting company 
where Applicant worked. He is a reserve Marine officer with 22 years’ active service. He 
stated that he has worked with Applicant and knows him to be an excellent worker who 
is “very highly thought of.” He is also a facility security officer, and in that capacity, 
recommends Applicant as an “absolutely trustworthy individual” who has received 
extensive security training. In his written character reference, the witness described 
Applicant as a man of honesty and integrity, and a “trustworthy individual of 
unquestionable ethical character and strong moral fiber.” (AE H; Tr. 86-96) 
 
 Applicant submitted eight character references (AE H). A friend who has known 
Applicant for 16 years describes him as honest and truthful, and another notes his 
integrity and sincerity. Another friend who has known and worked with him more than a 
decade states that Applicant “always follows rules anywhere from daily traffic rules to 
filing taxes.” Several noted Applicant’s comments on the value he attaches to his 
chosen country of the United States. (AE H) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Republic of Indian (India) 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts.3 India is a sovereign, secular 
democratic republic. It is a multiparty, federal parliamentary democracy with a 
bicameral parliament and a population of approximately 1.2 billion. Since gaining 
                                                 
3
 The facts cited derive from the summary and documents contained in Hearing Exhibit I and II. 
 
 
 
5 
independence in 1947, India has had a tumultuous history, and continues to 
experience terrorist and insurgent activities.  
 
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but serious 
problems remain. The most significant human rights problems are security force 
abuses including extrajudicial killings, torture, and rape. Authorities infringe on citizens’ 
privacy rights, and widespread corruption at all levels of government continues. 
 
India, along with other countries, has been involved in criminal espionage and 
cases involving violation of U.S. export controls. Cases have involved the illegal export, 
or attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India, including 
technology and equipment which were determined to present an unacceptable risk of 
diversion to programs for the development of weapons of mass destruction or their 
means of delivery.4 Governmental and private entities, including intelligence 
organizations and security services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of 
U.S. technology.  
 
Despite past differences regarding India’s nuclear weapons program, and its 
cooperation with Iran in some policy areas, the United States recognizes India as key 
to its strategic interests and has sought to strengthen the relationship. The two 
countries are the world’s largest democracies, both committed to political freedom 
protected by representative government, and share common interests in the free flow 
of commerce, fighting terrorism, and creating a strategically stable Asia.  
 
India remains one of the world’s most terrorism-afflicted countries. India and the 
United States are partners in the fight against global terrorism. A Bilateral 
Counterterrorism Cooperation Initiative was formally launched in July 2010. As of 2011, 
the number of terrorist-related deaths had decreased compared to 2010. The State 
Department’s Anti-Terrorism Assistance program has conducted scores of training 
courses for more than 1,600 Indian law enforcement officials. In May 2011, a U.S.-
India Homeland Security dialogue was established to foster cooperation on numerous 
law enforcement issues. As of November 2012, counter-terrorism cooperation with 
India was described by the Obama administration as a “pillar of the bilateral 
relationship” between the two countries. (HE I, II) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the (AG).5 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
Guidelines. 
                                                 
4
 Cases included in the Government’s documents occurred from 2004 to 2008. (HE I) 
5 
Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
6 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.7 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the 
national interest as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information in favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern related to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 
                                                 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
 
7 
The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 are relevant: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant has ties of affection for his parents, brothers, and parents-in-law, who 
are citizen-residents of India. He is in touch with them once or twice per month. He 
shares living quarters with his wife, who is in contact with her family in India. He has 
visited India five times since 1996. His parents visited him in the United States once. 
Such ties constitute a heightened risk of foreign influence. Disqualifying conditions AG 
¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (d) apply. Although Applicant had substantial financial assets in India, 
he has divested himself of these assets, and ¶7(e) does not apply. 
 
The foreign influence guideline also includes factors that can mitigate security 
concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 
8 
The mere possession of close family ties to persons in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives 
in a foreign country and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that 
relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. Here, Applicant's 
parents, brother, and parents-in-law live in India. The nature of the foreign country 
must be considered in evaluating the likelihood of exploitation. The United States and 
India have a long-standing, stable relationship, and share common strategic goals. 
India is a democracy and a partner in combating terrorism. Given the nature of the 
country involved, it is unlikely that the government would exploit Applicant or his 
relatives based on their relationship. It is unlikely that Applicant would have to choose 
between the interests of his family in India and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 
8(a) applies. 
 
Applicant has strong ties to the United States, which weigh in his favor when 
evaluating the question of exploitation or potential conflicts of interest based on ties to 
India. He has lived in the United States since 1996. He and his wife are naturalized 
U.S. citizens, and his children are native-born U.S. citizens. He speaks with his parents 
and brothers once or twice per month. None of his family members has connections 
with the Indian government or military. His relationships with his Indian family have 
decreased during the 16 years he has been in the United States. Applicant has shown 
that he places U.S. interests above those in India: He has transferred his real estate to 
his mother-in-law. He also closed his bank accounts, even though that resulted in the 
loss of almost $30,000. Applicant has substantial financial assets in the United States, 
including bank accounts, a retirement account, and a home.  He votes, is involved in 
community activities, and is involved in his son’s school activities. I conclude that 
Applicant would choose his strong U.S. ties over his foreign connections, in the event a 
conflict of interest arose. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
 
9 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
Applicant’s foreign contacts represented a security concern because of the 
potential for conflicts of interest and exploitation. However, Applicant's parents, 
brothers, and in-laws have no connections with the Indian government or military. 
Although some areas of the country are plagued by terrorists, Applicant's family does 
not live near such areas. Moreover, the Indian government is engaged in vigorous 
efforts against these groups. Applicant's interactions with his parents and brothers 
have decreased over the years since he has left India. Although Applicant had 
significant land holdings in India, he has divested himself of these properties. He also 
closed his bank accounts there, despite losing almost $30,000 in the process. 
Applicant’s actions demonstrate that he is willing to place the interests of the United 
States above his ties to India.  
 
Applicant's ties to India are outweighed by his strong ties to the United States, 
including his wife, son, and daughter who live here, his personal investment in his 
children’s activities and his community, and his substantial financial assets in the 
United States. Applicant’s history, conduct, and strong U.S. ties show that he is unlikely 
to make decisions that would harm the United States. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised concerning Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
