1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-05404
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Arnold Weinstock, Esq.   
                   
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant was involved in an incident
of domestic violence involving a former girlfriend in January 2012, which ultimately
resulted in a no-contest plea to a misdemeanor offense. He completed all terms of the
court’s sentence in 2013. Given the recency of these matters, he did not present
sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate the concern about his fitness and suitability to
hold a security clearance. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided
against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
On December 19, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a
statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG  were
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace the
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Exhibit 1. 2
 Exhibit 3. Statements in a police report about matters personally observed by the reporting officers in3
execution of their duties are admissible in these proceedings. ISCR Case No. 98-0582 at n.1 (App. Bd. Nov.
12, 1999), citing ISCR Case No. 99-0119 at 2–3 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 1999); ISCR Case No. 96-0575 at 3 (App.
Bd. Jul. 22, 1997) (citations omitted). See Fed.R.Evid. 803(8) (Sometimes called the official record exception
2
consistent with the national interest to grant him access to classified information.  The1
SOR is similar to a complaint, and it detailed reasons for the action under the security
guideline known as Guideline J for criminal conduct.     
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on April 11, 2013. The hearing took place by video teleconference as
scheduled on June 18, 2013. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 26, 2013. 
The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional documentary
evidence. Those matters were timely received on June 24, 2013, and they are admitted
without objections as Exhibits D, E, and F. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleged a single incident of criminal conduct in January 2012. Applicant
made a qualified admission to the allegation and provided a brief explanation. His
admission and explanation are accepted and adopted and incorporated as findings of
fact. In addition, the following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 63-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is employed as a
housekeeper or custodian by a company that provides such services to a military
installation. His company is sponsoring him for a security clearance for this job, which
he began in January 2010. He submitted a security clearance application the same
month; this is his first application for a clearance.  2
There is substantial evidence establishing that Applicant was involved in an
incident of domestic violence involving a former girlfriend in January 2012. Initially, he
was arrested and charged with two offenses stemming from an altercation with his
former girlfriend who was present in his home. The first charge was a misdemeanor
offense of battery/domestic violence; the second charge was a felony offense of
battery/domestic violence constituting strangulation. The police report indicates that the
arresting officers observed large scratches on the former girlfriend’s chest, a large bump
on her head, and bruising around her neck.  3
to the hearsay rule; but in a criminal case, it excludes matters observed by police officers and other law
enforcement personnel). W hile I considered the personal observations of the reporting officer in Exhibit 3, I
have not considered the oral statements of the former girlfriend recorded in the report. At the hearing,
Applicant disputed her account and she was not a witness. Consideration of her oral statements in the report
would deprive Applicant of the opportunity to cross-examine a person providing information adverse to him,
which is contrary to DOD policy. Directive, ¶ 4.3.3. 
 Exhibits E and F. 4
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a5
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.6
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 7
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 8
3
The case was resolved when Applicant pleaded no contest to a single
misdemeanor offense of battery constituting domestic violence. The court’s sentence
included several terms as follows: (1) stay out of trouble while the case was pending; (2)
attend domestic-violence counseling; (3) pay a fine and work off part of the fine by
performing community service; and (4) 180 days in jail, which was suspended for
completion of the sentencing requirements. He completed all terms of the court’s
sentence, to include attending 52 sessions (once per week) of domestic-violence
counseling for first offenders, which he completed in April 2013.  4
At the hearing, Applicant admitted grabbing his former girlfriend, but denied
attacking her, and he stated that her injuries were self-inflicted. He stated that he was
acting out of emotion at the time. He acknowledged that the incident should not have
happened. He no longer associates with her, and he is unaware of her whereabouts. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As5
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An7
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  8
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.12
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 13
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).14
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.15
 AG ¶¶ 30, 31, and 32 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 16
4
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting9
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An10
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate11
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme12
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.13
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.14
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it15
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline J for criminal conduct,  the security concern is that criminal16
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. By its nature, criminal conduct
calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations, which is relevant to the proper handling and safeguarding of classified
information.  
 Exhibit 2 at various pages. 17
 Exhibit 2 at 2. 18
5
The guideline contains several disqualifying conditions. Given the evidence here,
I have especially considered the following disqualifying condition:
AG ¶ 31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted. 
The guideline also contains several mitigating conditions. Given the evidence
here, I have especially considered the following mitigating conditions:
AG ¶ 32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and
AG ¶ 32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity,
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment
record, or constructive community involvement.
Applicant is a 63-year-old employee who is seeking a security clearance for the
first time. He was involved in an incident of domestic violence involving a former
girlfriend in January 2012. It was a fairly serious matter in light of the fact that the initial
charges included a felony offense for strangulation. It was resolved when Applicant
pleaded no contest to a single misdemeanor offense and received what appears to be a
first-offender sentence. He receives credit in mitigation for successfully completing the
sentence in 2013, which included attending 52 counseling sessions for domestic
violence. And he no longer associates with his former girlfriend. He was sincere and
articulate during the hearing, and he expressed the benefits and lessons learned from
the counseling.  
Nevertheless, the evidence in mitigation is not persuasive. First, although the
incident took place in January 2012, he completed serving his sentence just a few
months ago in April 2013. Given these circumstances, the incident is considered
recent; it is certainly not in the distant past. Second, there is documentary evidence of
criminal conduct in 2006, which was also resolved by the court system.  Given these17
circumstances, the 2012 incident cannot be viewed as  a one-time or isolated incident of
criminal conduct. And third, there is documentary evidence of workplace misconduct at
his current job during 2010.  Although the workplace misconduct took place before the18
January 2012 incident, it militates against a conclusion of Applicant having a good
employment record with his current employer, which tends to undermine his evidence of
reform and rehabilitation. The second and third matters—which are not alleged in the
 ISCR Case No. 09-08108 at 6 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2011) (citations omitted). It was unnecessary to make19
findings of fact about the second and third matters because they are considered only for the limited purposes
noted above. 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).20
6
SOR—are considered only for these limited purposes consistent with Appeal Board
caselaw.  19
Applicant’s recent criminal conduct raises doubt about his judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve that
doubt in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the
evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the
unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person
concept.  Having done so, I conclude that Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of20
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
