KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The applicability of a particular adjudicative condition is not necessarily dispoitive. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-05994.a1
DATE: 07/25/2013
DATE: July 25, 2013
In Re:
-----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-05994
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
13, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
1“[T]he conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss
of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances[.]” 
2“[T]he individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts[.]”
2
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On May 6, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative
Judge Martin H. Mogul denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed,
pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (1) whether the Judge made a factual error;
(2) whether the Judge did not properly apply the Guideline F mitigating conditions; and (3) whether
the Judge failed to apply a whole-person analysis.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the
Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision. 
The Judge found: Applicant has ten overdue debts which total approximately $104,000.
Applicant’s financial problems occurred as a result of some periods of underemployment and
unemployment.  He also purchased three investment properties in 2005.  As the economy collapsed,
he attempted to retain the homes, but ultimately all three homes were foreclosed.  He borrowed on
his credit cards in an effort to save his investments.  Ultimately, he could not make the required
payments on the cards.  An adjustable rate mortgage on his primary residence also created problems.
There is a settlement agreement in place on three of the debts, and Applicant has begun paying on
them.  Applicant has considered filing bankruptcy but it is not his preference; and at the present time
he does not have enough money to pay an attorney.  Witnesses and character letters from people who
have known Applicant in his professional and private life speak in laudatory terms about Applicant.
   
The Judge concluded: The evidence has established that Applicant has accumulated
significant delinquent debt.  Applicant testified that his financial problems resulted from several
factors beyond his control, including periods of underemployment and unemployment, and the
collapsing economy that resulted in his three investment properties being foreclosed.  While
Applicant has attempted to act responsibly regarding these debts by making some small payments
on a few of the smaller debts, he is still overdue on more than $100,000 of past debt.  Therefore,
Mitigating Condition ¶ 20(b)1 is not applicable.  Similarly, Guideline F Mitigating Condition ¶
20(d)2 is not applicable because, while Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to repay a few of
the smaller overdue creditors, there is still far too much outstanding debt to allow this mitigating
condition to be applied.  No other mitigating condition is a factor for consideration in this case.
Until Applicant has significantly reduced or resolved his overdue debts in a far more significant
amount, he has not mitigated the financial concerns of the Government. The record evidence leaves
significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance
under the whole-person concept.  Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns.
Applicant argues that the Judge erred by not properly applying the mitigating conditions to
his current financial situation.  He asserts that the Judge did not properly consider the fact that his
3
situation was caused by forces outside of his control.  He also asserts that he has been working
through a challenging financial situation for six years without wavering or faltering.  
The Judge concluded that since Applicant was still overdue on more than $100,000 of past
debt, “I cannot consider this mitigating condition (¶ 20(b)) applicable.”  Similarly, the Judge
concluded with regard to mitigating condition ¶ 20(d), “there is still far too much outstanding debt
to allow this mitigating condition to be applied.”  The Judge’s language is problematic, as it is not
clear what he means by “applying” a mitigating condition.  If he meant that Applicant’s amount of
outstanding debt precluded him from considering at all the applicability of the mitigating conditions,
such analysis would be error.  The size of Applicant’s outstanding or delinquent debt is not a basis
for excluding the applicability (meaning consideration of or analysis of) of otherwise pertinent
mitigating conditions.  On the other hand if the Judge concluded that the presence of so large an
amount of debt precluded him from resolving the case in Applicant’s favor, then the Judge did not
err.  The applicability of a particular condition, mitigating or disqualifying, is not necessarily
dispositive of a case.  Rather, the application of a disqualifying or mitigating condition requires the
exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-
14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 15, 2003).  Even if a Judge concludes that a particular Adjudicative
Guidelines disqualifying or mitigating condition is applicable, the Judge must still consider what
weight is reasonably entitled to be given in light of the other applicable provisions of the
Adjudicative Guidelines and the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-05110
at 4-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2004). 
An option available to the Board would be to remand the case to the Judge to clear up the
ambiguity.  However, the Board determines that remand is not necessary as it can resolve the
ambiguity through reference to other portions of the Judge’s decision.  The Board does not review
isolated sentences of a Judge’s decision.  Rather, when considering and evaluating appeal issues,
the Board considers a Judge’s decision in its entirety to ascertain what findings the Judge made and
what conclusions the Judge reached.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-05645 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 15,
2004).  The Board notes that the Judge discusses various components of mitigating condition ¶ 20(b)
and mitigating condition  ¶ 20(d) in other parts of his decision, which indicates that he did subject
them to some analysis and considered their basic applicability, notwithstanding any other language
suggesting the contrary.  The Board determines that the Judge did not conclude that the size of
Applicant’s debt trumped any consideration of the mitigating conditions.    
Also, remanding the case would serve no useful purpose as the Judge’s ultimate resolution
of it is supported by the record evidence.  The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone
compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
25157 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2008).  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a
whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the
Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence,
is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner
that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd.
3Tr. At 55-56.
4Additionally, the credit report evidence indicates that the debt is now current.  A February 2012 credit report
(Govt. Ex. 4) lists the debt as past due in the amount of $983, and is the basis for the SOR allegation.  A January 2013
credit report (Govt. Ex. 8), however, lists the same account with no showing of an amount past due.  
4
Oct. 12, 2007).  The Judge’s basic conclusion that Applicant has yet to develop a positive financial
track record sufficient to mitigate the Government’s concerns is sustainable on this record.
Applicant asserts that the Judge made a fact-finding error with regard to the status of a debt
listed at subparagraph 1.d. of the SOR.  Applicant asserted below and asserts on appeal that he is
now current on this debt.  The Judge references a letter submitted into evidence by Applicant, and
states that the letter only establishes the principal balance of the debt.  The Judge states, “I cannot
determine from the evidence that Applicant is current on this loan.”  Applicant correctly points out
that the document referred to contains the statement, “Account is Current as of 07-25-2012.”
Applicant also testified that the account was current, and he was keeping it current.3  Given this
evidence, there is no basis for the Judge to conclude that Applicant is not current on the debt.4  The
Board concludes, however, that considering the entire record, this error is harmless.  The allegation
involves a debt arrearage of $983, and Applicant’s total delinquent debt load exceeds $100,000.
Thus, this particular error would not reasonably be likely to change the outcome of the case, given
the extent of the total debt.  
Applicant asserts that the Judge did not adequately consider his “entire body of work”
including his unblemished record and his success as a professional in the whole-person analysis.
He states that the Judge ignored pages of written text describing the positive aspects of his
background.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record unless he
specifically states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009).
Applicant does not overcome that presumption here.  The Judge’s decision contains a section labeled
“Mitigation” wherein the Judge discusses evidence derived from witnesses and character letters
indicating Applicant’s high standards of ethics and professional skill.  While the Judge does not go
into an in-depth analysis of this positive evidence in his whole-person analysis, that analysis does
reference  facts and circumstances surrounding the case, which would necessarily include the
positive evidence discussed under the “Mitigation” section. The Board concludes that the Judge’s
whole-person analysis is sustainable.      
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
5
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E, Smallin                  
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
