KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record
evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-09160.a1
DATE: 07/03/2013
DATE: July 3, 2013
In Re:
-------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-09160
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
November 14, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline
E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
1Applicant testified that she had a “writeup” for bad checks.  Conceding guilt, she testified that someone got
in touch with the military and advised them of the offense.  She also stated that a warrant had been issued for her arrest
because of these checks.  Tr. at 29-31.  
2
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 17, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Mark W. Harvey denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline E are not
at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issue raised on appeal: Applicant has
been employed by a Defense contractor since late 2011.  She has an associate’s degree and served
in the military from 1998 to 2001.  While she was in the military, authorities issued a warrant for
her arrest for writing bad checks.  She received “negative counseling” for that offense.1  Decision
at 2.  Applicant received a general discharge from the military “because she was a single parent
without a satisfactory family care plan.”  Id.  Applicant experienced unemployment following her
discharge.  She and her husband moved to a different state, but he was unable to find work.
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection, and her debts were discharged in the
early 2000s.  The SOR alleged several delinquent debts that had not been resolved by the close of
the record.  These debts were for a mortgage, two repossessed vehicles, medical expenses,
telecommunication services, etc.  Applicant entered into a debt consolidation plan, through which
she has initiated payments on some of her delinquent debts.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge resolved allegations under Guideline E in Applicant’s favor.  He also entered
favorable findings on most of the debts alleged under Guideline F.  However, for nine of the alleged
debts, he concluded that Applicant had failed to demonstrate mitigation.  He stated that she had not
provided documentation that shows she had taken reasonable action to resolve these debts or to show
that she had attempted to communicate with creditors, negotiate settlements, etc.  In the whole-
person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s military service and evidence that she had held a high-
level security clearance without incident or concern.  He also noted her evidence of unemployment
and that she is an excellent worker.  However, he noted her long history of financial problems,
dating back to her years in the military and evidenced by her Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  He concluded
that the evidence she presented during the processing of her application and at her hearing was not
sufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised by the nine debts discussed above.
Discussion 
3
Applicant cites to evidence demonstrating that her circumstances have changed in recent
years, for example that she makes more money than previously.  She argues that the evidence shows
that she has mitigated the security concerns in her case.  A Judge is presumed to have considered
all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-06026 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 5, 2013).
The Judge made extensive findings about Applicant’s financial history as well as about her good
work record, her good security record, etc.  His overall assessment of Applicant’s finances was that
she had significant delinquent debt that she could not demonstrate she had attempted responsibly
to resolve.  This assessment is consistent with the record that was before the Judge.  Applicant has
not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the record evidence, nor has she
demonstrated that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  Applicant cites to evidence not contained
in the record, for example that she was placed on administrative leave following the Judge’s
decision.  We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-08981 at 2
(App. Bd. Apr. 11, 2013).  In any event, the adverse impact of an unfavorable decision is not
relevant in evaluating an applicant’s security-eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-23613 at 4
(App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2013).  Applicant  argues that her bankruptcy action should not have been raised
as a security concern.  However, the Judge resolved an SOR allegation referencing the bankruptcy
in Applicant’s favor.  That she acquired additional debts after her discharge was a proper matter for
the Judge to have considered, even if he concluded that the discharge itself was of limited concern.
We have considered the arguments Applicant put forth in her brief.  In light of the record as
a whole, we conclude that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory
explanation for the decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                  
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
