Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-14 and 17-20, hearing exhibits (HE) I-IV and1
Applicant exhibits (AE) A-G and I-N. GE 17 was admitted for the sole purpose of identifying GE 1-14 for the
record and dealing with their admissibility.  AE N was admitted for the sole purpose of identifying AE A-G and
I-M for the record and dealing with their admissibility. AE I is the same as GE 5.
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20,2
1990), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-02655
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Richard Murray, Esquire, Ian Cronouge, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is denied.1
On 8 August 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E, (Personal
Conduct), B (Foreign Influence), and K (Handling Protected Information).  Applicant2
timely answered, requesting a hearing before the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 11 January 2013, and I convened a
hearing 27 February 2013. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 7 March 2013. 
Section 20B: Foreign Business, Professional Activities, and Foreign Government Contacts. Question 4.3
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the Guideline E allegations, admitted the Guideline B
allegations, and denied the Guideline K allegations. He is the 40-year-old president of
his own company since June 2006, employed as a defense contractor. He previously
worked as an independent contractor for a defense contractor from January 2002 to
June 2006. He seeks to retain the clearance he obtained in approximately May 2005.
On 28 September 2010, Applicant completed a clearance application (GE 1) to
initiate the background investigation required for the periodic reinvestigation of his
security clearance. Applicant answered “yes” to a multi-part question designed to elicit
his past history of contacts with foreign governments or foreign-government officials
within the last seven years.  Applicant reported that between August 2004 and August3
2007, he had contact with his father-in-law, who was during that time the Deputy Chief
of Mission (DCM) of the Haitian Embassy, and that through his father-in-law he met two
ambassadors from the Haitian Embassy. His explanatory comments implied that these
contacts were casual contacts with no official purpose.
Applicant also reported that between October 2009 and September 2010, he had
met with the Haitian Minister of Tourism to pitch marketing ideas aimed at soliciting his
support should Applicant’s company seek international development work in Haiti. He
reported business travel to Haiti in October 2009, to pitch a marketing campaign to the
Minister of Tourism. He also reported making many short business trips to Haiti
between March 2010 and August 2010, to take advantage of increased business
opportunities in Haiti in the wake of the January 2010 earthquake. Although he had
bought the airplane tickets for his next trip to Haiti on 27 September 2010 and was
leaving for Haiti on 29 April (GE 4), his travel comments make no mention of his
impending travel.
Applicant estimated that the Government of Haiti (GOH) would receive and
manage 20 percent of expected international aid—a minimum of $500 million over 18
months and $2 billion over five years (GE 10). Applicant planned a concerted effort to
position his company to take advantage of those potential profits. However, as early as
December 2009, Applicant was aware that he might have to create a subsidiary
company to establish a firewall between his classified U.S. Government contracts and
any potential GOH business he obtained (GE 14). Further, in September 2008, he had
been briefed on his company reporting responsibilities, including an extensive list of
derogatory information and foreign national contacts that were other than casual. He
was also informed that he was required to complete and sign a notification of foreign
The email suggests that Applicant may have submitted travel dates to his FSO at that time, but Applicant did4
not provide the portion of the email originated by him; even though it was on his computer and he could have
provided it. 
Company emails (GE 7) reflect that Applicant and his father-in-law were to travel to Haiti in March 2010 to5
make business contacts with Haitian government officials. Applicant’s business credit card records (GE 4)
reflect that his father-in-law traveled to Haiti in August 2010, on a trip that overlapped Applicant’s business
trip to Haiti the same month. Applicant testified (Tr. 172-179) that his travel to Haiti began in earnest in March
2010, after the January 2010 earthquake, and he traveled to Haiti every 6-8 weeks for the next several
months. His father-in-law went with him as a paid consultant on most of those trips “to the extent possible to
have him help us meet government officials that he knew or his contacts knew.”
Applicant’s February 2010 email thread (GE 7) recommends that Applicant and his father-in-law travel to Haiti6
in March 2010 because Applicant’s father-in-law is the cousin-in-law of the current PM as well as his former
colleague, and can arrange a meeting with the PM. The father-in-law is also able to assess potential target
contacts for furthering company business in Haiti. Applicant’s 15 May 2010 email to other company officials
(GE 6), specifically referenced meeting with the Minister of Tourism, the Chief of Communications, a
representative from the MOJ (who was to arrange a meeting with the Minister of Justice), W orld Bank officials,
and a named individual otherwise unidentified. Applicant’s 19 May 2010 email update (GE 8) refers to meeting
with the COS MOJ (to arrange a meeting with the Minister), meeting with another MOJ official, and meeting
with the former President of Haiti. Applicant’s 28 May 2010 email (GE 9) refers to making additional inroads
to the MOJ, the MOT, and members of the Haitian National Labs (NL), as well as meeting Canadian Embassy
representatives, and United Nations (UN) representatives. A company-prepared slide show presenting the
business opportunities in Haiti (GE 10) touts the “scores of government officials, industrialists, and other
professionals” met by company personnel in Haiti, and records the names and titles of at least 12 GOH
officials, one Haitian industrialist, UN personnel, and Canadian Embassy personnel.
3
travel form 30 days before his expected travel. His travel briefing was renewed in May
2010 (AE G).4
Nevertheless, Applicant failed to report that he had met with the Minister
Consular of the Haitian Embassy in the U.S. to discuss business opportunities in Haiti.
He also failed to report that after his father-in-law’s term as DCM, his father-in-law was
employed—or at least utilized—by Applicant’s company to foster official contacts with
the Haitian government to solicit business with the Haitian government.  He appears5
also to have failed to report business connections made with Haitian businessmen while
in Haiti. And he failed to report that at the time he completed his clearance application,
he was the named defendant in a civil suit filed by his business partner. While these
falsifications were not alleged in the SOR, I have considered them for permissible
purposes, to assess Applicant’s credibility on the falsifications that have been alleged.
Further, Applicant deliberately failed to disclose other extensive contacts with
Haitian government officials in efforts to expand his company’s business in Haiti: the
current Prime Minister (PM), the current and  former President, the Chief of Staff (COS)
and other members of the Ministry of Justice (MOJ), the Minister of Commerce (MOC),
other members of the Ministry of Tourism (MOT) besides the Minister, members of the
Ministry of Culture and Communications (MOCC), and members of the National Police
(NP), among others not listed in the SOR, but contained in Applicant’s records (GE 10).6
Applicant bought his September 2010 tickets the day before he completed his clearance application, and7
traveled the day after his application (GE 3). His passport (GE 2) confirms his entry into Haiti in September
2010 and his exit in mid-October 2010. He bought his November 2010 tickets in late-October 2010 (GE 3) and
his passport (GE 2) confirms his entry into Haiti in mid-November 2010 and his exit about a week later.
4
Applicant claimed (Tr. 190-191; 255) that he listed all his contacts with other
government officials on his clearance application. However, this claim cannot be true
for several reasons. First, Applicant’s facility security officer (FSO) at the time testified
(Tr. 275) that Applicant submitted no supplemental materials with his application, and
the application itself allows the Applicant to add as many supplemental pages as
needed, renumbering the pages so that the finished copy contains sequential
numbering (Tr. 276-277). Second, Applicant himself produced no addendum from his
personal records, or any records he prepared of his contacts beyond what was
contained in his 2010 slide show (GE 10). Finally, Applicant’s current FSO testified (Tr.
Tr 344-345) that the electronic system used by Applicant to complete his clearance
application is a password-protected system with both username and password unique
to the applicant, that the FSO can view, but cannot change the answers on. Applicant’s
answers to Question 3 end on page 42 of 57. His complete answers to Question 4 are
contained on page 43 of 57. His answer to Question 5 begins on page 44 of 57.
Around May 2010, Applicant’s FSO became concerned that Applicant had
engaged in foreign travel for which he had not given prior notice, or reported any foreign
contacts made, as he was required to do (Tr. 64). Between August and November
2010, he traveled to Haiti without prior notice or post-travel reporting. She contacted her
Industrial Security Representative (ISR)(the Government representative who serves as
the liaison between the company FSO and the Government on security issues) who
advised her that it would be better for the Applicant’s clearance as well as the
company’s facility security clearance if the FSO conducted the investigation on the
issues and reported it during Applicant’s periodic reinvestigation, rather than submit it as
an adverse information report. According to the FSO, Applicant did not provide advance
notice of his travel plans, did not report his travel after it was completed, and did not
report his foreign contacts. In late 2010, he denied to her having traveled to Haiti and
denied having met any foreign government officials. When the FSO tried to discuss her
concerns with Applicant, he told her that she was not to make any reports via the
Government’s reporting system without checking with him first. In his view, he was the
owner of the company and the reports would be at his discretion (Tr. 67-87). Faced with
his obstruction, fearful of his possible retaliation, and experiencing health issues
because of the stress of the situation, Applicant’s FSO resigned from her job in early
January 2011 (AE A). She had never been criticized for her work at the company, and
had been recommended for a bonus in June 2010 (GE 18) for her efforts in getting new
employees cleared.
During a November 2010 subject interview with a Government investigator (GE
2), Applicant discussed his October 2009 business trip to Haiti and March and June
2010 business trips to Haiti. However, he failed to disclose travel to Haiti in September
2010 and November 2010.  He again misrepresented his father-in-law’s connection to7
The Government investigator reported (GE 2): “Subject and his father in law (sic) have had contact with8
foreign government or representatives. The subject’s father in law (sic) is a former diplomat from Haiti to the
embassy in the USA. The subject would meet and greet the people his father in law (Sic) was working with
in passing while picking him up.” This recitation is consistent with Applicant’s comments on his clearance
application that suggested those contacts were purely casual. However, those representations ignore the fact
that in November 2010, Applicant’s father-in-law had traveled to Haiti in at least March 2010, August 2010,
and November 2010 to meet with Haitian government officials on behalf of the company.
Applicant’s assertion (Tr. 209) that because his employee was merely a contractor in the Turkish Embassy9
he was not “affiliated” with the Turkish government is not credible. 
5
his business interests by claiming that the only foreign contacts he made through his
father-in-law were casual contacts he made while his father-in-law was employed at the
Haitian embassy, but did not disclose the fact that at the time, Applicant was mining his
father-in-laws current contacts with the Haitian government.  Again, some of those8
misrepresentations were not alleged in the SOR, so I will not consider them on the
merits of the case, but I will consider them on the issue of Applicant’s credibility.
In January 2011, as part of Applicant’s periodic reinvestigation, the former FSO
was interviewed by a Government investigator (AE B). As she had been advised by her
ISR, she reported the results of her investigations, chronicling his unreported business
trips to Haiti, his unreported contacts with Haitian government officials, and his attempts
to regulate her reporting adverse information about company employees. These reports
were required by the National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM).
In July 2011, Applicant was again interviewed by a Government investigator, and
executed a sworn statement (GE 5). Applicant stated that although his company Vice
President was a legal permanent resident (LPR) of the U.S., originally from Turkey, he
had never, to Applicant’s knowledge, been affiliated with the Turkish government
However, Applicant had met his employee in 2004, when the employee worked in the
Turkish Embassy as a contractor (Tr. 207, AE J).  In addition, Applicant’s website (GE9
13) biography of this employee states “[b]etween 1997-2004 [last name] worked at the
Defense Office of the Turkish Embassy in Washington DC as the Assistant to the
Defense Cooperation Attache (DCA).”
In his sworn statement, Applicant also described to the investigator the steps he
was preparing to take to expand his business in Haiti, including establishing the
subsidiary company to provide the necessary firewall between his U.S. government
work and his work in Haiti. He reported traveling to Haiti on business in January 2011,
March 2011 (twice), April 2011, and May 2011 to promote his company and meet with
Government officials. Many of these officials were either officials he had met during his
2010 trips to Haiti (but did not report on his September 2010 clearance application) or
officials whose predecessors he had met, but not reported during his 2010 trips to Haiti.
What he failed to disclose is that, as of 28 February 2011 (GE 12), Applicant’s company
had several business proposals pending action in Haiti. 
6
Applicant’s wife was born in the U.S. while her father was serving his first
assignment as a diplomat in the Haitian Embassy. Over the next 40 years he served
similar assignments on and off, as the ruling government changed. When he was not
connected to the ruling government, he worked as an insurance salesman. When he
served as DCM from August 2004 to August 2007, he renewed his connections to the
Haitian government. Applicant clearly recognized his father-in-law’s value to Applicant’s
business prospects in Haiti before the January 2010 earthquake, but after the
earthquake his father-in-law became nearly invaluable to Applicant’s company. Haiti is
the poorest country in the Western hemisphere, with a long history of official corruption.
The Haitian government was about to gain control over a significant portion of the
billions of dollars in foreign aid being poured into Haiti because of the earthquake, and
Applicant was uniquely positioned to take advantage of that control through his father-
in-law’s connections to the Haitian government. Applicant spent most of 2010 and 2011
attempting to take advantage of those connections.
 
Applicant’s response to these allegations was to attempt to embroil his former
FSO in a civil suit brought by his former business partner in June 2010 over ownership
percentages, and his January 2011 countersuit , alleging her misconduct. That suit was
settled in January 2012 (GE 2), with Applicant buying out his former partner’s interest in
the company for about $500,000. Applicant also attempted disparage his former FSO by
portraying her as an incompetent FSO and disgruntled employee. Yet, he never
criticized her performance while she was an employee, and gave her a bonus for her
performance in June 2010. Further, in addition to claiming that he always gave required
notice of foreign travel to his FSOs, and had his current FSO testify to that fact, neither
he nor she produced any documentation to corroborate that claim. Consequently,
although I admitted GE 19, 20, AE E, F, and K-M, and considered them, I gave them
virtually no weight in making my decision, particularly where my most important
analyses are based on Applicant’s own documents which reveal his misrepresentations
and omissions and his failure to document any of his countering claims from electronic
records in his possession.
Applicant’s work and character references consider him honest and trustworthy,
and recommend him for his clearance. He is very involved in community activities.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for
access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of a clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Guideline B
(Foreign Influence), and Guideline K (Handling Protected Information).
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).10
¶ 34 (g): any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other sensitive information; (h)11
negligent or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by management . . . 
7
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.10
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guidelines E and
K, and Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Throughout 2010, Applicant
deliberately acted to inhibit or prevent his FSO from performing her required duties as
FSO. He failed to give her advance notice of his foreign travel to Haiti, failed to give her
post-travel reports of his travel, and failed to disclose his foreign contacts while in Haiti.
He did so because he did not want anything to interfere with his business prospects in
Haiti, which was a fast-paced environment that he wanted to take advantage of. Others
in the company were aware of his travels and contacts, but that information was not
shared with the FSO. The trips were scheduled on such short notice that the 30-days
notice required by the company could not be met, but Applicant did not give what
advance notice was possible. His conduct prevented his FSO from meeting her
responsibilities under the NISPOM, which violated his responsibilities under the
NISPOM.11
Further, in September 2010, when Applicant’s clearance was up for periodic
investigation, he deliberately misrepresented his father-in-law’s involvement in his
Haitian business pursuits and deliberately under reported his contacts with Haitian
government officials. His FSO at the time could not have altered his clearance
application, so if the other Haitian government contacts are not on his application, it is
because he did not report them.
Applicant continued those misrepresentations and under reporting during a
subject interview with a Government investigator in November 2010. He failed to update
¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel12
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, . . . [or]
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .; (b) deliberately providing false or misleading
information regarding relevant facts to an . . . investigator . . .;
The falsifications and omissions that were not alleged in the SOR may not be considered on the merits of13
the Guideline E allegations, but may be considered as relevant to the Applicant’s credibility, his whole person
analysis, and to establish absence of mistake on the falsifications that were alleged.
¶ 17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification14
before being confronted with the facts;
¶ 35.15
8
his foreign travel and foreign contacts with the investigator when given the opportunity
to do so.  His explanations for not updating his information are not credible.12
Finally, Applicant falsified his sworn statement to the Government investigator in
July 2011 by misrepresenting his company’s presence in Haiti and his Vice President’s
past connection to the Turkish government. These falsifications, along with the
falsifications that were not alleged, were enough to shift the burden to Applicant13
regardless of his alleged interference with his FSO’s official responsibilities.
None of the Guideline E or K mitigating conditions apply. The concealed and
misrepresented information was relevant and material to a clearance decision. Applicant
did not disclose this information until well after his reinvestigation was underway, and he
never was really forthcoming with the Government investigators.  The idea that this14
constitutes a prompt, good-faith disclosure defies credibility. Applicant’s interference
with his FSO’s security responsibilities and his failure to report his foreign travel and his
foreign contacts to his FSO as required were clearly aimed at keeping the Government
uninformed about his foreign business pursuits when he did not have the corporate
structure in place to protect Government interests, and giving him the maximum amount
of flexibility pursuing those foreign business interests while the opportunities were still
fresh. His security violations are recent, they were not due to improper or inadequate
training, and he does not demonstrate a positive attitude toward the discharge of his
security responsibilities.15
The Government has an interest in examining an Applicant’s foreign travel and
foreign contacts in real time to determine if any Government interests are implicated.
The FSO is the Government’s agent in that regard, through contacts with the ISR. The
Government also has an interest in examining all relevant and material adverse
information about an applicant before making a clearance decision. The Government
relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse information in a timely fashion, not
when they perceive disclosure to be prudent or convenient. Further, an applicant’s
willingness to report adverse information about himself provides some indication of his
willingness to report inadvertent security violations or other security concerns in the
future, something the Government relies on to perform damage assessments and limit
the compromise of classified information. Applicant’s conduct suggests he is willing to
¶ 6.16
¶ 7 (a).17
9
put his personal needs ahead of legitimate Government interests. Accordingly, I resolve
Guidelines E and K against Applicant.
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline B, and
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns. Under Guideline B (Foreign
Influence), an applicant’s foreign contacts and interests may raise security concerns if
the individual 1) has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, 2) may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in
a way contrary to U.S. interests, or 3) is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest. Foreign influence adjudications can and should consider the identity of
the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is
located—including, but not limited to, whether the country is known to target U.S.
citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.16
Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications for access to protected information requires
careful assessment of both the foreign entity’s willingness and ability to target protected
information, and to target expatriates who are U.S. citizens to obtain that information,
and the individual’s susceptibility to influence, whether negative or positive. More
specifically, an individual’s contacts with foreign family members (or other foreign
entities or persons) raise security concerns only if those contacts create a heightened
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.17
Applicant’s father-in-law worked for the GOH, on and off for 40 years, during past
and present iterations of the Haitian government. Applicant sought to use his father-in-
law’s contacts with the Haitian government to meet any government official who could
help Applicant position his company at the front of the line for Haitian contract work with
one of most corrupt government’s in the Western hemisphere. Put another way,
Applicant curried the influence his father-in-law could bring to bear on the Haitian
government. He did so without creating the corporate entities necessary to protect the
Government’s interests. He could not help but be influenced by the prospect of the
significant financial rewards represented by his preeminent position with the Haitian
government. I resolve Guideline B against Applicant.
Ultimately, this case comes down to the credibility of the Applicant and his former
FSO. I considered both their demeanor and their possible motives to misrepresent
themselves, both before and during the hearing. I found her credible and him not.
Disgruntled or not, Applicant’s evidence that the FSO had a possible financial interest in
the outcome of the civil suit or a reason to wish his company ill was unconvincing. On
the other hand, Applicant had clear motives to want to keep information about his
foreign travels, foreign contacts, and foreign business interests from his FSO and the
Government: his share of between $500 million and $2 billion of disaster aide to be
administered by the GOH, a government to which Applicant had inside access that he
was more than willing to exploit.
10
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-h: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3. Guideline K: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
