 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06221 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline E (personal 
conduct), but failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 29, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 7, 2012, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 22, 2012, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated April 9, 2013, was provided 
to him by letter dated April 10, 2013. Applicant received the FORM on April 11, 
2013. He was given 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not submit any information within the 30 
days after receipt of copy of the FORM. The case was assigned to me on June 
21, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c, and denied the remaining 
allegations in SOR ¶ 1.d and SOR ¶¶ 2.a through 2.c. He also provided an 
accompanying explanation for each of his answers. After a thorough review of the 
record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old logistics manager, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since April 2007. His December 2010 e-QIP indicates that he was 
granted a secret security clearance in July 1981 and a top secret security 
clearance in September 2003. (Items 4 and 5.) 
 
Applicant married in May 1984 and separated in July 2010. During 
Applicant’s February 2011 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview, he 
stated that final action on his divorce decree was pending. Applicant also stated in 
a December 16, 2011 letter to a creditor that he has “since completed (his) 
divorce.” (Items 3 and 7.) The FORM does not provide a final divorce date. 
Applicant has four adult children. (Item 4.) He served in the U.S. Air Force from 
November 1980 to December 2000, and retired with 20 years of honorable 
service as an enlisted person. (Item 4.) The FORM does not contain any further 
information about Applicant’s 20 years of military service. 
 
Financial Considerations   
 
The SOR alleges four separate debts totaling $61,282. They are: SOR ¶ 
1.a – credit card collection account for $9,828; SOR ¶ 1.b – credit union charged-
off account for $8,782; SOR ¶ 1.c – home equity loan charged-off account for 
$42,369; and SOR 1.d – cable TV collection account for $303. Although the $303 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.d, apparently belonged to Applicant’s ex-wife, he stated 
that he paid that account “to clear (his) credit records.” Applicant documented his 
payment, dated February 10, 2012. This account is resolved. (Item 3, pages 14-
16.) 
 
However, the remaining three accounts are unresolved. Applicant attributes 
his financial problems to a contentious divorce. He stated in his February 2011 
OPM interview that he made the conscious decision not to pay any of his joint 
debts until after their divorce was final. He stopped paying joint accounts “either in 
7/2010 or 6/2010” stating that he did not want his ex-wife to reap the benefits of 
him making timely payments on their joint accounts. (Items 3 and 7, pages 3-4.) 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant acknowledged that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.c were delinquent and past-due. He made several unsuccessful 
attempts to settle these three accounts, primarily in 2011. Regarding the creditor 
in SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant sent an e-mail dated February 10, 2012 to the creditor 
offering to settle the debt, which had increased to $9,991 debt as of January 11, 
2012, for $4,000. There is no record of further correspondence between Applicant 
and this creditor. (SOR answer.) The FORM contains no documentation that this 
debt has been resolved. 
 
Regarding the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.b, Applicant sent a letter dated 
December 16, 2011 with a $200 check towards payment on the debt which was 
then $8,782. He stated that the check was not cashed or returned and “[b]ranch 
representatives deny they have an open account and state that it has been 
charged off but can’t provide me a current owner of the account.” (SOR answer.) 
The FORM contains no documentation that this debt has been resolved. 
 
Regarding the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.c, Applicant stated that this debt was a 
home equity loan on his former home and he asserts that after the bank 
foreclosed on his home, “the disputed bill should now be between (home equity 
loan creditor) and (bank).” He provided two offers to settle this account from the 
home equity loan creditor dated June 23, 2011 and September 29, 2011 in the 
respective amounts of $8,035.45 and $4,017.73. Applicant stated, “If the amount 
owed was legit they would have never offered and I would have accepted.” (SOR 
answer.) The FORM contains no documentation that that this debt has been 
resolved. 
 
In short, the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c remain unresolved. 
The FORM contains no evidence that Applicant sought financial counseling or 
professional help in resolving his financial difficulties. 
 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Personal Conduct 
 
Three separate falsifications are alleged under this concern. The SOR 
states that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose a 1983 DUI offense when he 
completed his most recent December 2010 e-QIP and two separate security 
clearance applications (SF-86s) in October 2003 and in May 2004.1 Applicant 
denied that he intentionally falsified these security clearance applications. 
Applicant explained in his SOR answer that he was pulled over on base in 1983 
and was taken to the base hospital for a blood alcohol test (BAC). His BAC test 
results were .068 and at that time a BAC of .10 was required to qualify as a DUI. 
Applicant stated that he was never disciplined as a result of this incident nor was 
he ever charged with drunk driving.  
 
Department Counsel asserts that Applicant’s SOR answer is inconsistent 
with his February 2011 OPM interview statement. I do not concur with this 
characterization, but rather view Applicant’s SOR answer as a more concise 
explanation of the one contained in his February 2011 OPM interview statement. 
Applicant’s statement that he listed this incident on prior investigations is certainly 
plausible given the fact that he was granted and has successfully held a security 
clearance since 1981.  
 
Problematic is that fact that the FORM contains no primary source 
documents pertaining to a 1983 DUI such as a base police report, preliminary 
investigation report, or report of disciplinary action that would have been prepared 
at the time, particularly if Applicant were charged or disciplined. The only source 
of a 1983 alcohol-related incident in the FORM is the investigator’s summary of 
Applicant’s February 2011 OPM interview. The facts in that interview were 
provided by the Applicant and are at best the Applicant’s attempt to recall and the 
agent’s attempt to record and summarize an incident that took place 28 years 
earlier. Even though Applicant “adopted” the agent’s summary of his February 
2011 interview, it lacks key details such as date, time, circumstances, and 
disciplinary follow-up. Absent source documents, I accept Applicant’s explanation 
of what occurred and that he did not deliberately falsify his answers.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying conditions 
                                                          
1
 The copy of Applicant’s October 2003 SF-86 in the FORM does not have a signature 
page certifying that his answers were true, complete, and correct to the best of his knowledge. 
(Item 11.) 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with 
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG 
¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, 
logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have 
avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”2 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified 
information. Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a 
disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion for 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case 
No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).3 
                                                          
2
 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a 
reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary 
evidence in the record.” ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ 
E3.1.32.1). “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing 
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being 
supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 
(1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
3 “
The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable 
and unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent 
provisions of the Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion 
under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 
1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, 
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can 
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts 
to generate funds. 
 
Applicant’s indebtedness has been ongoing since 2010, around the time he 
decided not to pay his joint debts during his separation and divorce. The FORM 
contains insufficient evidence that three out of the four debts alleged have been 
resolved. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR 
Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can 
normally meet the substantial evidence standard and the 
government’s obligations under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent 
allegations. At that point, the burden shifts to applicant to establish 
either that [he or] she is not responsible for the debt or that matters 
in mitigation apply. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in 
his credit reports and in his OPM interview.  
 
The evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole,4 I conclude none of the five 
financial considerations mitigating conditions fully apply. However, partial 
application of the mitigating condition in ¶ 20(b) is warranted as a result of 
Applicant’s separation and divorce. To receive full credit under this mitigating 
condition, the Applicant must demonstrate that he also “acted responsibly under 
the circumstances.” Although, not paying bills to preclude an estranged spouse 
from benefiting from your responsible behavior is perhaps a behavior not 
                                                          
4
  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-
22173 at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for AG ¶ 20(a), all debts 
are considered as a whole. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
uncommon in divorce; it is nevertheless not responsible behavior. Creditors still 
expect payment and as Applicant found out, his failure to make continued 
payments adversely affected his credit standing. Additionally, Applicant’s limited 
attempts to settle with his creditors two or three years ago without proof of 
resolution does not qualify as a “good-faith effort to repay his creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts” as contemplated in ¶ 20(d). Applicant presented limited 
evidence before receipt of his FORM documenting efforts taken to contact 
creditors and no evidence after receipt of FORM to resolve his debts.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process.  
 
The Government’s evidence does not establish that Applicant deliberately 
falsified his October 2003, May 2004, December 2010 security clearance 
applications. As noted, there are no source documents that address the purported 
1983 DUI, and the FORM does not contain an October 2003 SF-86 signature 
page. Based on Applicant’s denial and explanation, I find that Applicant did not 
deliberately falsify his security clearance applications as alleged. Having reached 
that conclusion, there is no need to discuss disqualifying or mitigating conditions 
under this concern. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant did 
not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision. In reaching this conclusion, the whole-person concept was given due 
consideration and that analysis does not support a favorable decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
