 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-09258 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 1, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 20, 2013, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on May 31, 2013. The FORM was mailed to Applicant on 
 
2 
 
 
June 4, 2013. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted his response to the FORM on 
June 28, 2013 (Response). The case was assigned to me on July 17, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. Those 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He is divorced and has two adult children. He has 
worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since October 2010. He received 
a bachelor’s degree in 1997. He was unemployed from March 2009 to October 2010. 
He served on active duty in the Navy from 1982 to 1986 and received an honorable 
discharge.1  
  
 The SOR lists two delinquent debts, the first, a home equity loan in the amount of 
about $60,000 (SOR ¶ 1.a), and the second, a mortgage account with a past due 
amount of about $45,000 on a total mortgage amount of over $152,000 (SOR ¶ 1.b). 
These debts are supported by credit reports dated May 2013, September 2012, and 
November 2010.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties resulted from his 18 months of unemployment. He 
exhausted his savings while searching for new employment. When he could not make 
his current mortgage payments, he sought a loan modification from his mortgage 
holder, but it was denied in May 2010. In August 2011, he retained a law firm to assist 
him in negotiating with his two creditors to secure loan modifications. The record reflects 
that the last correspondence concerning his home mortgage modification was dated 
January 2013. There is no record evidence showing any modification to Applicant’s 
home equity loan. The last correspondence is dated September 2012 and shows a new 
servicing creditor for the loan. In his FORM Response, Applicant claims he has 
sufficient funds to qualify for a modified mortgage loan; however, he failed to provide 
any documentation to support that assertion.3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
1 Items 5-6. 
 
2 Items 1, 7-9. 
 
3 Items 4, 6; Response. 
 
 
3 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
 
4 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Both of Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide 
sufficient evidence to show that the debts are unlikely to recur. I find mitigating condition 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant provided evidence that he was unemployed for 
about 18 months, which contributed to his financial problems. However, in order for this 
mitigating condition to fully apply, Applicant must demonstrate responsible behavior in 
light of the circumstances. Although he hired a law firm to negotiate a home mortgage 
modification, nothing resulted from that effort. Additionally, there is no evidence of any 
 
5 
 
 
action to resolve the home equity loan. This demonstrates a lack of responsible 
behavior. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant failed to present evidence of 
financial counseling, and there is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial problems 
are being resolved or under control because both debts remain unpaid. There is no 
evidence that he has made a good-faith effort to pay the remaining debts. I find AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s past military 
service and his unemployment. However, he has not shown a track record of financial 
stability. The record lacks evidence that Applicant has made an overall good-faith effort 
to resolve his debts. Therefore, he failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
