 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07409 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
July 29, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had five delinquent debts totaling $180,301, identified on the Statement 
of Reasons (SOR). While his student loan debt of $156,000 is in good standing, 
Appellant has not addressed his additional $24,301 in delinquent consumer debt. He 
failed to produce sufficient documentation that his debts have been addressed or are 
otherwise satisfied. He has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 13, 2012, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the Statement of Reasons on July 20, 2012, (Answer 1), and 
on October 9, 2012, (Answer 2). Applicant elected to have the case decided on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing in Answer 2. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on May 6, 2013. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was received by Applicant on May 14, 2013. He was afforded 30 days 
to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
concerns. Applicant did not submit any information within the time period of 30 days 
after receipt of the copy of the file of relevant material. The case was assigned to me on 
July 24, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 50 years old. He served on active duty in the Marine Corps from April 
1981 to August 1985. He is divorced and has one adult child. He has been working for 
his current employer since October 2006. (Item 4.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. The SOR 
identified five delinquent debts totaling $180,301. Applicant’s debts appear in credit 
reports entered into evidence. Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 
1.d. He denied SOR allegation ¶ 1.e. (Answer; Items 3, 5, 6.)  
 
Applicant attributes his debts to being laid off by his employer in approximately 
October 2006. He listed on his security clearance application that he has been 
employed by a Defense contractor since October 2006. He failed to provide evidence of 
the scope and duration of his unemployment. (Item 4; Item 7.)  
 
His debts are as follows: 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent consumer account in the amount of $1,991 
(as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a). This debt has been delinquent since March 2008. It remains 
unsatisfied. (Item 5; Item 6.)  
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent consumer account in the amount of $3,011 
(as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b). This debt has been delinquent since March 2008. It remains 
unsatisfied. (Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent consumer account in the amount of $4,923 
(as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c). It has been past due since April 2008. This item has been 
charged off. It remains unsatisfied. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a delinquent consumer account in the amount of 
$14,376 (as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d). It has been past due since February 2011. This debt 
remains unsatisfied. (Item 5; Item 6.)  
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e alleges that Applicant is indebted on student loans that were reported 
in March 2011 to be in “deferred status/not in repayment” in the approximate amount of 
$156,000. Appellant’s credit report of March 10, 2011, indicated: “student loan not in 
repayment” and “payment deferred.” Applicant denied this allegation and explained that 
this loan is currently in repayment with the creditor. Applicant’s credit report dated May 
23, 2012, lists all of Applicant’s student loans in “I1” status, indicating Applicant has 
never missed a payment. On his personal financial statement, he indicated he was 
paying $435 per month on his federal student loans and $70 on his state student loans. 
Applicant is acting responsibly with respect to his student loans. (Item 5; Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement indicated he had $36 available after 
paying his monthly living expenses and student loan payments. He presented no 
evidence that he has utilized credit counseling services. (Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant provided no additional evidence concerning the quality of his 
professional performance, the level of responsibility his duties entail, or his track record 
with respect to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. 
He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good 
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, 
demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a 
hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems since at least 2008, when he became 
delinquent on several of his accounts. He has failed to present any evidence that he is 
addressing the debts in SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
5 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant indicated that his financial problems were the result of being laid off 
from work. However, he failed to indicate the duration of his unemployment or that he 
acted responsibly once he found a new job. Further, he has only $36 available after 
meeting his monthly expenses. Therefore, I cannot conclude that future financial 
delinquencies are unlikely to occur. His financial issues are recent and ongoing as he 
has failed to address the debts identified in SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant explained that he incurred debts as a result 
of unemployment. This was a circumstance beyond his control. However, he identified 
on his security clearance application that he was laid off in October 2006, and he 
started his new position in October 2006. The duration and impact of the unemployment 
on his financial situation is unclear. Further, his debts date back to 2008, not 2006. To 
be fully applicable AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual demonstrate that he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has acted responsibly with 
respect to the repayment of his student loans. He was granted a deferment on his loans 
when he was having financial difficulties, instead of lapsing into delinquency. When the 
deferment expired, he responsibly resumed repayment of his student loans. However, 
he has not acted responsibly with respect to his remaining $24,301 in consumer debt. 
There is no evidence that he has addressed his consumer accounts.  
 
 
6 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant attended financial counseling. Further, there 
is little indication that four of Applicant’s five delinquent accounts are being resolved or 
are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve his delinquent 
consumer debts totaling $24,301. He presented no evidence of any payments or 
progress toward the settlement of his consumer debts. As noted earlier, he has acted 
responsibly with respect to his student loans and is in good standing on those accounts. 
The record fails to establish that any payments have been made on his consumer 
debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable to allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d.: but does 
apply to ¶ 1.e. 
 
 Applicant failed to present evidence to show that he was in the process of 
formally disputing any of his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is inapplicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant failed to address $24,301 in delinquencies. While he has experienced a 
period of unemployment in 2006, he failed to demonstrate how that brief period of 
unemployment impacted his financial situation over six years later. Accordingly, 
continuation of these circumstances is highly likely, and the potential for coercion, 
exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
 
7 
 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial 
Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
