 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08374 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines F, financial 
considerations, and E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 4, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F, financial 
considerations, and E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 3, 2013, and February 14, 2013. His 
statements about whether he wanted a hearing or to have his case decided on the 
written record were ambiguous. Department Counsel contacted Applicant on July 24, 
2013, and he confirmed he did not want a hearing.1 On March 28, 2013, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant, and it was received on June 3, 2013. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not provide additional information. The case was assigned to me on July 
29, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 29 years old. He is a high school graduate and has attended college, 
but has not earned a degree. He enlisted in the Navy in April 2006. He was discharged 
in December 2007 with a General Discharge under Honorable Conditions due to 
misconduct. He has worked for his present employer, a federal contractor, since 
October 2009. 
 
 Applicant provided documented evidence that he paid and resolved the debts 
listed in SOR ¶ 1.b ($362) and ¶ 1.c ($327).2 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($22,519) is for a vehicle loan. Applicant explained in his 
Answer to the SOR that in 2008 his mother wrecked his car. He attempted to work out 
car payments with the creditor, but was only able to lower the monthly payment for two 
months. He did not have a stable living arrangement at the time, but later was able to 
get a stable job. He stated: “Since then, I have been making payments. I never knew 
anything was on my credit because I had different phone numbers and was not stable 
after getting out of the military.” He went on to say: “On February 11, 2013, I finally paid 
off the [creditor’s] charge.”3 Applicant did not provide a document to support that this 
debt has been paid. He provided a document from the same creditor dated January 17, 
2013, noting he had made a $450 payment toward a loan that now reflected a balance 
of $5,460. It is unclear if this is the same loan as alleged or a different loan.4 Applicant’s 
credit report, dated March 20, 2013, reflects the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a as being charged off 
in March 2009.5  
                                                          
1 Department Counsel’s memo.  
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Item 3. 
 
5 Item 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant completed his security clearance application (SCA) on November 9, 
2009. In response to Section 13A, requesting information about Applicant’s employment 
activities, he failed to disclose his employment with Company X from April 2009 to May 
2009. In response to Section 13C, requesting information about whether Applicant had 
ever been fired from a job; quit a job after being told he would be fired; left a job by 
mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct; left a job by mutual 
agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance; left a job for other reasons 
under unfavorable circumstances; or been laid off from a job by an employer, Applicant 
answered “no,” when in fact he was terminated by Company X in May 2009.  
 
 Applicant’s explanation for failing to disclose his employment and subsequent 
termination with Company X was that he was “on a 90 day probation and could have 
been let go at any time.”6 He stated the reason he was let go was for not following 
directions. He said his boss told him to “apply for another job in the company because 
they were about to let you go.”7 A document from Company X dated May 15, 2009, 
titled Employee Separation Questionnaire, indicates Applicant was “involuntarily 
terminated” and he was “Not Rehireable.” The reasons for the termination were due to 
insubordination, failure to follow directions, and performance.8  
 
 In response to interrogatories asking Applicant if he was employed with 
Company X from April 2009 to May 2009, he responded: “well I spoke with an 
investigator and told them that I worked from March until May 2009. I told them that I 
worked for [Company X], don’t remember, which investigator.” Applicant was asked in 
interrogatories to explain why he failed to list his employment with and termination from 
Company X. He stated:  
 
I told investigator about companies and listings of living that I may recall, 
and explained that it may not be accurate because I moved around a lot. 
Investigator said give him a close date and we can check on it later. 
Whatever was left out he or another investigator will ask later.9  
 
 In another response he stated: “I told one investigator that I was laid off from 
[Company X]. Later the company said I can apply later, but for another position.”10 
Applicant failed to provide an answer to why he did not disclose he was employed by 
Company X or that he was terminated. Applicant was interviewed by a government 
investigators on September 25, 2009; October 5, 2009; October 7, 2009; and October 
                                                          
6 Item 3. 
 
7 Item 3. 
 
8 Item 7.  
 
9 Item 6. 
 
10 Item 6. 
 
4 
 
 
12, 2009. There is no information that Applicant disclosed during the interviews that he 
worked for Company X. I find he deliberately failed to disclose this information.11 
 
 In response to Section 26 on Applicant’s SCA that asked if he had any debts that 
had been over 180 days delinquent or if he had any that were currently 90 days 
delinquent, he responded “no.” Applicant’s explanation for failing to disclose his 
delinquent debts was: “After I found out about the information in [SOR ¶¶] 1.a-1.c above 
I started making arrangements to pay bills. I told the investigators and one of them said 
[as] long as you are working on the situation, you should be okay.”12 Applicant indicated 
in his Answer to the SOR that in November 2009, when he became aware of the debts 
in the SOR, he paid the bills quickly. His supporting documents reflect he did pay SOR 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.c relatively quickly. Applicant was aware of the car loan debt, and he 
deliberately failed to disclose it.13  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
11 Item 6. 
 
12 Item 3. 
 
13 Item 3. 
 
5 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had three delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. I find 
the above disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant provided documented proof that he resolved the small debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b and 1.c. He stated he paid the larger debt in SOR ¶ 1.a, but failed to provide proof 
the debt is paid or resolved. He provided a document from the same creditor, but it still 
shows a balance on a debt and there is insufficient evidence to determine if this is the 
same debt as alleged. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the debt is unresolved. 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to unemployment, an unstable living situation, 
and his mother wrecking his car. These were conditions beyond his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b) Applicant must show he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant paid two small debts, but failed to provide sufficient evidence 
that he is addressing the remaining large debt. I find AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies. 
No information was provided about whether Applicant has received financial counseling. 
There is evidence that Applicant is paying a debt to the same creditor as in SOR ¶ 1.a, 
but there is insufficient evidence to conclude this is the debt alleged. At this time, there 
are not clear indications the problem is being resolved or under control. I find AG ¶ 
20(c) does not apply. Applicant made good-faith payments on two of his delinquent 
debts. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to those debts. Applicant did not dispute any of the debts. AG 
¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
7 
 
 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
I considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 that could raise a security 
concern and concluded the following has been raised: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant was discharged from the Navy with a General Discharge under 
Honorable Conditions due to misconduct. There is insufficient evidence about the 
reason for his discharge. I find none of the above disqualifying conditions apply to this 
allegation. Applicant was first interviewed by a government investigator in September 
2009 and completed his SCA in November 2009. His employment was terminated by 
Company X in May 2009. Applicant failed to provide a credible explanation for why he 
failed to disclose his employment and his termination. I find he deliberately omitted this 
relevant information from his SCA as was required. Applicant was aware that his mother 
wrecked his car and he was responsible for paying the car loan. The loan was charged 
off. Applicant deliberately failed to disclose this debt as was required on his SCA. The 
above disqualifying conditions apply. I find in favor of Applicant that he was unaware of 
the two smaller debts on his credit report.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
 
8 
 
 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 None of the above mitigating conditions apply. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to provide an explanation for his failure to disclose his employment and 
termination from Company X. He did not disclose it to investigators and when 
specifically asked about it in interrogatories he failed to provide a reasonable 
explanation. In 2008, after Applicant’s mother wrecked his car, he knew he owed the 
remaining balance on the car loan. The car loan was charged off in 2009. Contrary to 
his claim, Applicant failed to provide sufficient proof to substantiate that he did not know 
that he had a debt over 180 days or 90 days and therefore did not have to disclose any 
information. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 29 years old. He experienced some unemployment and unstable 
living conditions after being discharged from the Navy. He resolved two small debts, but 
did not provide sufficient proof regarding the large car loan debt. He failed to disclose 
this debt and his employment with and termination by Company X on his SCA. The 
evidence supports a determination that Applicant’s failure to disclose this information 
 
9 
 
 
was deliberate. Applicant has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, 
personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph  1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph  1.b:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph  1.c:   For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph:  2.a:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.b-2.d:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
