Applicant submitted a 5-page attachment with his answer to the amended SOR.      1
The Government submitted eleven items in support of its case.      2
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ISCR Case No. 11-11459
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On December 12, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). On March 20, 2013, an amended SOR was issued under
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,1
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered both SORs and requested an administrative
determination in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated April 17, 2013.  Applicant received the FORM on May 8, 2013.2
He did not submit additional information. I received the case assignment on June 21,
2
2013. Based on a review of the case file, I find Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns raised. Security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations under Guideline F,
¶¶ 1.a through 1.i. with explanations. He admitted the allegations under Guideline E,  ¶¶
2.a and 2. b. (Item 4). 
Applicant is 37 years old. He is an employee of a defense contractor. He
graduated from high school, and received his undergraduate degree in December
2000.  He married his second wife in 2004. He has a son, age 6, and 2-year-old twin
daughters. (Item 5) Applicant has been employed with his current employer since April
2010. On May 26, 2011, he completed a  security clearance application. (Item 5)
Applicant has held a top secret security clearance since July 2006. (Item 10)
 The SOR lists nine delinquent debts including  two student loans, and collection
accounts. The total amount is approximately $31,135.00. The credit reports at Items 7-9
confirm them. Applicant did not disclose any adverse information concerning his
finances on his May 2011 security clearance application. (Item 5) When interviewed by
DOD investigators about any debts either currently 90 days delinquent or 180 days
overdue within the last seven years, Applicant responded “No”. When the investigator
confronted Applicant with a June 2011 credit bureau report listing 13 delinquent debts
on the report, Applicant stated that the accounts became delinquent in 2007 or 2008.
He explained that he was struggling financially due to the birth of his first child and
having to reduce expenses and give up his previous life style. Applicant stated that he
intends to pay his creditors. 
Applicant admitted to the investigator that he did not list the delinquent debts on
his security clearance application or respond correctly to the investigator about any
delinquent debts due to fear that the adverse information would negatively affect his
existing clearance. On the answer to the amended SOR, Applicant admitted that he
falsified material facts on his security clearance application and in his 2011 interview.
(Item 11) He stated that he was remorseful and the falsification of facts concerning his
financial record was a mistake that he deeply regrets.
Applicant completed DOHA 2012 interrogatories and provided documentation
that he was addressing the delinquent accounts in SOR 1.a through 1.g in a debt
settlement program, and the two student loans, allegation 1.h and 1.i, were under a
forbearance until March 7, 2013. At that time, he would begin making payments on the
student loans. 
Applicant’s March 2013 credit report reflects six creditors that were owed a total
of approximately $26,218.00 for delinquent debt. This did not include his two student
loan accounts that had just been released from forbearance status. (Item 9) The two
student loans total about $102,000.
3
Applicant submitted documentation that in November 2012, he obtained the
services of a debt settlement program to settle the delinquent accounts alleged in SOR
1.a through 1.g. The seven delinquent debts are in the process of being settled by the
company. Applicant pays $431 each month. The term is for 43 months. He submitted
documentation that he paid the necessary amount in December 2012. He did not
provide evidence of any payments made after that date. It is not clear from the record
which, if any, accounts have actually been settled.
Applicant stated that the two student loans (SOR 1.h and 1.i) total $102,000. He
has scheduled monthly payments with a Direct Loan Program. The monthly payment is
$1,031.11. He did not provide any documentation that he started payments. His
personal financial sheet lists a monthly payment of $568. Since March 2013, the two
student loans were removed from forbearance status, there is no record of any actual
payments.
Applicant stressed that he and his wife paid non-SOR delinquent debts from
2007-2011.  He acknowledged his mistakes and realizes that he has a way to go, but
he has provided for his family and managed to pay or settle some delinquent debts
Applicant is current with his mortgage. Applicant is current with his car payment.
Since 2008, he has not accrued any additional unsecured debt. 
Applicant has a monthly net income of approximately $5,435.08.  After deducting
total monthly expenses of $4,985, he has a net monthly remainder of approximately
$449. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
4
The United States Government must present evidence to establish controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or
proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a3
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  4 5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
5
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant has delinquent debts of approximately $31,135.00. Two student loans
totaling about $102,000 are also part of his debt. His admissions and credit reports
confirm these debts. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions
(FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c)
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is
left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
since 2008 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Consequently,
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. Applicant did not provide information to prove that the delinquencies
were beyond his control and that he acted responsibly. This mitigating condition does
not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) partially applies. Applicant produced some
evidence that he obtained the services of a debt settlement company and provided
documentation that he paid or settled 13 creditors from 2008 to 2011. However, the
record is not clear as to how much was paid. He provided  proof of a monthly payment
to the debt settlement company from December 2012, but there is no further
information. He did not present evidence that he received financial counseling, but as
part of the debt settlement program, FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem) applies. I find that  there are no clear indications
that his financial problems are being resolved and are under control.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
6
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information;
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources.
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
7
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group;
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to
the employer as a condition of employment; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
Applicant admitted that he lied about his delinquent debts when he completed
his May 2011 security clearance application. At the time he was in possession of a top
secret security clearance. He also admitted that he lied during his interview with an
authorized investigator. It was only after Applicant was confronted with his credit bureau
report that he admitted that he wanted to hide the delinquent debts due to fear of its
effect on his security clearance. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (b) apply. 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's
8
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
Applicant displayed a recent pattern of questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, and or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. The repeated
falsification is not mitigated. He has not presented any other information to persuade
me that he has mitigated personal conduct concerns.  I have doubts about his judgment
and reliability. After considering the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concern under personal conduct. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 37 years old. He is an educated man. He has worked for his current
employer since 2010. Applicant has held a security clearance since 2006. He is married
and provides for his wife and three children. 
However, Applicant accrued delinquent debt beginning in 2008. He claims that
he has paid delinquent debts since 2008 through settlements. The record does not
provide details. Applicant still has delinquent debt of approximately $31,000 and two
outstanding student loans. He entered a debt settlement program recently, but there is
evidence of only one monthly payment. He receives partial credit for some good-faith
efforts. However, he did not produce sufficient documentation to prove that he has the
ability to pay the debts given his small monthly net remainder, as indicated from his
budget. He has not completed financial counseling. He has not mitigated the financial
considerations security concern.
9
More troubling is the fact that Applicant did not disclose his adverse financial
information on his 2011 security clearance application. He denied any financial
problems to the investigator. It was not until he was confronted with a recent credit
report that he admitted that he amassed delinquent debt from 2007 or 2008. He
admitted in his answer to an amended SOR that he falsified his application and lied to
an investigator. He is remorseful about his actions. He realizes his grave mistake.  This
is recent behavior. However, Applicant failed to mitigate personal conduct security
concerns. The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials. A denial of his security
clearance does not necessarily indicate anything adverse about an applicant’s
character or loyalty. It means that the individual has presented insufficient mitigation to
meet the strict standards controlling access to classified information. Clearance is
denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
