Consisting of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Items 1-10.1
DoD acted under the 9 April 1993 memorandum of agreement between the Composite Health Care System2
Program Office (CHCSPO), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant Secretary
of Defense for Command, Control, Communications, and Intelligence (ASD C I) to conduct trustworthiness3
determinations for contractor personnel employed in Information Systems Positions defined in DoD Regulation
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated January 1987. ADP cases are adjudicated under
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive) and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the DoD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 11-11108
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s trustworthiness1
determination.
On 17 May 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without2
During her March 2011 interview with a Government investigator, Applicant claimed that she had paid the3
three medical accounts, but was unable to provide any proof of payment. In her October 2012 response to
DOHA interrogatories, she stated her intent to arrange repayment of these accounts.
2
hearing by DOHA. The record in this case closed 29 June 2013, the day Applicant’s
response to the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) was due. Applicant
submitted no materials for review. DOHA assigned the case to me 19 July 2013.
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations, except for SOR 1.c, which she
denied because the house was in foreclosure. She is a 58-year-old clerk employed by a
defense contractor since September 2010. She will have access to sensitive medical
data. She has not had a trustworthiness determination previously.
The SOR alleges, and Government exhibits substantiate, five delinquent debts
totaling $75,000. Applicant admits four debts for $1,300. Three of the debts are medical
debts totaling $1,150.  She is about $74,000 delinquent on a $154,000 mortgage. She3
claimed, without corroboration, to have completed a short sale of the mortgaged
property in December 2012. She has not otherwise paid or arranged payment plans
with any of the remaining creditors, despite having previously stated her intent to do so.
Applicant was unemployed from November 2008 to September 2010, during
which time she received unemployment benefits but did not have health insurance. At
some point, she and her then husband refinanced their house with a 10-year note,
which consequently increased their mortgage payment dramatically. In June 2009, her
husband left her for another woman. He refused both to pay on the mortgage or to
cooperate with Applicant in refinancing the note to a more manageable payment or
other resolution short of foreclosure. 
Applicant submitted no character or employment records. Applicant’s credit
reports show a large number of accounts that were delinquent, but which are now
current or closed with a zero balance. These accounts were not alleged in the SOR. Her
credit reports also show several collection accounts which were paid. However, her May
2013 credit report (Item 9) shows two new delinquent accounts totaling $740.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for
access to sensitive information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
¶ 19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.5
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that6
it is unlikely to recur.
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and7
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.
3
denial of a clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Trustworthiness decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s public trust position. The
Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the
SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
Government’s case.  Because no one has a right to a public trust position, the applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.4
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial difficulties are
reasonably attributable to her two-year’s unemployment between November 2008 and
September 2010, and her separation, and subsequent divorce, from her husband. She
paid off, or brought current, numerous delinquent debts not alleged in the SOR. What
she has not done is document her claimed short sale of her house, along with release of
her liability by her lender. She has not documented any efforts to resolve the other small
debts, or provided a proposed plan to address them.5
Applicant potentially meets only one of the mitigating factors for financial
considerations. Her financial difficulties are both recent and multiple.  While her6
unemployment and divorce were clearly circumstances beyond her control, she got a
new job in September 2010. While she might reasonably claim to have been
responsible in addressing many debts not alleged in the SOR since then, she has not
been responsible dealing with the debts alleged in the SOR, or documenting any efforts
to resolve them.  In addition, there is no evidence that she has sought credit counseling7
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications8
that the problem is being resolved or is under control.
 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.9
4
or otherwise brought the problem under control.  There is very little evidence, and no8
corroboration, of any good-faith effort to satisfy the debts alleged in the SOR.  Finally,9
given her unwillingness to seek or use financial counseling, and the fact that her most
recent credit report shows two new delinquent debts, there is nothing in the record to
suggest that Applicant will put her financial problems behind her. I conclude Guideline F
against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a-e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a public trust
position for Applicant. Eligibility for a public trust position denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
