 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------ )  ISCR Case No. 11-12649 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John R. Campbell, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding criminal conduct and 
alcohol consumption. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 28, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and 
submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a 
Security Clearance Application.1 On unspecified dates, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued him two sets of interrogatories. He responded to both sets of 
interrogatories on November 1, 2012.2 On November 29, 2012, the DOD issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative 
                                                          
1
 GE 1 (SF 86, dated September 28, 2010). 
 
2
 GE 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated November 1, 2012); GE 3 (Applicant’s Answers to 
Interrogatories, dated November 1, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and G (Alcohol Consumption), and detailed reasons 
why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 19, 2012. In a sworn statement, dated 
January 2, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
prepared to proceed on January 31, 2013. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on February 5, 2013, but reassigned to me on March 21, 2013. A 
Notice of Hearing was issued on June 7, 2013, and I convened the hearing, as 
scheduled, on June 26, 2013.3  
 
During the hearing, 3 Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 3) and 13 Applicant 
exhibits (AE A through AE M) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on July 8, 2013. The record 
closed on July 8, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR pertaining to criminal conduct (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.) and alcohol consumption (¶ 
2.a.). Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
retain the secret security clearance which was granted to him in 1973.4 He has been 
employed by the same defense contractor since October 2001, and currently serves as 
a senior systems analyst and programmer.5 He was previously employed in similar 
positions by other defense contractors.6 He served on active duty in an enlisted capacity 
                                                          
3
 Earlier efforts to schedule the hearing were unsuccessful because neither Applicant nor his attorney had 
access to any military facilities or video teleconference facilities, and an exception to the sequestration guidelines 
regarding travel at that time to conduct a hearing at the geographic location in which Applicant was located could not 
be justified. An exception was eventually approved. 
 
4
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 40-41. 
 
5
 AE A (Curriculum Vitae, dated August 24, 2009), at 1; GE 1, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
6
 AE A, supra note 5, at 1-3. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
with the U.S. Army from March 1973 until he was honorably discharged in November 
1976.7  
 
Applicant received an Associate of Science degree in 1975; a Bachelor of 
Science degree in Biology in 1977; a Bachelor of Science degree in Business 
Administration in 1978; and a Master’s of Business Administration degree in 1980.8 
Applicant was married in May 1973, and divorced in November 1974; married a second 
time in February 1979, and divorced in November 1999; married a third time in April 
2001, and divorced in May 2005; and married a fourth time in September 2007, and 
divorced in August 2009.9 He has two daughters, born in 1973 and 1984, and one son, 
born in 1982.10 
 
Criminal Conduct & Alcohol Consumption  
 
Applicant is an alcohol abuser whose use or possession of alcohol has resulted 
in three incidents involving the police and judicial authorities. Other than brief narratives 
of Applicant’s alcohol consumption, very little evidence has been furnished about the 
specifics of the frequency, quantity, duration, or effects of such consumption. Applicant 
started consuming alcohol on a monthly basis at social events with members of his 
military unit when he was 21 years old.11 Over the past ten years, he consumed beer, 
wine, and mixed drinks, generally on weekends, social events, and holiday parties, with 
friends.12 Applicant estimated that it might take approximately six beers for him to 
become intoxicated. He denied ever drinking to intoxication or to the point of losing 
motor skills.13  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 2.a.): In October 1995, when he was 42 years old, Applicant, 
accompanied by his then-13 year old son, was driving from their residence to a 
campsite about 50 or 60 miles away, when Applicant was stopped by the police for 
speeding. He knew he was speeding, but hoped to be at the campsite before it closed in 
order to join his brother and several friends. When an open bottle of vodka or wine 
cooler was found in the rear seat of the vehicle, Applicant was arrested and charged 
with driving under the influence (DUI), speeding, and possessing an open container in a 
dry county.14 He was administered a breathalyzer test that registered 0.03 or 0.04, and 
                                                          
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 16; AE A, supra note 5, at 4; GE 3 (Report of Separation from Active Duty (DD Form 
214), dated November 14, 1976); Tr. at 21-22. Although Applicant referred to himself as a “Regular Army Vietnam 
Era Veteran,” he never served in Vietnam. See, AE A, supra note 5, at 4; Tr. at 39. 
 
8
 AE A, supra note 5, at 4. 
 
9
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 19-22. 
 
10
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 25-26. 
 
11
 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated November 1, 2010), at 2. 
 
12
 GE 3, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
13
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 2. 
 
14
 Tr. at 42-46. The evidence as to the type of alcohol found is inconsistent as Applicant has referred to it 
differently during various stages of the investigation and hearing. 
 
4 
                                      
 
released after spending two hours in the city jail.15 He was eventually found guilty of the 
open container and speeding charges and fined about $400.16 The DUI charge was 
dismissed. Applicant acknowledged bringing alcohol to the campsite because the 
people he expected to camp with were all “drinkers.”17 He also stated to an investigator 
from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) that the open bottle belonged to 
another person who had previously been in the vehicle.18 Applicant acknowledged 
having consumed one wine cooler during the day before he departed for the campsite,19 
and the breathalyzer results confirm his recent consumption of alcohol. At that point in 
his life, Applicant did not believe he had a problem with alcohol.20 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 2.a.): In the evening of September 2010, when he was 57 
years old, Applicant attempted to drive onto a military reservation in order to attend an 
Oktoberfest celebration. Upon approaching the gate, a security guard smelled alcohol 
on Applicant’s breath, and directed him to pull over. Applicant was observed as emitting 
the odor of alcohol, slurred speech, glassy and bloodshot eyes, unsteady balance, and 
difficulty in following instructions.21 Three field sobriety tests were administered, but 
when Applicant was asked to undergo a breathalyzer test, he refused to do so.22 He 
was arrested and charged with DUI, spent the night with the provost marshal, and was 
released the following day.23 Nearly one year later, after a two-day trial before a jury in 
September 2011, in which he entered a plea of not guilty, Applicant was convicted, and 
sentenced to a fine of $600, a special assessment of $25, and two year’s supervised 
probation.24 One of the provisions of his probation was that he not commit another 
federal, state, or local crime.25 An additional provision was added to his sentence on 
September 28, 2011, when Applicant was required to attend and complete a DUI 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
15
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 2; Tr. at 45, 47-48. 
 
16
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 2; Tr. at 45; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 1. 
 
17
 Tr. at 46. 
 
18
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 2. 
 
19
 Tr. at 43; GE 2, supra note 2, at 1. 
 
20
 Tr. at 46. 
 
21
 GE 3 (Official Notice of Intended Suspension of Driving Privileges and Affidavit, dated September 18, 
2010). 
 
22
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 2; Tr. at 50-51. 
 
23
 GE 2, supra note 11, at 2. 
 
24
 GE 3 (Court Documents, various dates), attached to Applicant’s Answers to the Interrogatories; Tr. at 52-
53. 
 
25
 GE 3, supra note 24. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
school.26 Applicant subsequently acknowledged having consumed one vodka cranberry 
drink before he departed for the military facility.27 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 2.a.): Less than one year after he was placed on supervised 
probation, in June 2012, at about 9 o’clock in the evening, Applicant stopped at a 
gentleman’s club where he consumed what he described as two or three wine coolers.28 
He subsequently continued driving home, and in an effort to avoid a dog that ran onto 
the road, Applicant swerved his truck and ran it into a ditch by the side of the road.29 
After taking a field sobriety test he was administered a blood alcohol test which 
registered 0.17.30 He was arrested and charged with DUI.31 Applicant reported the 
incident to his probation officer who in turn notified the court. As a result, on September 
13, 2012, Applicant’s probation from his 2010 DUI was modified, and it was extended 
two years from September 5, 2012; he was ordered to serve two days in the custody of 
the U.S. Marshals Service; and was ordered to participate in the Court Intervention 
Program (CIP) under the supervision of the U.S. Probation Office.32 Under the CIP, as 
acknowledged by Applicant, his attorney, his probation officer and the assistant United 
States Attorney, Applicant was required to stay free of drugs and alcohol.33 
Nevertheless, after he commenced the weekly 12-step Moral Reconation Therapy 
program (MRT) under the CIP, Applicant continued to consume alcohol, albeit for a 
relatively short period.34 For example, on the way home from therapy during the first or 
second week of October 2012, he purchased a bottle of wine and went home and 
consumed it.35 
 
As of October 27, 2012, Applicant had completed 2 steps of the 12-step MRT 
and had undergone an assessment by a counselor who is both a licensed professional 
counselor and a national certified counselor.36 He completed the MRT on January 12, 
2013.37 Applicant’s counselor wrote a letter noting that Applicant had “progressed 
nicely” while in the MRT, and that he had exhibited “true remorse, accountability, 
                                                          
26
 GE 3, supra note 24. 
 
27
 Tr. at 50. 
 
28
 Tr. at 57. 
 
29
 Tr. at 57-58. 
 
30
 Tr. at 58. 
 
31
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 1. 
 
32
 GE 3, supra note 24. 
 
33
 GE 3 (Court Intervention Program, ordered September 5, 2012). 
 
34
 Tr. at 23. 
 
35
 Tr. at 41. 
 
36
 GE 3 (Counseling Records, various dates). 
 
37
 AE E (Certificate, dated January 12, 2013). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
awareness, acceptance, and humility.” Applicant had also passed all breathalyzer tests 
that had been administered.38 No evaluation, assessment, or diagnosis was entered into 
evidence. While the counseling handbook describes the various options available in the 
counseling programs, there are no clinical, treatment, or counseling notes in evidence 
describing Applicant’s actual therapy sessions or overall prognosis. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he consumed alcohol “most all of [his] life” and that 
he abused alcohol.39 He used to go to clubs.40 During the period between 1995 and 
2010, there were times when he was drinking and driving, and was probably at risk of 
being arrested for DUI.41 He also attributes his alcohol abuse to personal issues 
involving troublesome marriages and other relationships.42 Now, however, since starting 
the MRT, he realized he needed to make better choices and come to grips with his 
problem, and he no longer goes to clubs or consumes alcohol, has no alcohol in his 
residence, and has no plans to resume drinking alcohol.43 Applicant contends that he 
has been abstinent since October 2012, and there is no evidence to the contrary. Upon 
completion of the MRT, it was Applicant’s intention to continue with a weekly after-care 
program, at least through September 2013, when he anticipates his probation will be 
terminated.44 
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
Applicant’s work performance appraisals from his employers generally reflected 
an individual whose “performance is exceptional in all areas and is recognizable as 
being far superior to others;”45 whose performance “consistently exceeds job 
requirements in all key areas;”46 or whose performance “demonstrates high level of 
competency; achieves results beyond expectations.”47 He was selected as an employee 
of the quarter in January 1998.48 Various program managers, supervisors, and military 
“customers” were effusive in praise for Applicant’s efforts, significant contributions, 
excellent work ethic, dedication, organization, technical expertise, personal leadership, 
                                                          
38
 AE E (Letter, dated January 2, 2013 (sic)). 
 
39
 Tr. at 46. 
 
40
 Tr. at 24. 
 
41
 Tr. at 49. 
 
42
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 4. 
 
43
 Tr. at 23-27, 47. 
 
44
 Tr. at 25, 60-61; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, at 3. 
 
45
 AE H (Performance Appraisal, dated December 5, 1996). 
 
46
 AE D (Performance Appraisal, dated April 29, 1998). 
 
47
 AE C (Annual Evaluation, dated December 4, 2012). 
 
48
 AE D, supra note 46, at 2. 
 
7 
                                      
 
insight, and efficiency.49 His current program manager, an individual who has known 
and worked with Applicant for over ten years, noted that Applicant has “never exhibited 
any evidence of impairment or lack of good judgment on the job.”50 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”51 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon 
a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”52   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”53 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
                                                          
49
 AE B (Letter of Commendation, dated March 31, 2003); AE F (Letter, dated July 24, 2000); AE K (Letters 
of Commendation and Appreciation, various dates); AE L (Recommendation, dated October 20, 1994); AE M 
(Promotion Memorandum, dated May 28, 1992). 
 
50
 AE G (Character Reference, dated January 2, 2013). 
 
51
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
52
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
53
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case.  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.54  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.”55 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”56 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses is potentially disqualifying. 
Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(d), if the individual is currently on parole or probation, security 
concerns may be raised. In addition, a violation of parole or probation, or failure to 
                                                          
54
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
55
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
56
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
9 
                                      
 
complete a court-mandated rehabilitation program, is potentially disqualifying under AG 
¶ 31(e). Applicant’s history of criminal conduct consists of three arrests and convictions 
for alcohol-related incidents, and a violation of probation, and he is currently on 
probation. AG ¶¶ 31(a), 31(d), and 31(e), have been established.   
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
In addition, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply when there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; 
including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply. AG ¶ 32(d) only minimally applies. Applicant’s 
criminal conduct commenced in 1995 and continued until June 2012, a little over one 
year ago. Following each incident, Applicant was involved in both the police and court 
systems. He spent brief periods in jail, paid fines, attended education classes, 
underwent therapy, and was placed on probation. In June 2012, despite being on 
probation from the 2010 DUI, Applicant violated the terms of the probation and was 
involved in another alcohol-related incident. After his probation was extended because 
of that violation, and aware that he was not to consume alcohol, he did so again. No 
type of punishment seemed to work. Nevertheless, there is some evidence of 
successful rehabilitation which essentially started after Applicant was enrolled in the 
MRT. There has been no further SOR-alleged criminal conduct during the past 12-
month period. A person should not be held forever accountable for misconduct from the 
past, especially if there is a clear indication of subsequent reform, remorse, or 
rehabilitation. Applicant has expressed remorse for his past criminal conduct and 
reformed his habits, and he has an outstanding employment record as both a member 
of the military and as an employee of government contractors. Nevertheless, in light of 
the multi-year period of criminal activity, it is simply too brief a period to generate 
enough confidence to conclude that there is a successful rehabilitation. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:  
      
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 22(a), alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
 
10 
                                      
 
alcohol dependent is potentially disqualifying. In addition, habitual or binge consumption 
of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent, may apply under AG ¶ 22(c).  
Similarly, a diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical 
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence is of security 
significance under AG ¶ 22(d). Additionally, an evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 22(e). Also, AG ¶ 
22(g) may apply if there is a failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol 
education, evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. AG ¶ 22(a) has been established by 
Applicant’s two DUI convictions and his open container conviction; AG ¶ 22(c) has been 
established, because Applicant repeatedly consumed alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment; and AG ¶ 22(g) has been established by Applicant’s continued use of alcohol 
in violation of his probation provisions. AG ¶¶ 22(d) and 22(e) have not been 
established as the record is silent regarding a diagnosis and an evaluation. 
 
 The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from alcohol consumption. Under AG ¶ 23(a), the disqualifying 
condition may be mitigated where so much time has passed, or the behavior was so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. In addition, when the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues 
of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an 
alcohol abuser), AG ¶ 23(b) may apply.  
 
AG ¶ 23(b) minimally applies and AG ¶ 23(a) does not apply. Although he denied 
having an alcohol problem in the past, Applicant now concedes that he has an alcohol 
problem, and he needs to stay away from alcohol. He no longer goes to clubs or 
consumes alcohol, has no alcohol in his residence, and has no plans to resume drinking 
alcohol. Applicant attributes his alcohol abuse to personal issues involving troublesome 
marriages and other relationships. Applicant contends that he has been abstinent for 
only nine months, since October 2012, and there is no evidence to the contrary. He 
completed the MRT and is continuing with a weekly after-care program, at least through 
September 2013, when he anticipates his probation will be terminated.  
 
Applicant has consistently minimized the significance of alcohol in his life. He 
estimated that it might take approximately six beers for him to become intoxicated. He 
denied ever drinking to intoxication or to the point of losing motor skills. Yet, in 
September 2010, after consuming only one vodka cranberry drink before he departed 
for the military facility, Applicant was observed as emitting the odor of alcohol, slurred 
speech, glassy and bloodshot eyes, unsteady balance, and difficulty in following 
instructions. In June 2012, after consuming only two or three wine coolers, he was 
administered a blood alcohol test which registered 0.17. It appears that Applicant has 
minimized the quantity of alcohol consumed on each occasion. After careful 
consideration of the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol consumption, I conclude 
Applicant’s continued alcohol consumption after his alcohol-related convictions, as well 
 
11 
                                      
 
as while he was on probation, and his minimizing his alcohol problem, all indicate he is 
unwilling or unable to curtail his alcohol consumption. As such, his conduct 
demonstrates a lack of judgment and/or a failure to control impulses which is 
inconsistent with the holder of a security clearance. While his abstinence should be 
viewed favorably, and he should be encouraged to continue his abstinence and 
aftercare treatment, it is simply too soon after his most recent consumption of alcohol to 
conclude that his alcohol problem has been put behind him and will not recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines J and G in my analysis below.      
 
There is substantial evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant 
has been employed by the same defense contractor since October 2001, and has had a 
secret security clearance since 1973. Applicant expressed remorse for his past criminal 
conduct and reformed his habits, and he has an outstanding employment record as both 
a member of the military and as an employee of government contractors. He is well 
educated, and is a respected member of his employer’s workforce. He successfully 
completed MRT, and is currently attending an aftercare program. Applicant now 
concedes that he has an alcohol problem. He has been abstinent since October 2012. 
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is an alcohol abuser who has two DUI convictions, and an open container 
conviction between 1995 and 2012. He spent brief periods in jail, paid fines, attended 
education classes, underwent therapy, and was placed on probation. In June 2012, 
despite being on probation from the 2010 DUI, Applicant violated the terms of the 
probation and was involved in another alcohol-related incident. After his probation was 
extended because of that violation, and aware that he was not to consume alcohol, he 
did so again. Applicant’s probation is currently scheduled to continue until September 
2014. After a lengthy period of alcohol consumption, Applicant has been abstinent for 
 
12 
                                      
 
only nine months. He continues to minimize the quantity of alcohol consumed in the 
past. 
 
 I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.57 Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has failed to mitigate the criminal conduct and alcohol consumption 
security concerns. (See AG && 2(a)(1) - 2(a)(9).) 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against  Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
57
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
