KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The record provides no reason to believe that Applicant was not adequately informed
of her right to counsel or of her other rights concerning the hearing.  Applicant acquired
additional significant debts after having been discharged on bankruptcy.  This is sufficient to
raise Financial Considerations security concerns.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-12204.a1
DATE: 07/11/2013
DATE: July 11, 2013
In Re:
----------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-12204
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Steven A. Suralie, Personal Representative
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 3, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On May 9, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative
Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant was denied due process;
whether the evidence was sufficient to raise security concerns; whether the Judge failed to consider
all of the evidence; and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant
worked for a Defense contractor from 2005 to early 2010, at which time she was laid off.  She was
unemployed until May 2011, when she began working for her current employer, also a Defense
contractor.  While out of a job she received unemployment compensation.  She served in the military
in the early 1980s.  She held a security clearance in the military and again while working for her first
contractor employer.
Applicant married in 1984 and divorced in 2008.  In 1993, she and her husband were
discharged in Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  Their debts included medical bills, credit cards, and a
delinquent home loan.  Since that time, Applicant has acquired additional delinquent debts, for
medical bills, cable services, credit cards, student loans, etc.  She testified that these debts arose as
a consequence of her divorce.  In addition, she incurred expenses associated with job-related
relocations.  She also admitted that some of her debts were due to bad decisions, such as credit card
expenditures undertaken with insufficient thought to the long-term consequences and cosmetic
treatments.
After receiving the SOR Applicant contacted some of her creditors, but she was not able to
settle her debts.  She has not contacted any of her SOR creditors since late 2012.  She has addressed
other debts not alleged in the SOR.  For example, she resolved a delinquent car loan through a
voluntary repossession and she has been negotiating a settlement of a debt to the IRS.  She also paid
off several student loans by withdrawing money from her retirement account.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial circumstances raised concerns under
Guideline F.  He further concluded that she had not met her burden of persuasion as to mitigation,
citing to a paucity of evidence concerning the circumstances of her bankruptcy; the number of her
unresolved debts; and her apparent lack of a plan for resolving the SOR debts.  The Judge noted that
circumstances outside Applicant’s control affected her financial condition, although some of her
debts had become delinquent and had been entered into collection status before her divorce and
unemployment.  However, he noted that she had not made recent contact with her creditors and
concluded that she had failed to demonstrate responsible conduct in regard to her debts.  In the
whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to evidence of Applicant’s military service, her having held
a clearance without incident or concern, and her having paid off her student loans.  He stated,
however, that Applicant has demonstrated a pattern of incurring debt without considering the
consequences and that she had been passive in the face of her financial situation.  
1Applicant contends that, in her naivete, she failed to offer into evidence a certain character letter, thereby
evidencing her relative disadvantage in presenting her case.  However, the record contains two character letters,
including a letter by the same writer and containing substantially the same information as the one she referenced in her
appeal brief.  This letter  was attached to Applicant’s response to the SOR.  
Discussion
Applicant contends that she was denied due process.  She states that she was out of her
element at the hearing and that she was overmatched by Department Counsel.  She argues that the
Judge should have stopped the hearing and rescheduled it after she had had an opportunity to obtain
counsel or other assistance.  
We note that the record contains a letter from Department Counsel to Applicant advising her
of the nature of her upcoming hearing.  Among other things, the letter advised her of her right to hire
an attorney or be represented by some other person and of her right to present evidence and cross
examine witnesses.  The letter gave Applicant a brief overview of how the hearing would be
conducted and informed her of the documents that Department Counsel intended to submit.  Hearing
Exhibit 1, dated March 27, 2013.  In addition to this letter by Department Counsel, the Chief
Administrative Judge also sent Applicant pre-hearing guidance containing much the same
information, though without including a proposed evidence list.  This letter from the Chief Judge
specifically stated that Applicant had the right to hire an attorney.  Finally, at the beginning of the
hearing, the Judge advised Applicant of her right to counsel, among other things.  Tr. at 5.
Moreover, the Judge left the record open for ten days after the hearing at his own initiative to enable
Applicant to submit additional evidence.  Tr. at 63.  The record provides no reason to believe that
Applicant was not adequately informed of her right to counsel or of her other rights concerning the
hearing.  Having chosen to represent herself, she cannot fairly complain about the quality of her self-
representation or seek to be relieved of the consequences of her decision.1  She has failed to
demonstrate that she was denied the due process afforded by the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
10-02364 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2011).     
  Applicant contends that her circumstances do not raise security concerns.  She argues that
her prior bankruptcy action was not relevant because it occurred a long time ago.  She also argues
that her response to her debts as a whole shows responsibility and should not raise concerns as to
her trustworthiness.  In a DOHA proceeding, the Government must present substantial evidence
concerning controverted allegations.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-03668 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 5,
2012).  In the case before us, Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR.  Insofar as these
allegations were not controverted, the Government bore no obligation to present evidence of them.
Nevertheless, the Government did present two security clearance applications by Applicant and her
answers to interrogatories.  The Government also offered three credit reports, which in and of
themselves normally can constitute substantial evidence of Guideline F security concerns.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2009).   This evidence, read alongside Applicant’s
testimony at the hearing, support the Judge’s material findings that, after having been discharged
in bankruptcy, Applicant acquired additional significant delinquent debts.  These findings are
sufficient to raise Financial Considerations security concerns, thereby giving rise to Applicant’s
burden of persuasion as to mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.    
Applicant cites to record evidence, including her good security record, her efforts to pay off
some of her debts, her unemployment, and her job-related moves.  A Judge is presumed to have
considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-05833 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun.
21, 2010).  The Judge made findings about the cited evidence and discussed it in his analysis.
Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence.  In support
of her appeal, Applicant has submitted evidence from outside the record.  We cannot consider new
evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  See also ISCR Case No. 09-05833, supra.  Applicant
asserts that if she cannot obtain a clearance she will have to find another job.  As we have previously
noted, the adverse impact of an unfavorable decision is not relevant in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for a security clearance.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-23613 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2013).
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
