 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13605  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM), I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns raised under the financial considerations guideline. Accordingly, his request 
for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Item 1), pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; DOD directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The SOR listed 
security concerns addressed in the Directive under Guideline F (Financial 
 
2 
 
 
Considerations) of the AG. In his Answer to the SOR, notarized on April 23, 2013, 
Applicant admitted the two allegations, and requested a decision without a hearing. 
(Item 3) 
 
Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
prepared a presentation of the Government’s case in a FORM dated May 22, 2013,1 
which contained the Government’s argument and documents to support its preliminary 
decision to deny Applicant's request for a security clearance. Applicant received the 
FORM on June 3, 2013. He was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to 
file a response. He did not submit one. The case was assigned to me on July 25, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
FORM, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old high school graduate. He married in 1978, and has 
three adult children. Applicant served as an enlisted member of the military from 1967 to 
1986. He served as an officer from 1986 until his honorable discharge in 1997. In his 
August 2011 security clearance application, he reported receiving a top secret security 
clearance in 1984, and a secret security clearance in 2007. Since 2008, he has been 
employed by a defense contractor as a programmer analyst. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant's wife handles the family bills. During his 2010 security interview, 
Applicant was unfamiliar with the details of any of his delinquent accounts. He explained 
that his financial issues stemmed from a mortgage loan he obtained from what he called 
a “predatory lender.” In his Answer to the SOR, he stated that he missed a mortgage 
payment in 1999. However, at his security interview, he said the mortgage payments 
became delinquent in about 2002. In 1999, the lender refused to accept anything but 
the full delinquent amount, which Applicant could not afford. While Applicant tried to 
negotiate, the delinquent balance continued to grow. The lender decided to sell the 
home. (Items 3, 6) 
 
 Based on advice from an attorney, Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petition in July 2003. The petition allowed him to stop the house sale. The first and 
second mortgage loans listed in the bankruptcy totaled $178,000. The other listed debts 
totaled approximately $34,000. Under the bankruptcy plan, he made monthly payments 
of $2,600. The petition was successfully discharged in May 2006. (Items 3, 6) 
 
 In August 2006, Applicant was accused of making false statements to his 
employer, a county health department. He resigned in October 2006, on advice from his 
union representative and an attorney. A formal investigation showed no grounds for the 
                                                          
1 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six documents (Items 1 - 6) proffered in 
support of the Government’s case. 
 
 
3 
 
 
allegations However, Applicant was unemployed from the time of his resignation in 
October 2006 until June 2007. He became delinquent on his current mortgage 
(allegation 1.a). As of his 2010 security interview, Applicant had not sought financial 
counseling. The balance on the loan is $316,000. As of his February 2013 credit report, 
the account was past due in the amount of $95,000. (Items 3, 5, 6) 
 
 Applicant’s mortgage was sold to several successive lenders. He noted in his 
Answer that he contacted each of the mortgage holders numerous times about 
resolving his delinquency. He also stated that he applied five times for loan 
modifications, and none of his applications have been either approved or disapproved. 
He did not provide evidence of the applications or his contacts with the lenders. 
Applicant stated in his Answer that the current mortgage holder “. . . has worked with us 
to some degree, but we have had no resolution yet. They are also investigating to see if 
we are one of the cases that [a previous lender] owes money to under their recent 
mortgage settlement agreement.” (Item 3) 
 
 With his Answer, Applicant provided evidence of his recent payments to the 
current lender. The $2,920 monthly payments were made from May through July 2012 
and from September through December 2012. The evidence does not include 
information on whether these payments apply only to the current balance, or whether 
any part is being applied to reduce the delinquent balance. Recently, Applicant applied 
to a federal housing agency to determine if he qualifies for assistance through the 
“Making Home Affordable” program. If he does not qualify, he plans to try to short-sell 
the house. (Items 3, 6) 
 
 The file contains no information on Applicant's income, or if he is current on his 
other monthly expenses. However, his February 2013 credit report shows no delinquent 
accounts other than the mortgage. The file also does not include character references 
or performance evaluations. (Item 5) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.2 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
                                                          
2 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. . . . 
 
 The evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶19 (a) (inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). Applicant completed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan in 2006. The bulk of the 
debt in that bankruptcy stemmed from delinquent first and second mortgage loans. 
Within months of successfully discharging that bankruptcy plan, Applicant became 
delinquent on his current mortgage. The SOR alleges approximately $95,000 in 
delinquent debt.  
 
                                                          
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions can potentially mitigate the security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 Applicant’s failure to meet his financial obligations did not occur in the distant 
past, because his mortgage loan is currently delinquent. His unresolved financial 
situation casts doubt on his judgment and reliability, and AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied. 
 
 As of 2006, after successfully completing a Chapter 13 plan, Applicant was 
unemployed for eight months, and was unable to keep up with his mortgage payments. 
He receives partial mitigation because this unforeseen event affected his finances. 
However, for full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b), an applicant must act reasonably in 
response to the event. Although Applicant contends that he contacted his mortgage 
lenders and sought loan modifications, he did not provide documentation to support his 
claim. Without such evidence, full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) is not available. 
 
 As of his 2010 security interview, Applicant had not sought financial counseling, 
and there is no indication that he has recently sought it. Although he said that he 
contacted the lenders, and applied for loan modifications, the file contains no 
documentation to support his claim. He provided evidence of mortgage payments in 
2012, but no information on whether these funds represent his current mortgage 
payments, or full or partial payments toward his past-due balance. The record evidence 
does not show a substantiated plan to resolve his significant delinquency. Applicant's 
financial situation is not under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) cannot be applied.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
 
6 
 
 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Applicant receives credit for completing a three-year Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan, 
through which he resolved his past debts and paid his creditors. However, since shortly 
after discharging that petition in 2006, Applicant’s current mortgage loan has become 
significantly delinquent. He owes back payments of approximately $95,000, with no 
clear evidence in the file showing how it rose to that level. Applicant has been aware 
that delinquent debts are a security concern since at least 2009, when he completed his 
security clearance application.  
 
 Applicant stated that he contacted the lenders, and applied for several 
modifications, but provided no evidence of these efforts. Although uncorroborated 
statements can be accepted,6 it is difficult to rely on such claims in the context of an 
administrative determination, where an applicant's credibility cannot be weighed. There 
is no record evidence regarding how the delinquent balance rose to its current level, 
how long he has been delinquent, or any record of his payments since 2006, when the 
problem began. Applicant has no plan in place to resolve his substantial mortgage debt, 
other than a possible future effort to short-sell the property. Applicants are not required 
to be debt-free; however, they are expected to develop a plan for resolution, and 
provide evidence that they are implementing that plan. The Government’s doubts about 
Applicant's suitability to hold a security clearance remain, and must be resolved in favor 
of the national interest.7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.b    For Applicant  
 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 98-0419 at 3 (App. Bd. April 30, 1999).  
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
