 
1 
 
 
 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12227 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleged 11 collection or unpaid accounts, which totaled more than 
$30,000. Her financial problems were due to circumstances beyond her control, and she 
has acted reasonably under the circumstances. The financial considerations security 
concerns have been mitigated. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on December 19, 
2012, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance. On January 28, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
hearing. On May 15, 2013, I was assigned the case. On June 4, 2013, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the hearing 
convened on May 31, 2013. I admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 8 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits A through F, without objection. Applicant and her fiancé testified at 
the hearing. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
information. Additional material (Ex. G and H) was submitted and admitted into the 
record without objection. On June 24, 2013, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied owing some of the debts and 
admitted the remainder. Her admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old truck driver who has worked for a defense contractor 
since June 2011, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. Applicant’s supervisor states 
Applicant is an honest, hard-working, dedicated worker. (Ex. A) He states, there “is no 
other owner operator team within our organization that can be counted upon more for 
unquestioned acceptance of responsibility and superior customer service.” (Ex. A)  
 
 In 2000, Applicant was 40 years old and working as an over-night stocker at a 
large discount store. (Tr. 42) In December 2000, she married. Her husband was a truck 
owner and driver who taught her how to drive a truck. (Tr. 42) She worked for one 
trucking company and he another. Following their marriage, she purchased a car with a 
26 percent interest rate and had a few other minor debts. Her husband thought paying 
such a rate was ludicrous and convinced her to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. 
(Tr. 48, 49) In February 2001, Applicant filed the Chapter 7 and in April 2002, her debts 
were discharged. (Ex. 2, 5) 
 
 Applicant’s ex-husband started building a trucking company, which he ran as a 
sole proprietorship. Both the company and their home2 were solely in his name. (Ex. 2, 
Tr. 49) Applicant worked in the trucking company’s office. (Tr. 28, 36) Her ex-husband 
eventually purchased 13 highway truck tractors with little or no money down. (Tr. 44) 
Her ex-husband had a gambling problem, started using company funds for personal 
use, and started using narcotics. (Tr. 34) He used their credit cards for gambling and 
started pawning their possessions. (Tr. 46) The first four or five years of her marriage 
were free of verbal and physical abuse. (Tr. 44) The trucking company went out of 
business.  
 
 In March 2007, Applicant joined with her husband in filing for Chapter 113 
bankruptcy protection. (Ex. 3, 4) The bankruptcy listed assets of $1,456,187 and 
liabilities of $2,163,282. (Ex. 4) The liabilities included $1,830,293 in secured debt for 13 
                                                          
2 The divorce decree awarded the home to her ex-husband. (Ex. 2) The home has since gone to 
foreclosure. 
 
3 A Chapter 11 bankruptcy is used when a business, either a corporation or sole proprietorship, is unable 
to pay its creditors and seeks protection. 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
semi-trucks model years 2005 through 2007. (Ex. 4) In June 2007, the Chapter 11 was 
dismissed and the matter was converted to a Chapter 7. (Ex. 2) When the matter 
converted to a Chapter 7, Applicant was removed from the bankruptcy because the 
statutorily required eight year waiting period for her to again file for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy protection had not elapsed.  In June 2007, her ex-husband’s debts were 
discharged. All the documents concerning the trucking business and the 2007 
bankruptcy remain in her ex-husband’s possession.  
 
 When the company ended, Applicant intended to end the marriage. Her ex-
husband talked her out of it, and they started driving separate trucks for another 
company. (Tr. 45) Her ex-husband spent a month in jail for destroying a motel room. 
(Tr. 40, 45) Two years after the bankruptcy, in July 2009, she separated from her ex-
husband and was divorced in January 2010. (Ex. 2) Following the divorce, her ex-
husband was imprisoned for two years for narcotics possession. (Tr. 33) Her ex-
husband has also threatened to kill her fiancé. (Tr. 33)  
  
 In 2006, Applicant and her fiancé, a truck owner and driver, met when he was 
dispatched to carry loads where Applicant’s husband ran his trucking company. (Tr. 37) 
Her fiancé, having observed how Applicant’s ex-husband treated her and how he ran 
the business, asked his company not to send him to the location again, but was told as 
a senior driver for the company he was expected to go. (Tr. 32) Eventually, he left the 
area and did not return. He did not see Applicant again until 2009. (Tr. 37) They have 
been together for approximately four years and drive together and, at one time, hauled 
mostly explosives and radioactive material. (Tr. 38) They borrowed $12,000 from their 
employer to replace a truck engine and have repaid the loan. (Tr. 30) The household’s 
debts are paid on time and they receive no calls or letters from creditors demanding 
payment. (Tr. 35)  
 
 The 2007 bankruptcy listed five medical accounts: $900 owed a doctor, $252 
owed a hospital, $426 owed a health center, $1,021 medical debt (SOR 1.e), and 
another hospital was also listed without an amount provided.4 (Ex. 4, Tr. 4) These five 
unpaid medical accounts totaled approximately $3,300. Applicant contacted the 
creditors and was told the $199 medical debt (SOR 1.a) is in her ex-husband’s name. 
(Tr. 54) She has reduced the balance due on another medical debt (SOR 1.b) from 
$1,385 to $657. (Ex. 8, F, Tr. 55) She is disputing a $657 dental bill (SOR 1.c) because 
this was her ex-husband’s dentist, and she never went to this dentist for treatment. (Ex. 
57) She asserted she had paid an $81 medical bill (SOR 1.d). (Tr. 59) She paid a $730 
city debt (SOR 1.l). (Ex. B, C, Tr. 64) She also paid a $93 cable bill (SOR 1.m). (Ex. D) 
 
 The $439 debt (SOR 1.f) and the $5,014 debt (SOR 1.g) were amounts owed the 
trucking company’s business attorney. (Tr. 60, 61) Both of these debts were included in 
the 2007 bankruptcy. (Ex. 4) The $14,000 debt (SOR 1.h) was a business line of credit 
opened in June 2006. (Ex. 6, Tr. 62) The July 2011 credit report lists this account as 
included in the 2007 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (Ex. 6) The $6,502 automobile loan (SOR 
                                                          
4 It is unclear from the record any correlation between the SOR medical bills and those medical debts 
listed in the 2007 bankruptcy.  
 
4 
 
 
 
 
1.i) was for a Ford pick-up truck that was listed as a secured asset in the 2007 
bankruptcy. At the time of the divorce, Applicant’s ex-husband kept the truck. (Tr. 63)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 In 2001, Applicant sought bankruptcy protection and was dismissed from a 
business bankruptcy filed in 2007. The SOR lists five unpaid medical debts and six 
collection accounts. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The debts were incurred prior to 2007, when Applicant’s ex-husband’s trucking 
company filed for bankruptcy protection. Her ex-husband’s responsibility for a number of 
these debts ended with the 2007 bankruptcy. However, when the bankruptcy changed 
from Chapter 11 to Chapter 7, Applicant was dismissed from the action because it had 
been less than eight years since her 2001 Chapter 7 filing. The 2001 filing was the 
result of Applicant following her husband’s direction to file for bankruptcy to end 
payment on a car note with 26% interest.  
 
 The debts were incurred more than six years ago, but remain unpaid. There are 
eleven debts of which five of the debts are simply listed as unpaid. There is no 
allegation that these five medical debts have been charged off or are in collection. The 
debts were incurred under circumstances unlikely to recur. Her ex-husband’s trucking 
business failed and the amounts owed the company’s attorney ($439, SOR 1.f and 
$5,014, SOR 1.g) were discharged in bankruptcy as was the company’s $14,000 line-of- 
credit debt. Although married to the owner of the company, these were company 
obligations.  
 
 Two of the medical debts ($199, SOR 1.a and $657, SOR 1.c) belong to 
Applicant’s ex-husband. One is an obligation from his dentist and the other a medical 
bill in his name. Although listed in the 2007 bankruptcy, her ex-husband chose to keep 
his pick-up truck at the time of their divorce. The $6,502 truck debt (SOR 1.i) has been 
placed for collection. Applicant is unlikely to again incur financial problems due to her 
ex-husband’s actions. The business obligations, her ex-husband’s medical bills, and the 
debt on the pick-up truck are unlikely to recur. Additionally, these debts do not cast 
doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
applies. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experience both divorce and her ex-husband’s 
trucking business failing along with the financial burden associated with each. These 
are events beyond her control. AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
Under AG & 20(c), Applicant is living within her means and not receiving any 
calls or letters from creditors demanding payment. Following the 2007 bankruptcy, she 
has not received any demands from the creditors listed in the bankruptcy asking her to 
pay the delinquent obligations. She and her fiancé borrowed $12,000 from their 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
company to repair their truck and have repaid the loan. Applicant has paid three of the 
debts: SOR 1.d ($81), SOR 1.l ($730) and SOR 1.m ($93). She is making payments on 
SOR 1.b and has reduced the amount owed from $1,385 to $657. These payments 
represent good faith efforts to repay these four creditors. There are clear indications the 
financial problems she experienced while married to her ex-husband no longer exist. 
Her current finances are under control. AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) apply. 
 
Under the circumstances of this particular case, I do not find Applicant’s 2001 
bankruptcy filing or the business bankruptcy that followed the failure of her ex-
husband’s trucking business to be of financial significance. I find for her as to the two 
bankruptcies (SOR 1.j and 1.k).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was married to her ex-
husband for a ten-year period ending in 2010. Early in the marriage they did not 
experience financial problems. In fact, her ex-husband’s credit was sufficient for him to 
purchase 13 highway tractors. Her ex-husband’s gambling, misuse of company funds, 
and narcotic use resulted in the failure of the trucking company. The first four or five 
years of her marriage were free of verbal and physical abuse. However, the abuse 
finally ended the marriage. When the marriage ended, Applicant was given a chance to 
start again. She and her fiancé pay their debts as required and have a sound financial 
picture.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid, it is 
whether her financial circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security 
clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) She has paid some of her debts and is making 
payments on another obligation. The remaining debts are either debts from her ex-
 
8 
 
 
 
 
husband’s trucking business or personal debts belonging to her ex-husband. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
