KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s analysis misstates the period of time Applicant has worked at his current
job as nine months.  The Board cannot conclude the error is harmless.  Adverse decision
remanded.
CASENO: 11-15184.a1
DATE: 07/25/2013
DATE: July 25, 2013
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-15184
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Leslie McAdoo Gordon, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 4, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
2
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On May 31, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge LeRoy F. Foreman denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge made factual errors that
impaired his application of Mitigating Condition 17(c)  and whether the Judge’s adverse decision
was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline B and
his favorable findings under two of the three Guideline E allegations are not at issue in this appeal.
Consistent with the following, we remand the case to the Judge.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge found that Applicant has worked for a Defense contractor since August 2011.  He
previously worked for another Defense contractor from May 1983 to July 2011.  
In late 2010 or early 2011, Applicant gained access to a proxy server.  This enabled him to
bypass his employer’s restriction on accessing personal e-mail accounts while using his employer’s
unclassified computer.  The purpose of this restriction was to reduce the risk of introducing malware
into the employer’s information technology systems.  
Applicant used the proxy server for his personal e-mail account, communicating with family
and friends.  At some point he began using it in connection with a personal business.  This activity
was uncovered by cyber-intelligence analysts conducting an investigation unrelated to Applicant.
The investigation discovered that several employees, including Applicant, were using proxy servers
to gain access to unauthorized internet sites.  The analysts monitored Applicant’s computer for two
weeks and discovered thirty-six hours of suspected non-work activity on his computer.  Upon
discovery that Applicant was “multi-tasking” during this two week period, they concluded that he
had billed 16.9 hours of personal use, worth about $1,076, to the Government.     
Applicant admitted to having used the proxy server to access his person e-mail account, to
running an outside business during the workday, and to having charged Government contracts for
time spent on personal business.  Applicant elected to resign in lieu of termination.  
According to a forensic examiner, Applicant’s use of the proxy server did not alter or
damage his employer’s network in any way.  He did not compromise or increase the vulnerability
of the employer’s IT system.
Applicant’s new job entails the same duties as the one from which he resigned.  Although
he continues to operate his personal business, he is not seeking new business.  He is the sole
employee and sole member of his personal company.  
1These other Guideline E allegations pertained to two security violations.  The Judge concluded that these
violations were isolated, inadvertent, and unlikely to recur.  
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 17(c): “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment[.]”
3
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for his work performance, reliability, commitment
to national security, and compliance with security policy.  His current supervisor has known him for
20 years.  He views Applicant’s circumvention of his employer’s internet restrictions as a one-time
incident.
The Judge’s Analysis
As stated above, the Judge resolved the Guideline B allegations in Applicant’s favor, as he
did with two of the allegations under Guideline E.1  Concerning the Guideline E allegation
pertaining to Applicant’s having used the proxy server, however, the Judge concluded that Applicant
had failed to demonstrate mitigation.  In considering the possible effect of Mitigating Condition
17(c),2 the Judge stated as follows:  
Applicant’s use of the proxy server was recent.  Although it ended about two years
ago, it ended because he was caught in the act, not because he chose to stop.  He has
worked for his new employer for only about nine months, during which he has been
under pressure to prove himself and keep his security clearance.  Under the
circumstances, I conclude that his misconduct has not been mitigated by the passage
of time without recurrence.  Decision at 12.
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s treatment of Mitigating Condition 17(c), particularly the
statement he had worked at his current job for only nine months.  He notes record evidence that he
had worked at this job since August 2011, nearly two years by the close of the record.  He states that
the error impaired the Judge’s analysis of the recency of Applicant’s security-significant conduct.
We find this argument persuasive.  In addition to the evidence cited by Applicant, we note
the Judge’s own finding, referenced above, that Applicant had worked in his new job since August
2011, which was about twenty-one months, more than twice the amount of time upon which the
Judge relied in his analysis.  Accordingly, the Judge’s treatment of Mitigating Condition 17(c) was
erroneous, and, reading the Decision in light of the record, we are not able to conclude that this error
3Applicant also challenges the Judge’s statement that he had been under pressure at his new job to keep his
security clearance.  This statement constitutes a reasonable inference from the record before the Judge.  We find no error
in it.
4In his reply brief, Department Counsel states that he does not object to a remand of the case.  
4
was harmless.3 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-01021 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 18, 2011) (An error is
harmless if it did not likely affect the outcome of the case).  Accordingly, we remand the case to the
Judge for a new Decision consistent with the above.4 
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.  
Signed: Jeffery D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
