 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14362 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 12, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective 
within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On February 24, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. On April 16, 2013, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). In the FORM, Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
 
requested administrative notice be taken of certain facts with respect to India.1 The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on April 23, 2013. Applicant was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. Applicant did not submit additional information. The case was assigned to 
me on June 21, 2013. I took administrative notice of pertinent facts about India that are 
included in the findings of fact.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, with comments. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. He was born in India. It is unknown when he moved to 
the United States. He married his wife in India in 1984. He attended college in the 
United States in 1988 and received a master’s degree in 1990. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2003. He wife is also a naturalized citizen. It is unknown when 
she became a naturalized citizen. Applicant has three children. The oldest was born in 
India in 1986 and is a naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant’s two younger children were 
born in the United States and are ages 22 and 17. 
 
 Applicant’s father is a citizen and resident of India. He is a retired physician who 
does consulting work for a private hospital. His mother is deceased. Applicant’s mother-
in-law is a citizen and resident of India. She is a retired schoolteacher. His father-in-law 
is deceased. Applicant has monthly telephone contact with both of them and visits them 
about once a year when he travels to India.  
 
 Applicant has two brothers-in-law who are citizens of India and reside and work 
in Saudi Arabia. One works as a manager of a company and the other provides 
technical support for a computer company. Applicant maintains quarterly telephone 
contact with each of them and sees them about every two to three years either in India 
or the United States.  
 
 In the past ten years, Applicant has traveled to India on vacation about once a 
year to visit his family and friends. He intends to continue to travel to India, perhaps 
more frequently, due to the availability of airline travel to India. He continues to maintain 
close and continuing contact with his immediate family in India.  
 
 In 2010, Applicant purchased four apartments in India. In August 2011, at the 
time of his personal subject interview, the apartment building was under construction. 
Applicant estimated the value of the property at the time to be $250,000. The current 
status of the property is unknown. Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR: 
 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel’s Administrative Notice request is included in the FORM. 
 
3 
 
 
I treat my investments in India as a part of a diversified investment and 
wealth management strategy. Currency and regional economy 
diversification is practiced by companies and individuals as a routine 
matter when assets rise to a level that one does not immediately need 
them. A further mitigation is that the assets in India (bank accounts, and 
real estate combined) amount to less than 10% of my overall assets.2 
 
In response to the SOR, Applicant additionally stated: 
 
India has had friendly ties with the U.S. and the likelihood of any hostilities 
between the two countries is small. It is impossible for me to envision any 
plausible situation in which my father’s citizenship in India could possibly 
pose a security risk to the U.S. through me or in any other way. I am also 
quite certain that my loyalties to the U.S. will not be compromised. 
 
He concluded his response to the SOR as follows:  
 
I am quite certain and willingly affirm that the risks cited in the 
STATEMENT OF REASONS are not facts that will compromise my loyalty 
to the U.S. 
 
 Applicant has a bank account in India with approximately $50,000 in it. Applicant 
did not provide any other information or supporting documents to show his overall net 
worth, or the extent and nature of his financial holdings in the United States. 
 
India 
 
India is a multi-party, federal, parliamentary democracy, with a bicameral 
parliament and a population of approximately 1.1 billion. Its political history since it 
gained independence from Great Britain in 1947 has included several armed conflicts 
with Pakistan, assassinations of two prime ministers, sporadic outbreaks of religious 
riots, and violent attacks by several separatist and terrorist groups in different parts of 
the country. There is a continuing threat from terrorism throughout the country, including 
attacks on targets where U.S. citizens or Westerners are known to congregate or visit. 
 
India’s size, population, and strategic location give it a prominent voice in 
international affairs. India has always been an active member of the United Nations. 
India is a non-permanent member of the Security Council, and it seeks a permanent 
seat on the Security Council. 
 
The United States and India have differences over India’s nuclear weapons 
programs, the pace of India’s economic reforms, and India’s bilateral strategic 
partnership with Iran. Nevertheless, the United States recognizes that India is important 
to U.S. strategic interests. The strategic partnership between the United States and 
                                                          
2 Answer to SOR. 
 
4 
 
 
India is based on shared values such as democracy, pluralism, and the rule of law. 
Since 2002, the United States and India have held a series of substantive combined 
exercises involving all military services. The United States is India’s largest foreign 
investment partner. Since December 2006, direct civilian nuclear commerce with India 
has been permitted. The two countries have a common interest in the free flow of 
commerce and resources, including through the vital sea lanes of the Indian Ocean. 
The United States and India share a common interest in fighting terrorism and in 
creating a strategically stable Asia. They are seeking to foster bilateral relations by 
establishing working groups to address five areas of mutual interest: (1) strategic 
cooperation; (2) energy and climate change; (3) education and development; (4) 
economics, trade, and agriculture; and (5) science and technology, health, and 
innovation. 
 
India is identified in the 2008 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic 
Collection and Industrial Espionage, along with seven other countries, as being involved 
in criminal espionage and U.S. export controls enforcement cases. An earlier report lists 
India as being among the most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary 
information and highlights specific incidents wherein India engaged in attempts to 
acquire export-restricted products.  
 
In its 2009-2011 Report to Congress, the Office of the National 
Counterintelligence Executive noted that some U.S. allies used their access to U.S. 
institutions to acquire U.S. economic and technological information. This was primarily 
achieved through aggressive tactics.  
 
There are numerous instances of violations of U.S. export laws involving India. 
This highlights the desire of India or third parties in India to acquire U.S. technology 
regardless of the laws protecting it. Some of the technology illegally exported or 
attempted to be exported had military capabilities and the potential for being diverted for 
weapons of mass destruction or delivery of these weapons. The threat to the United 
States from foreign collectors, such as India, has continued unabated and targets a 
wide variety of unclassified and classified information. 
 
The Indian Government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but there are 
serious problems involving abuses by police and security forces. Corruption in the 
police force is pervasive, and police officers often act with impunity. The U.S. 
Department of State, notes the most significant human rights problems with police and 
security force abuses, were extrajudicial killings, torture, widespread corruption at all 
levels of government, and separatist, insurgent, and society violence. There are also 
serious human rights violations against women, including rape, domestic violence, 
dowry-related deaths, honor killings, sexual harassment, and discrimination. There is no 
evidence India uses torture or abuse against its citizens to extract economic 
intelligence. 
 
In the past, India had a long-standing military supply relationship with the Soviet 
Union, and continues to obtain the majority of their military supplies from Russia. The 
 
5 
 
 
United States has differences with India over their nuclear weapons program. India has 
a bilateral strategic partnership with Iran. The United States is concerned that India will 
seek greater energy resources from Iran, a country that the United States is trying to 
isolate. India has refused to either sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty or accept 
The International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards on all of its nuclear material and 
facilities.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
6 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable:  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign–operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (e) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government or owning property in a 
foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
 
7 
 
 
individual family tie must be considered. The Applicant’s foreign financial interest must 
also be considered. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”3 
 
Applicant father and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of India. His two 
brothers-in-law are citizens of India and residents of Saudi Arabia. Applicant maintains 
regular contact with these relatives. Applicant has significant financial interests in India, 
including a $50,000 bank account and a real estate interest that was valued at $250,000 
in 2010, prior to its development.  
 
Despite its strategic ties, India is known to engage in economic espionage 
against the United States. India has a partnership with Iran and obtains the bulk of its 
military supplies from Russia, which are causes of concern. India is identified as one of 
the most active collectors of sensitive U.S. economic, industrial and proprietary 
information. There are documented cases of actual or attempted illegal export of U.S. 
restricted dual use technology to India. Its human rights record, terrorism activities, and 
problems with corruption in its government raise security concerns. Applicant’s 
relationships with his family members and his financial interests in India create a 
heightened risk and potential conflict of interest. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply.  
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
 The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government, the 
country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the 
foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. India has strategic ties to the 
United States. However, it also has ties with Iran and Russia; it is an active collector of 
sensitive U.S. economic, industrial, and proprietary information; and there are cases of 
actual or attempted illegal export of U.S. restricted dual use technology. There are also 
concerns about its human rights record; terrorist activities; and corruption issues in its 
government. 
 
 Applicant father and mother-in-law live in India. His brothers-in-law live in Saudi 
Arabia. He provided minimal background information about them. Applicant travels 
annually to visit his father and mother-in-law. His regular contact with them and with his 
brothers-in-law is more than casual and is not infrequent. Without further information 
about these family members and Applicant’s ongoing relationship with them, I am 
unable to conclude that his relationship with them does not create a security risk.  
 
There is insufficient information about the current value of Applicant’s financial 
holdings in India. When the apartment building he owns was being built in 2010, he 
estimated its worth at $250,000. There is no updated information as to its current worth 
and whether Applicant leases the apartments and whether he is involved as a landlord. 
There is insufficient information about Applicant’s holdings in the United States. At this 
juncture without additional clarifying information and based on information in the record, 
Applicant failed to establish that his financial interests in India are unlikely to result in a 
conflict and could be used to influence, manipulate and pressure him. I find none of the 
above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
9 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 52 years old. He received his master’s degree in the United States. 
He has been a naturalized citizen of the United States since 2003. His wife and eldest 
child are also naturalized citizens, and his two younger children were born in the United 
States. The burden of persuasion rests with Applicant. He must provide evidence of 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation sufficient to overcome the case against him. This is 
in no way a comment on an applicant’s loyalty to the United States or his patriotism, but 
recognizes that people may be unpredictable when faced with choices that may affect 
family members. At this juncture, there was limited information about Applicant’s family 
and current financial interests in India. Therefore, the allegations cannot be mitigated. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs   1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
