1 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 11-11064 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the personal conduct or the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 4, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines E and F. The 
DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 4, 2013. The case was assigned 
to me on May 14, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on May 22, 2013, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
June 12, 2013. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted 
2 
into the record without objection. An index for the government exhibits was marked 
Hearing Exhibits (HE) I. Applicant testified, but did not submit any documentary 
evidence. I kept the record open to allow Applicant to submit additional information; 
however, he chose not to submit anything further before the record closed on June 26, 
2013. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 19, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a government contractor. He has worked 
as a help-desk technician for his current employer since March 2011. He was married in 
2010 and divorced in 2012. He has three children from two relationships, ages 10, 4, 
and 3. He has custody of the 10 year old, and is current on his child support for the two 
younger children living with their mother. He has some college education. He does not 
have military experience.1 
 
 In January 2010, Applicant was working for a commercial company. He wanted 
to attend a sporting event and needed to take time off from work to do so. He went to 
his supervisor’s office to ask permission. His supervisor told him he could take the time 
off, but he needed to send the supervisor an email formally requesting it. Applicant 
failed to send the email and went to the event, taking time off from work to do so. A 
timecard was submitted for Applicant showing that he had worked the hours he was 
absent. Apparently, a coworker saw Applicant at the event and informed his supervisor. 
Applicant was called before his supervisor and another employee and asked if he 
attended the game. He denied attending. He later admitted that he lied because he 
didn’t want to admit attending the event in front of the other employee. He was 
terminated for fraud, since he received pay for hours he did not work, which is the 
allegation stated in SOR ¶ 1.a.2   
 
 The SOR also lists 14 delinquent debts totaling about $41,882. Applicant 
admitted that he owed the delinquent debts listed in SOR, except for ¶ 2.c., which he 
denied, claiming that it was his father’s debt.3  
 
 Applicant’s financial troubles began back in 2011. He was behind on several 
debts at that time and he was planning to use his income tax refund to pay them when 
he and his wife separated and ultimately divorced. He then got behind on his mortgage 
payments. He asked his wife to sign a quit claim deed so he could refinance, but she 
refused. He is currently one month behind on his mortgage. He was given an 
opportunity to submit documents showing his current mortgage status post-hearing, but 
he failed to do so. He pays $200 monthly for child support and is current on that 
obligation. He admitted having very little, if any, disposable income available at the end 
of the month once he pays his bills. He has not sought out financial counseling in the 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 27, 59-60; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 28-31; GE 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 35; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
3 
past, but a friend who is involved in financial planning has offered to help him clean up 
his credit for a fee of $600.4  
 
 The status of the debts is described in the table below and all the debts are listed 
in credit reports dated March 2011, August 2012, November 2012, and April 2013.5  
 
DEBT SOR ¶ AMOUNT STATUS EVIDENCE 
2.a  $177 Remains unpaid, no contact with 
creditor. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 48. 
2.b  $432 Remains unpaid, no contact with 
creditor. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 48. 
2.c. $9,744 
 
Applicant claimed this was his 
father’s debt, but provided no 
evidence to document his dispute, 
even though he was given the 
opportunity to submit supporting 
documents after the hearing. Debt 
is listed as a student loan in the 
credit reports. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 48, 62. 
2.d $1,000 Currently behind one month, but 
provided no documentation. 
Unresolved. 
Tr. at 49. 
2.e – 2.i $1,845 Applicant claims he pays periodic 
$50 payments on these student 
loan debts with the last such 
payment occurring in April 2013. 
No documentation provided. 
Unresolved. 
Tr. at 50. 
2.j $4,747 This was a line of credit from his 
former employer that was being 
paid out of his paycheck. When he 
was terminated for fraud, he 
stopped making the payments. His 
last payment was in December 
2009. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 51-52. 
2.k $13,134 This debt resulted from a balance 
owed after a car repossession. He 
is jointly liable with his ex-wife. No 
contact made with the creditor. 
Unresolved. 
Tr. at 52-53. 
2.l $8,658 Remains unpaid, no contact with 
creditor. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 53. 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 32-34, 45, 47, 55-57, 63. 
 
5 GE 4-7. 
 
4 
2.m $1,903 Remains unpaid, no contact with 
creditor. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 54. 
2.n $242 Remains unpaid, no contact with 
creditor. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 54. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
5 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for personal conduct is set 
out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying. One is applicable in this case: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's time 
or resources. 
 
 Applicant was terminated from his employment when he failed to properly 
request time off in writing as directed by his supervisor. He took time off without 
submitting a written request and was therefore paid for several hours that he did not 
6 
work. The company considered his actions tantamount to fraud. To compound his error, 
Applicant lied to his supervisor when he was asked directly whether he took the time off. 
AG ¶ 16(d)(2) is applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns. 
Two potentially apply: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant was confronted by his former employer about his actions in taking time 
off before he could reveal it on his own. During that confrontation he chose to lie. Lying 
to an employer is not a minor offense. Neither AG ¶¶ 17(a) nor 17(b) apply. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG ¶ 18:   
   
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated numerous delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c).  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20(a) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
7 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Although some of Applicant’s debts occurred several years ago, they are still 
owed and they are numerous. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable at this time.  
 
 Applicant’s separation and divorce contributed to his financial distress. Those are 
conditions that were largely beyond his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant failed to 
act timely dealing with his debts. Even though he recently contacted a friend about 
cleaning up his credit, no substantive debt reduction has happened. AG ¶ 20 (b) does 
not apply. 
 
 Even though Applicant contacted his friend for credit help, there is no indication 
his debts are being resolved or under control. Applicant receives partial consideration 
under AG ¶ 20(c). His actions do not qualify as a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.6 AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. His disputed debt 
                                                          
6 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
8 
that he claims is his father’s is not supported by any documented proof absolving him of 
liability. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant intentionally deceived his employer to gain a benefit. When confronted, he lied 
about what he had done. Financially, he has struggled during and after his divorce to 
pay his debts. Despite those circumstances, Applicant has had sufficient time to 
develop a plan of action to deal with his debts, yet he failed to do so. Applicant’s 
financial track record does not persuade me that he will satisfy the delinquent debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs  2.a-2.n:   Against Applicant 
   
9 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
