 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ADP Case No. 11-13434 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the concerns arising from her financial problems that were 
due to years of domestic abuse, followed by loss of employment and underemployment. 
She responsibly handled her financial situation by decreasing her monthly expenses 
and paying her debts. She has taken control of her finances and is firmly on the road to 
financial stability. Eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 21, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) recommending that Applicant’s eligibility to occupy an automated data 
processing (ADP) position, generally referred to as a public trust position, be denied due 
to concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial Consideration). This action was taken 
under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).1 Applicant timely answered the 
SOR and requested a hearing to establish her eligibility (Answer). 
                                                          
1 Pursuant to a Memorandum from the Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for 
Counterintelligence and Security, dated November 19, 2004 (Memorandum), the Defense Office of 
 
2 
 
 
On May 9, 2013, I was assigned Applicant’s case. After coordinating with the 
parties, I scheduled the hearing for June 6, 2013. At hearing, Government Exhibits (Gx.) 
1 – 5 and Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A and B were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and requested additional time to submit documents post-
hearing. She timely submitted Ax. C – Ax. F, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 14, 2013, and the record closed on 
June 28, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant, 36, is divorced and has twin daughters who are 10 years old. Her 
financial trouble started in about 2005, when she was forced to seek an order of 
protection to stop her husband who was physically abusing her. After being removed 
from the home, Applicant’s former spouse refused to financially support their children for 
approximately 18 months. A court determined that he owed Applicant over $10,000 in 
back child support. (Tr. at 28-30, 45, 49-51, 100-101; Gx. 1) 
 
After her former husband was removed from the home, Applicant discovered that 
he had stopped paying the mortgage on their home. Applicant had purchased the home 
on her own in 2001, and she had paid the monthly mortgage payments and other 
household expenses on a timely basis without issue. Shortly after their marriage in 
2004, Applicant’s former spouse convinced her to turn over their finances to him. He 
squandered their money and did not pay the mortgage and other household bills. As he 
worked at night, he hid all the collection notices sent to their home. By the time 
Applicant uncovered her former husband’s betrayal, they had defaulted on the mortgage 
and amassed a significant amount of debt. Applicant depleted her 401(k) retirement 
account and other savings in an attempt to save her home and pay her other debts, but 
it was to no avail and her home was foreclosed. She left her home and moved to an 
affordable apartment. (Tr. at 28-30, 45-49, 97-100; Gx. 3)  
 
 In 2007, Applicant’s divorce was finalized. Before Applicant could stabilize her 
finances and resolve the debts she had accumulated during the marriage, she suffered 
a further financial setback. Applicant’s former employer began outsourcing the work in 
her division and she was forced to accept a buyout. Applicant had worked for her former 
employer for over seven years and planned to remain there until she was forced to 
leave. Applicant was hopeful that she would quickly find another job based on the skills 
she had gained at her former job. Unfortunately, Applicant entered the workforce during 
the recession and was unemployed for a year. The small severance she had received 
and other steps she had taken to reduce her household expenses were insufficient, and 
she was forced to move in with her mother. (Tr. at 29-30, 33, 42, 46, 52, 58-59; Gx. 1) 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) is directed to utilize the provisions of the Directive, to include Enclosure 2, 
the adjudicative guidelines, to resolve contractor cases forwarded to it for a trustworthiness determination. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant testified quite emotionally how, at times, during this period of financial 
despair, she would sit up at night trying to decide which household necessities she 
could afford for her family. Applicant’s main concern was to make sure that her children 
never went to bed hungry at night – a “luxury” she could not afford for herself quite 
often. (Tr. at 32-33) 
 
Applicant was able to secure employment in December 2008, making far less 
than she made at her previous job. She went from earning approximately $60,000 a 
year to less than $25,000, but the job provided health insurance and other benefits that 
she desperately needed for her children. In less than a year’s time, she again found 
herself unemployed. She was unemployed from September 2010 until April 2011, when 
she was able to secure full-time employment with her current employer. Her current 
annual salary is approximately $47,000. (Tr. at 31-34, 52-53, 57-58; Gx. 1) 
 
Applicant works on a DoD contract, handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information. Her performance evaluations reflect that she “exceeds expectations.” She 
was recently promoted to a supervisory position and received a $6,000 increase in 
salary. (Tr. at 35-42; Ax. C – D, Ax. F)  
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 12 debts totaling about $25,000. Department Counsel 
withdrew the $630 debt alleged in ¶ 1.k, because it is a duplicative of another SOR 
debt. (Tr. at 79-80, 92) Applicant credibly testified and submitted some documentation 
that two of the largest SOR debts, totaling $20,878, were resolved in her favor. (Tr. at 
62-70, 78-79; Ax. F) She submitted proof that she satisfied the debts in ¶¶ 1.c and 1.l. 
(Tr. at 87-91; Ax. A; Ax. B). She has a viable plan to resolve her remaining past-due 
debts, submitted disputes with the credit reporting agencies for those debts she denies, 
and is paying her remaining debts. (Tr. at 70-78, 80-86; Answer; Gx. 3 – 5; Ax. D – F) 
 
Applicant provided her monthly budget, which shows that she has approximately 
$1,000 in disposable income each month to pay her debts and meet any unanticipated 
expenses. She has received financial counseling through her employer’s employee 
assistance program, and she is once again in firm control of her finances. (Tr. at 96-97; 
Ax. E) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. 
The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all 
available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that 
assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.2  
 
                                                          
2 Memorandum; Directive, § 3.2. Cf. Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended, ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.1.2.3, C6.1.1.1. 
 
 
4 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust, an administrative 
judge must apply the provisions of the Directive, to include the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG or guidelines).3 In addition to brief introductory explanations, the guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all available and 
reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
In addition to the guidelines, the Directive sets forth procedures that must be 
followed in trustworthiness adjudications. The Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for 
presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. Furthermore, an applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish his or her eligibility for a public trust 
position.4 In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve any doubt in favor of national security.5  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant’s accumulation of approximately $25,000 in delinquent debt raises this 
concern. It also establishes AG ¶¶ 19(a), inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 
19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 An individual’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the analysis, 
because a trustworthiness adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Accordingly, Applicant may mitigate the 
concern by establishing one or more of the following conditions listed under AG ¶ 20:  
                                                          
3 Directive, Enclosure 2. See also, Memorandum from the Office of the Under Secretary of 
Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, directing that the adjudicative guidelines be applied to all 
adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive and DoD Regulation 5200.2-R. 
 
4 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14 – E3.1.15. 
 
5 Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were due to the domestic abuse she suffered at 
her former husband’s hands and a lengthy period of unemployment and 
underemployment. While unemployed, she attempted to ameliorate her situation by 
decreasing her household expenses, including moving in with her mother. Since 
regaining full-time employment, Applicant has handled her finances in a responsible 
fashion. She has established a viable plan to pay those past-due debts she owes and 
has disputed others that she does not recognize. She has received financial counseling 
and has taken control of her finances. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all the 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine factors listed 
at AG ¶ 2(a).6 I hereby incorporate my comments under Guideline F, and highlight some 
additional whole-person factors.  
 
 Although this is Applicant’s first application for a position of trust, she has 
properly handled and safeguarded sensitive information since being hired by her current 
employer over two years ago. Her duty performance has been excellent and she has 
already been promoted to a supervisory position. She has gone through a tremendous 
amount of personal turmoil over the past several years and did not turn to crime or 
engage in other questionable conduct to alleviate her financial problems.  
                                                          
6 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
 
 Trustworthiness adjudications entail a certain degree of predictive judgment, 
where an applicant’s past history is the best indicator of future conduct. Applicant 
established that he has a history of properly handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information and there is no reason to doubt her ability to do so going forward. Her past 
history indicates that she is reliable, trustworthy, and possesses good judgment – 
character traits that are essential for those granted access to sensitive information.  
 
 Additionally, Applicant’s integrity, which is also vital matter to be considered in 
assessing an individual’s suitability for a position of trust, is unassailable. She has been 
candid about her financial issues from the start of her background investigation. 
Moreover, I had an opportunity to observe her demeanor while she testified and found 
her credible.  
 
 Consequently, I find that these favorable whole-person factors, in conjunction 
with the mitigating conditions noted above, mitigate the concerns at issue. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive 
information. Applicant’s request for a public trust position is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
