 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-15190 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated use of information technology systems security concerns, but 
he has not mitigated personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 20, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and M (use of information technology systems). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 20, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 19, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 1, 
2013, scheduling the hearing for May 30, 2013. The hearing was convened as 
 
2 
 
scheduled. The Government called a witness and submitted Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, 
which were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and called three 
witnesses, but he did not submit any documentary evidence. The record was held open 
for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted documents that were 
marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C and admitted without objection. 
Correspondence about the additional exhibits is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 7, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor (contractor). He has 
worked for his current employer since 1998. He seeks to retain his security clearance, 
which he has held for at least ten years. He has a bachelor’s degree and a number of 
post-graduate courses but no post-graduate degree. He is divorced with two children.1 
  
 In 2005, Applicant became the project manager at a government agency to 
modernize a telecommunications/information technology system. He left for another 
project for about 18 months before returning in 2009.2 On August 17, 2011, the 
government agency forwarded the following information to the DOD regarding Applicant 
and another contract employee (Mr. CE-A):  
 
This memorandum summarizes seven (7) security incidents involving 
[contractor] employees providing task deliverables under contract number 
[---] which resulted in removal of two individuals from the contract and a 
subsequent temporary “Stop Work Order” issued by [government agency]. 
 
Two [contractor] staffers, [Applicant] and [Mr. CE-A], were removed from 
contract tasking as a result of the following incidents: 
 
 March 24, 2011: Denial of Service; [Applicant] directs [Mr. CE-A] to 
modify account access and prevent [government agency] 
employees from accessing government-owned network equipment 
despite repeated direction from [government agency] manager to 
not access the device. This action resulted in a program lapse 
which compromised the physical safety of employees at [another 
office of the government agency]. 
 
 March 24/25, 2011: Deletion of Files/Federal Records/Work 
Product; [Applicant] deletes approximately 1,800 emails and 14,000 
files from a government issued laptop and a removable media 
device. At considerable cost, [government agency] staff was able to 
recover the emails and approximately one-third (1/3) of the 14,000 
files. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 87-88; GE 1, 4. 
 
2 Tr. at 15-16, 71-73, 88-90; GE 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 March 24. 2011:  Eavesdropping on telephone conversations; 
[Applicant] and [Mr. CE-A] conspire to afford [Applicant] the ability 
to eavesdrop on an ongoing conference call. [Mr. CE-A] subverts 
the system to ensure [government agency] staff is not aware 
Applicant is on the call and listening passively. Both [Applicant] and 
[Mr. CE-A] actively bypassed system safeguards designed to 
preclude such activity.  
 
 March 23, 2011: Forced Government Off Call; [Mr. CE-A] and 
[Applicant] conspire to covertly force [government agency] 
employee [Mr. GE-1] off a telephone conference call. 
 
 March 23, 2011: Unauthorized Access; [Mr. CE-A] improperly 
accesses a third party account by password guess to enable the 
ability to successfully complete the “Forced Government Off Call” 
action identified above. [Mr. CE-A] hacks the password of another 
[contractor] staff member who had administrative access to call 
functions. 
 
 January 19/20, 2011: Unauthorized Recording of Phone Calls; 
[Applicant’s] recovered files yielded three (3) recordings of 
conference telephone calls involving himself and [government 
agency] program managers. Interviews with [government agency] 
staff indicated that they were unaware any steps were being taken, 
systemic or other, to record the meeting sessions electronically. As 
the telephone system doesn’t have a recording capability, a wiretap 
device would have been required to record the calls. 
 
 January 6, 2011: Improper Use of Government Resources; 
[Applicant] conducted a personal business enterprise using 
government systems and time while under contract task delivery 
paid for by the government. Furthermore, [Applicant] identifies his 
contract government affiliation during correspondence while 
conducting personal business.3 
 
 While Applicant was working on another contract for 18 months, his employer 
used another project manager (Mr. GE-2). Mr. GE-2 resigned from his job with the 
contractor and was hired directly by the government agency in a supervisory position as 
an assistant director under the chief information officer (CIO) of the agency. As the 
assistant director, Mr. GE-2 was Applicant’s supervisor at the agency.4 Applicant stated 
that Mr. GE-2 created a hostile work environment: 
 
                                                          
3 GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 17, 76, 90-92. 
 
4 
 
During both work periods, I was continually challenged by a persistent 
string of unreasonable requests and demands, inconsistent guidance and 
direction, unsubstantiated or exaggerated accusations of poor job 
performance, unfair terminations, disproportionate responses for on the 
job mistakes, and a management style including intolerance, intimidation, 
and personal ridicule.5  
 
 Applicant’s employer verified that his company received several complaints about 
Mr. GE-2. The government representative who conducted the investigation into the 
allegations against Applicant testified that the agency requested that the contractor 
provide evidence of the hostile work environment for the agency to investigate. He 
stated that the contractor only provided information about Mr. GE-2’s conduct on March 
24, 2013. He stated that their investigation found that Mr. GE-2 was testy, loud, and 
yelling on that day. The agency reviewed the allegations with their general counsel and 
equal employment opportunity (EEO) assistant director and determined that the 
allegations of a hostile work environment were unsubstantiated.6 
 
 The allegations against Applicant will be discussed in chronological order, which 
is the reverse of how they were reported by the government agency and alleged on the 
SOR. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f (Improperly using U.S. Government resources) 
 
 Applicant inherited a property in another state that was held in a trust. He was in 
the process of selling the property to a neighbor of the property. In about January 2011, 
he sent a fax to the realtor handling the sale of the property from his work fax machine 
at the government agency. The fax contained a copy of an e-mail that Applicant sent to 
the realtor using his government e-mail account. The e-mail contained Applicant’s 
name, title at the government agency, and contact information. The government agency 
permitted “de minimis” use of government resources for personal use. It prohibited all 
use of government resources for a private commercial enterprise.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e (Recording government employees without their knowledge or 
consent) 
 
 In about January 2011, Applicant recorded meetings and telephone conference 
calls involving employees of the government agency and contract employees, without 
the employees’ knowledge or consent. Applicant worked in a jurisdiction that did not 
make the recording of individuals without their consent a criminal offense as long as one 
party to the conversation consented to the recording.8 The only party to the recording 
                                                          
5 GE 4. 
 
6 Tr. at 53-54, 64, 73-78, 82, 85-86, 154-155, 175-177; GE 4. 
 
7 Tr. at 40-42, 63-64, 119-121, 151-154; GE 2, 4, 5. 
 
8 See http://www.dmlp.org/legal-guide/recording-phone-calls-and-conversations.  
 
5 
 
that was not located in the same jurisdiction was Mr. CE-A, who also worked in a 
jurisdiction that did not prohibit one-party consent recordings. Applicant testified that he 
did not believe he recorded any telephone conferences with anyone outside his 
jurisdiction, including Mr. CE-A. This is contradicted by the government agency 
representative who testified that Mr. CE-A’s voice was on one of the tapes. The 
representative testified that the agency considers their work and meetings to be 
“sensitive, minimally official use.” He stated that the people who were recorded “felt 
violated.” Applicant admitted that his supervisor would have been mad if he discovered 
that Applicant was recording their meetings.9 Applicant stated that he recorded his 
supervisor because it was not uncommon for his supervisor to: 
 
 Make untrue and/or presumptive accusations against [Applicant], [contractor] and 
[its] employees. 
 Hold [contractor] accountable for actions of other contractors or tasks clearly 
outside [its] scope of work. 
 Make various statements that he might forget later.10 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d (Applicant and co-worker forced a government employee off a 
telephone conference call) 
 
 On March 23, 2011, an office of the government agency in another state was 
having problems with its system. Applicant believes that a government employee (Mr. 
GE-1) caused the problem, but that Applicant’s company was being held responsible for 
the problem. Applicant described Mr. GE-1 as a disgruntled former employee of 
Applicant’s company: 
 
What is missing from [government agency’s] report is that THE ONLY 
TWO government employees involved in these reported incidents – [Mr. 
GE-1] and [Mr. GE-2] – are both former [contractor] employees who 
resigned unhappily from [contractor] to become government employees. 
They are also good friends with one another. As an [contractor] employee 
[Mr. GE-1] had a history of internal disputes with other members of the 
[contractor] team prior to his resignation from [contractor]. Multiple 
[contractor] employees had come to me with suspicions that Mr. [GE-1] 
may have deliberately sabotaged their work or withheld critical information 
to provide Mr. [GE-1] the opportunity to “save the day” in the eyes of 
[government agency]. If smoke means fire, some serious games were 
being played by Mr. [GE-1]. In fact, while still an [contractor] employee, I 
had placed Mr. [GE-1] and another [contractor] employee on a written 
warning and Corrective Action Plans. Shortly thereafter, [Mr. GE-1] 
resigned from [contractor] and had only been an [government agency] 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 20, 37-40, 117-119, 149-151, 155-157; GE 2, 4, 5. 
 
10 GE 4. 
 
 
6 
 
employee for 4-6 weeks (approximately) before the reported incidents 
involving him took place. (emphasis in original)11  
 
 A telephone conference call, known as a bridge, was initiated by an employee of 
Applicant’s company (Mr. CE-B) to discuss the matter. As the initiator of the conference 
call, Mr. CE-B could control who had access to the call. The conference call went on for 
some time and parties entered and exited the call. Applicant and Mr. CE-A discovered 
that Mr. GE-1 was on the call. Applicant admits that Mr. GE-1 had authority to be on the 
call, but he stated that the “unethical behavior was when [Mr. GE-1] joined [contractor’s] 
conference bridge (he knew the standard access numbers) and refused to acknowledge 
his presence when named and directly asked if he was present.” During a period when 
Mr. CE-B was not on the call, Applicant and Mr. CE-A agreed that Mr. CE-A would 
access the system using Mr. CE-B’s password and force Mr. GE-1 off the call. Mr. CE-A 
guessed Mr. CE-B’s password, which was a simple numerical string and forced Mr. GE-
1 off the call.12 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (Violated directives from his manager by directing a co-worker to 
modify network account access to prevent government employees from 
accessing the system.) 
 
 On March 23, 2011, an office of the government agency in a third state was also 
having problems with its system. On the morning of March 24, 2011, the problem had 
still not been resolved. Correcting the problem was a priority because the problem 
prevented security from monitoring the office, and it prevented the office from contacting 
security. Applicant admits that a contractor employee “accidently cancelled service” on 
the system. Mr. GE-2 told Applicant that the agency considered the problem to be the 
contractor’s fault and that the government agency would correct the problem. Mr. GE-1 
was assigned to work on the problem. By midday the problem was not resolved, and 
Mr. GE-2 tasked one of the contractor’s engineers to work the problem.  
 
 The problem was still unresolved by late in the afternoon. Mr. GE-2 told Applicant 
to have Mr. CE-A work the problem with Mr. GE-1. Applicant stated that he “sent 
several messages to [Mr. GE-1] via Instant Messenger (IM) asking [Mr. GE-1] for the 
phone number of the conference bridge that was supporting the [location] issue,” but he 
was unresponsive. He stated that Mr. GE-2 yelled at him several times using profanity 
and told him to “just have [Mr. CE-A] ‘pick up the [expletive] phone’ and call [Mr. GE-1] 
directly.” Mr. GE-2 told Applicant that he was not to be involved in the process. 
 
 To correct the problem, an employee had to be on a telephone line to security. 
Mr. GE 1 was on the telephone line to security. Applicant believed that Mr. CE-A was 
more qualified than GE-1 to fix the problem. If two people access the system at once, 
the system can crash. At Applicant’s direction, Mr. CE-A accessed the system and 
changed the password, which locked Mr. GE-1 out of the system and disconnected him 
from the telephone line to security. Applicant and Mr. CE-A both testified that they were 
                                                          
11 GE 4. 
 
12 Tr. at 29, 32-37, 63, 68, 110-117, 144-149, 161-162, 166-167; GE 2, 4, 5. 
 
7 
 
unaware that Mr. GE-1 was in the system when the password was changed. Applicant 
admitted that he told Mr. CE-A not to give Mr. GE-1 the new password to access the 
system.13 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c (Applicant and co-worker bypassed system safeguards to eavesdrop 
on a telephone conference call) 
 
 Shortly after the above incident, Mr. GE-2 held a telephone conference call with a 
number of key people. He specifically told Applicant that he was not to be on the call. 
Applicant testified that Mr. GE-2 “was out of control,” and he thought Mr. GE-2 “was 
going to come in [his] office and start swinging.” He testified that Mr. GE-2 “told me to 
keep my [expletive] butt off that call.” Applicant later testified that Mr. GE-2 “did not 
explicitly tell me, you are not allowed on the call.” Despite Mr. GE-2’s directions, 
Applicant contacted Mr. CE-A and had him link him in to the call without the supervisor’s 
or any of the other parties’ knowledge.14 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 2.a (Deleted 1,800 e-mails and 14,000 files from government-
issued laptop and removable media device) 
 
 On March 24, 2011, it became clear to Applicant that he would no longer be 
working on the project at the government agency. He decided to copy files from the 
government agency’s server. He borrowed a thumb drive that was issued by his 
company to a co-worker. He deleted files from the thumb drive to make room for the 
copied files.  
 
 Applicant realized that he could not copy everything onto the thumb drive. From 
his home, he accessed the agency’s server from his government-issued laptop 
computer. He copied a large amount of files from the server onto the laptop and then a 
DVD. After the files were copied onto the DVD, Applicant deleted the files from the 
laptop. 
 
 The government agency representative testified that the agency has a process 
that an exiting employee must follow to obtain copies of files that are on the server. 
Applicant did not follow that process. The representative testified that the bulk of the 
files were deleted from the thumb drive and that copies of the deleted files were not on 
the server. He testified that the agency was able to recover the e-mails and about one 
third of the files that were deleted at a cost of about $32,000. The agency was 
reimbursed for that cost by the contractor. Applicant stated that the only files that were 
deleted from the server were personal files and files that had the contractor’s personnel 
materials. The co-worker who loaned Applicant the thumb drive testified that all the files 
on the thumb drive were back-up copies of files that were on the server. 
 
 Applicant stated that he gave the thumb drive and the DVD to his employer. In 
April 2011, Applicant’s employer reported to the government agency that Applicant 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 22-29, 60-62, 66-68, 92-106, 140-144, 159-165; GE 2, 4, 5. 
 
14 Tr. at 29-32, 106-109, 161, 165-166; GE 2, 5. 
 
8 
 
deleted files from the thumb drive because he “sought an expedient way to download 
[contractor] proprietary and personal materials from his [government agency] laptop to 
the thumb drive.” His employer offered to provide the thumb drive and a DVD containing 
a copy of the files deleted from Applicant’s laptop computer to the government agency. 
The agency representative testified that the agency received a thumb drive, but it was a 
different thumb drive. To his knowledge, the agency never received a DVD. Applicant 
stated post-hearing that his company’s general counsel had not responded to him as to 
whether the DVD had been returned to the government agency.15 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g (Questionnaire for National Security Positions) 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
May 9, 2011. Applicant answered “No” to Section 27b, which asked: “In the last 7 years, 
have you illegally or without authorization modified, destroyed, manipulated, or denied 
others access to information residing on an information technology system.” He testified 
that he thought he answered the question truthfully.16 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation by an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator on July 18, 2011. A signed statement was 
not taken, but the interview was summarized in a report of investigation (ROI). He was 
not asked about, and he did not discuss, the problems at the government agency. He 
made a general statement that he had never removed restricted material or information 
from a federal or approved contractor facility without authorization.17 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant was described by his company’s chief operating officer (COO) as an 
extremely hard worker, a good manager of people, and a solid engineer.18 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                          
15 Tr. at 42-51, 63-66 121-143, 154, 170-174; GE 2; AE A. 
 
16 Tr. at 168-169; GE 1. 
 
17 GE 3.  
 
18 Tr. at 85. 
 
9 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
 
10 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information; 
 
 (2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
 
 (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations;  
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's time 
or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant used his government fax machine to send a fax to the realtor handling 
the sale of his inherited property. He sent an e-mail to the realtor using his government 
e-mail account. The e-mail contained Applicant’s name, title at the government agency, 
and contact information. I find that Applicant’s “de minimis” use of government 
resources for personal use does not rise to the level of a security concern. SOR ¶ 1.f is 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
 
11 
 
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant intentionally 
provided false information on his SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶ 1.g is 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
 The other incidents reported by the government agency merit greater scrutiny. 
Applicant recorded meetings and telephone conference calls involving employees of the 
government agency and contract employees without the employees’ knowledge or 
consent. Applicant worked in a jurisdiction that did not prohibit one-party consent 
recordings. He admitted that his supervisor would have been mad if he found out that 
Applicant was recording their meetings. Applicant’s statement that he did not believe he 
recorded any telephone conferences with anyone outside his jurisdiction was 
contradicted by the government representative who testified that Mr. CE-A’s voice was 
on one of the tapes. Mr. CE-A also worked in a jurisdiction that did not prohibit one-
party consent recordings. 
 
On March 23, 2011, Applicant and Mr. CE-A agreed that Mr. CE-A would access 
the system using another contractor’s password and force a government employee off a 
conference call. Applicant admits that the government employee had authority to be on 
the call, but he stated that the employee’s behavior was “unethical” because he “refused 
to acknowledge his presence when named and directly asked if he was present.”  
 
 On March 24, 2011, a government employee was attempting to correct a 
malfunctioning system. Mr. GE-2 told Applicant that he was not to be involved in the 
process. At Applicant’s direction, Mr. CE-A accessed the system and changed the 
password, which locked the government employee out of the system.  
 
Shortly after the above incident, Mr. GE-2 held a telephone conference call with a 
number of key people. He specifically told Applicant that he was not to be on the call. 
Despite Mr. GE-2’s directions, Applicant contacted Mr. CE-A and had him link him in to 
the call without his supervisor’s or any of the other parties’ knowledge. 
 
Applicant realized that his time at the government agency was coming to an end. 
He borrowed a co-worker’s thumb drive and deleted many of the files on the thumb 
drive to copy files from the government agency’s server. He took his government-
agency-issued laptop home and copied files from the agency’s server onto the laptop 
and then onto a DVD. He then deleted files from the laptop. He did not follow the 
agency’s protocol for retrieving files when an employee is leaving the agency. 
 
I find that the above actions showed poor judgment and an unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. It also created a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d), and 16(e) are applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
12 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
Any one of Applicant’s actions, standing alone, likely would not be enough to 
establish a security concern. It is the pattern of questionable decisions and disregard for 
authority that is troubling. Applicant may not have liked or respected Mr. GE 2, but he 
was an assistant director at the government agency, and Applicant was obligated to 
follow his directions. He repeatedly failed to do so. 
 
I also was unable to accept all of Applicant’s explanations at face value. For 
example, Applicant testified that Mr. GE-2 “told me to keep my [expletive] butt off that 
[conference] call.” A short time later, Applicant testified that Mr. GE-2 “did not explicitly 
tell me, you are not allowed on the call.” In April 2011, Applicant’s employer reported to 
the government agency that Applicant deleted files from the thumb drive because he 
“sought an expedient way to download [contractor’s] proprietary and personal materials 
from his [government agency] laptop to the thumb drive.” Applicant clearly copied more 
than just his company’s “proprietary and personal materials.” Applicant testified that 
other than personal information and his company’s personnel materials, he did not 
delete any files from the agency’s server. Even if true, the copying of the agency’s files 
and the failure to follow the agency’s exit protocol are problematic. There are no 
mitigating conditions applicable to SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e.  
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
The security concern for use of information technology systems is set out in AG ¶ 
39: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information. 
 
 
13 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof;  
(b)  
(b) illegal or unauthorized modification, destruction, manipulation or denial 
of access to information, software, firmware, or hardware in an information 
technology system; 
 
(c) use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized access 
to another system or to a compartmented area within the same system; 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; and 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s copying and deletion of files would establish several of the above 
disqualifying conditions. However, as discussed above, it is the pattern of questionable 
conduct that is the true concern. That concern is appropriately and adequately 
addressed under Guideline E. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
14 
 
under Guidelines E and M in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and his long and positive 
work record with his employer. However, I have concerns about Applicant’s judgment, 
trustworthiness, and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated use of information technology systems security concerns, but he has not 
mitigated personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
