 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11874 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Drew Early, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct), Guideline K (Handling Protected Information), and Guideline M (Use of 
Information Technology Systems). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 31, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines E, K, and M. 
This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not find under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. On February 15, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
 
2 
 
 
hearing. The case was assigned to me on April 15, 2013. DOHA issued the Notice of 
Hearing on May 2, 2013. The hearing was held as scheduled on June 4, 2013. 
Department Counsel called two witnesses and offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. 
Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) 1 through 12. All exhibits were admitted into 
evidence without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on June 
12, 2013.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
At the start of the hearing, Department Counsel withdrew the Guideline E 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He began working 
for his current employer in March 2011. He received a bachelor’s degree in 1983, 
earned a certificate of completion from a military war college in 2007, and completed 
defense acquisition courses between 2003 and 2010. He served in the U.S Army and 
Army Reserve for about 32 years and retired in the grade of lieutenant colonel (O-5). He 
is married and has four children, ages 16, 21, 23, and 26. He has held a security 
clearance for about 30 years.1 
 
The remaining Guideline E allegation, SOR ¶ 1.c, alleged that Applicant copied in 
excess of 5,000 proprietary documents onto a flash drive on his last day of work at a 
company (hereafter referred to as “Company I”), failed to return the flash drive when 
initially asked, and subsequently retrieved it from his vehicle. The allegation in SOR ¶ 
1.c was cross-alleged as the only allegation under Guidelines K and M. In his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted that he downloaded files on his last day of work at 
Company I, but stated that he was only attempting to copy his personal files. His 
admission, as explained in his Answer to the SOR, is incorporated as a finding of fact.2 
 
 Applicant started working at Company I in August 2009. He worked there as a 
senior program analyst. At the beginning of that employment, he signed a confidentiality 
requirements document. This document indicated that maintaining confidentiality of 
sensitive information was important to Company I’s competitive position in the industry 
and ultimately to its success. It also stated in part: 
 
Protect this information by safeguarding it when in use, filing it properly 
when not in use, and discussing it only with those who have a legitimate 
business need to know. Employees are not to disclose (whether in one-
on-one or small discussions, meetings, presentations, proposals or 
                                                          
1 Tr. 13, 62; GE 1; AE 6, 7; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
2 Tr. 8; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
3 
 
 
otherwise) any material nonpublic information with respect to [Company I], 
its business operations, plans, financial condition, results of operations or 
any development plan.  
 
You must keep confidential and not disclose to others, without prior 
written approval from the Vice President of [Company I], all information 
developed, disclosed, found or learned by you in the course of your 
employment with [Company I]. Everything except that which is intended 
for outside distribution should be considered proprietary. This information 
includes, but is not limited to: reports and surveys, formulae, processes, 
plans, drawings, diagrams, apparatus, mechanisms, tools, equipment, 
designs, specifications, confidential business information, budgets, 
financial reports, customer and supplier lists, confidential cost and pricing 
information, computer source codes, computer programs, manuals, 
concepts, techniques, methods, systems, circuits, research, development 
or experimental work, work in process, operations, schedules of employee 
compensation, personnel records, account records, and trade secrets and 
confidential business and technical information received from third parties 
that is subject to a duty to maintain such confidentiality. If you are asked to 
reproduce documents for someone, either inside or outside the company, 
and are uncertain whether those documents are confidential, you should 
check with your supervisor. Dissemination of proprietary information 
without authorization may result in disciplinary action, up to and including 
termination.3 
 
An employee handbook and a security handbook that contained information on 
safeguarding proprietary information were posted on the company’s website. Applicant 
certified that he read and understood the company’s security handbook in April 2010.4 
 
 Applicant testified that, around February 18, 2011, his supervisor informed him 
that the company was running out of work for him. While continuing to work at Company 
I, he found another job. On March 16, 2011, he submitted a letter of resignation that 
indicated leaving Company I was not an easy decision for him to make. The letter stated 
that his resignation would be effective March 27, 2011.5 
 
 On Tuesday, March 22, 2011, Applicant downloaded about 5,000 files from 
Company I’s computer system onto a flash drive. On Thursday, March 24, 2011, 
Applicant informed Company I’s IT administrator that he was resigning and asked the IT 
                                                          
3 Tr. 39, 47-48, 64-69; GE 1, 4.  
4 Tr. 21-23, 39; AE 11. The company’s information technology (IT) administrator testified that he 
thought the employee handbook stated that proprietary information could not be taken from Company I’s 
building without prior approval. 
5 Tr. 61; GE 5. 
 
4 
 
 
administrator to make a compact disc (CD) of his personal documents and email files. 
The IT administrator advised him to create a computer folder with his personal 
documents so that the administrator could easily identify and copy them.6 
 
 The following day, Friday, March 25, 2011, was Applicant’s last day of work at 
Company I. On that morning, he advised the IT administrator that the folder was ready. 
When the IT administrator attempted to copy the folder, he noticed that it contained 
several thousand documents totaling almost three gigabytes of data. In the folder, he 
noticed files related to a company program (Program F) and other company business. 
He checked the computer monitoring logs and saw that Applicant had copied on 
Tuesday of that week over 5,000 documents, including some pertaining to Program F, 
to a flash drive. The IT administrator advised Applicant’s supervisor of the documents 
that Applicant had copied. The supervisor confirmed that Applicant should not be in 
possession of those documents. The supervisor indicated that he would talk to 
Applicant and retrieve the flash drive.7  
 
 At a later point, Applicant told the IT administrator that the flash drive was in a 
box at his home, and he would return it on Monday. The IT administrator was suspicious 
of Applicant’s statement and checked the computer logs. The logs showed that 
Applicant had been using that flash drive on his company’s computer just 30 minutes 
earlier that day. The IT administrator informed the supervisor that the logs showed 
Applicant’s earlier use of the flash drive. The supervisor told the IT administrator that he 
would talk to Applicant again.8 
 
 At approximately 10:00 a.m. that day, the company’s human relations (HR) 
representative began conducting Applicant’s out-processing and exit interview. During 
the out-processing interview, the HR representative asked Applicant whether he had 
any proprietary information, and Applicant stated that he did not think he had such 
information. At a later point, the out-processing interview was interrupted when 
Applicant’s supervisor took Applicant to a nearby conference room. The supervisor 
advised the HR representative that Applicant was retrieving an item. The supervisor told 
the HR representative not to complete the out-processing until Applicant brought back 
the item and the supervisor gave her the “okay” to proceed.9  
 
After Applicant retrieved the flash drive from his car, the supervisor and IT 
administrator went through the flash drive and deleted documents that the supervisor 
determined were proprietary in nature. The IT administrator estimated that he deleted 
                                                          
6 Tr. 39-40, 70-71; GE 3, 8. 
7 Tr. 40-43, 50-51; GE 3, 8. 
8 Tr. 43-45, 71; GE 3, 8. 
9 Tr. 19-21, 24-28; GE 3, 7, 8. 
 
5 
 
 
80 to 90 percent of the documents on the flash drive. The supervisor later advised the 
HR representative that she could continue with Applicant’s out-processing.10 
 
At some point in the out-processing interview, Applicant also signed an 
Employee Termination Disclosure and Certification form. In that form, Applicant 
acknowledged: 
 
By signing this document I declare that I do not have in my possession, 
nor have I failed to return, any trade secrets, or confidential or proprietary 
information of the company including, but not limited to, any documents, 
manuals, computers, computer programs, software, keys, specifications, 
drawings, blue prints, reproductions, notes, reports, proposals, plans, 
customer lists, marketing materials, or other materials tools, equipment or 
other property belonging to [Company I]. 
 
It is unknown whether Applicant signed that document before or after he retrieved the 
flash drive.11 
 
 During the out-processing interview, Applicant also indicated that he no longer 
had any company badges. A later review of company records confirmed that he was 
issued a Common Access Card (CAC). On March 30, 2011, the HR representative 
called him at home and requested that he return the company’s CAC. He stated that he 
forgot about that card and later returned it to the company that day. On March 30, 2011, 
Company I submitted a Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) entry that 
documented Applicant’s copying of the files and the CAC incident. The JPAS entry 
stated that Applicant should not have been in possession of those files due to their 
proprietary nature.12  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant described the events of his last day at work 
as follows: 
 
My employment with [Company I] was ending in March 2011, as [the 
company] had failed to secure additional work for me. I found a position 
with my current employer . . . I asked the [company] IT representative if 
there was a way to create a copy of my personnel files before I left. The IT 
rep instructed me to put all my personnel files in a folder, which I did, and 
they would provide me a copy of the files before I left.  
 
                                                          
10 Tr. 43-45, 48-49; GE 3, 7, 8. 
11 Tr. 24-25; GE 6, 7. 
12 Tr. 22-24, 28-29, 60-61; GE 3, 7. 
 
6 
 
 
As the last day progressed, the IT rep didn’t show up, so I took a thumb 
drive I had and copied those files to it. Sometime later the IT rep showed 
up and gave me the disk with the same files. 
 
An hour later, my supervisor confronted me in a very aggressive manner 
about downloading the files. I was intimidated and frightened by him; I told 
him I had copied the files and didn’t have the drive with me – which was 
technically true – as I had taken my stuff out to my car. Recovering my 
composure and in an effort to do the right thing, I retrieved the drive and 
gave it to him so he could see I had only copied the personnel files I had 
discussed with IT. I believe it is this event that triggered the JPAS entries.  
 
With[in] an hour, he returned the thumb drive, without comment. He has 
not spoken to me or attempted to contact me in any way shape or form 
since. Nor did he say there was any issue. I was on site for another hour 
out processing, nothing was ever said or conveyed that there was any 
problem. 
 
*  *  * 
 
As a point of fact, I did tell the employer that I had made a copy when the 
IT rep finally showed up with the disk with my files on it. It was shortly after 
that my supervisor got in my face, scaring me and questioning me about 
the files. As I stated before, at that point I did not have physical 
possession of the thumb drive, or I would have given it to him. It was in my 
car – which I retrieved shortly and gave to either him or the IT rep, it’s 
been so long I can’t remember who I gave it to.13 
 
Applicant attributed the JPAS allegations to his former supervisor’s retribution 
because Applicant obtained a job working for a competitor. He claimed the “inaccurate” 
JPAS reporting was an attempt to deny him employment, ruin his career, and destroy 
his reputation.14 
 
During his Office of Personnel Management interview, Applicant reportedly 
stated that he only copied the files in good faith. At the hearing, he testified that he got 
“trigger happy” when he was identifying the personal and Reserve files that he intended 
to copy and “took too much.” He stated that he did not know whether any of those files 
contained proprietary information, but thought that they might contain documents that 
could put Company I at a disadvantage, either directly or indirectly, if someone wanted 
to exploit them. He also acknowledged that these were not the type of documents that 
one would leave in public view, but noted he did not have any malicious intent in taking 
any of the files. In later questioning, Applicant agreed that, in retrospect, his earlier 
                                                          
13 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  See also GE 2. 
14 GE 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
7 
 
 
statement that none of the information was proprietary in nature was not accurate. 
When asked why he told the IT administrator on his last day at work that the flash drive 
was at his home when that statement was not true, he replied, “I got scared, got 
stupid.”15 
 
The director of a program office at a major Army command commended 
Applicant for his invaluable support to that command. The director referred to him as “a 
self-starter with a can-do attitude” who “demonstrated unwavering dedication to the 
warfighter and all the leadership skills necessary to produce the required results.” A 
manager at Applicant’s current company stated that he has “shown himself to be 
trustworthy with use of computer network systems, meticulously following corporate and 
government policies . . . .”16 
 
Applicant completed an impressive military career. During Operation Desert 
Storm, he served as a helicopter pilot and was awarded the Bronze Star Medal and Air 
Medal for his performance in combat. In his career, he also earned the Meritorious 
Service Medal, two Army Commendation Medals, and two Army Achievement Medals. 
His officer evaluation reports (OERs) reflect that he was a top performer. In the OERs, 
he was consistently marked in the highest performance categories, i.e., “best qualified” 
and “outstanding performance, must promote,” or in earlier versions of that form as 
“always exceeded requirements” and “promote ahead of contemporaries.” At Company 
I, his supervisor rated him as “exceptional,” which was the highest rating category. He 
has received many certificates reflecting his completion of various training 
requirements. Since he began working for his current employer, he completed ethics 
information assurance, and cyber awareness training.17 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
                                                          
15 Tr. 61, 63-69, 71; GE 2; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
16 AE 10, 12. 
17 Tr. 64; AE 1-11; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
8 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶ 33 sets forth the security concern for the handling of protected information: 
 
 
9 
 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or unwillingness and 
ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
I have considered all of the handling of protected information disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 34 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) collecting or storing classified or protected information at home or in 
any other unauthorized location; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information.  
 
During his last week of work at Company I in March 2011, Applicant copied 
thousands of files from a company computer onto a flash drive. These files included 
information on at least one company program. At the hearing, Applicant conceded that 
the files were not the type that should be left in public view and believed they contained 
information that could put the company at a disadvantage if someone were to exploit 
them. In a JPAS entry, the company stated that Applicant should not have possessed 
them because of their proprietary nature.  
 
On his last day at work, Applicant sought the assistance of the company’s IT 
administrator to copy documents onto a CD. In looking at the documents, the IT 
administrator noticed they contained information on the company’s business and also 
determined that Applicant had copied those or similar files onto a flash drive earlier in 
the week. A supervisor confirmed that Applicant should not be in possession of those 
files. Applicant was asked to turn over the flash drive. He lied about the flash drive’s 
location by stating it was at his home and indicated he would return it the next workday. 
The IT administrator was able to determine that the Applicant had lied about its location 
through computer logs that showed Applicant had been using the flash drive at work 
earlier that morning. When confronted about the information in the computer logs, 
Applicant retrieved the flash drive from his car, turned it over his supervisor, and 
sensitive information was deleted from it.  
 
Applicant stated that he lied about the location of the flash drive because he “got 
scared, got stupid.” This lie is circumstantial evidence that he knew what he was doing 
was wrong. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant also stated, “I did tell the employer that 
I had made a copy [of the files] when the IT rep finally showed up with the disk with my 
files on it.” The IT administrator’s testimony and written statement, however, contradict 
Applicant’s statement about telling the IT administrator that he made a copy of the files.  
The IT administrator determined that Applicant had made a copy of the files by 
reviewing the computer logs.  
 
Substantial record evidence exists to establish that Applicant knowingly copied 
and intended to take protected information from Company I without authorization. In 
 
10 
 
 
particular, he know that he was not allowed to copy such protected information onto that 
flash drive for his personal retention as he was leaving that company’s employment. He 
also failed to safeguard the company’s protected information by placing the flash drive 
in his car. The above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
 I have considered all of the handling of protected information mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 35 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities. 
 
No information was presented to show that Applicant disclosed protected 
information to an unauthorized individual. Since obtaining his current job, he has 
completed ethics and information assurance training.  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed that he was attempting to copy only 
personal files, but his reaction when confronted by his supervisor showed that he knew 
he should not have copied those files. In his Answer to the SOR, he also stated that he 
initially told his supervisor that he did not have the flash drive with him, but later 
regained his composure and gave the supervisor the flash drive. The record evidence, 
however, is more disturbing and showed that he only retrieved the flash drive after 
being confronted with information from computer logs that revealed he had been using 
the flash drive earlier in the day. Insufficient evidence has been presented to show that 
Applicant has accepted responsibility for attempting to take protected information from 
the company without authorization. While this incident happened a little over two years 
ago, insufficient time has passed to conclude that Applicant has reformed and 
rehabilitated himself. This incident continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 35(a) and 35(b) do not apply.  
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliably and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
 
11 
 
 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information.  
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable: 
(f)  introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, 
or media to or from any information technology system without 
authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines, or 
regulations. 
 
 The discussion of the facts under Guideline K applies equally here and is 
incorporated under this guideline. AG ¶ 40(f) applies.  
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 and the following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor. 
 
 For the reasons discussed under Guideline K, none of the Guideline M mitigating 
conditions apply in this case.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
12 
 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available evidence 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior to include breach of client confidentiality, release of 
proprietary information, unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or 
other government protected information; (2) disruptive, violent, or other 
inappropriate behavior in the workplace; (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing . . . . 
 
The discussion of the facts under Guideline K applies equally here and is 
incorporated under this guideline. Because Applicant’s copying of the protected 
information was explicitly covered under Guidelines K and M, AG ¶ 16(d) does not 
apply. However, since such copying could affect Applicant’s personal, professional, or 
community standing, AG ¶ 16(e) applies to that conduct.  
 
Applicant’s failure to turn over the flash drive when initially asked calls into 
question his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 16(c) applies to that 
failure.  
 
AG ¶ 17 lists three personal conduct mitigating conditions that are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
13 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 For the reasons discussed under Guideline K, none of the Guideline E mitigating 
conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines E, K, and M in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
Applicant has an impressive military record. He served in the Army and Army 
Reserve for 32 years. He held a security clearance for most of that time. He was 
awarded a Bronze Star and Air Medal during Operation Desert Storm. He is highly 
thought of in his current job. Nevertheless, his copying of protected information from 
Company I’s computers on his last week of work there is troubling. When confronted by 
his supervisor at Company I, he lied about the location of the flash drive. He has not 
 
14 
 
 
accepted responsibility for his inappropriate conduct. Instead, he claimed that he only 
intended to copy personal files and that he had no malicious intent. I did not find those 
claims credible.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. Therefore, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guidelines E, K, and M. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
    Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Withdrawn 
    Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline K:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
    Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline M:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
    Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
