1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-15250
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern generated by his relatives who
are citizens of Afghanistan and reside in Pakistan. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On September 6, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) explaining why it was not clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of
Defense on September 1, 2006. Applicant answered the SOR on October 6, 2012,
admitting the allegations and requesting a decision on the record evidence. On January
29, 2013, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM). In the
FORM, Department Counsel amended the SOR by withdrawing subparagraphs 1.c, 1.d,
1.f, and 1.h, amending subparagraph 1.g, and adding subparagraph 1.i. 
2
Applicant received the FORM on January 30, 2013, and filed a response on
March 28, 2013. Applicant did not answer amended subparagraph 1.g in his response.
Because Department Counsel amended subparagraph 1.g to correspond to information
Applicant provided in his answer, I have construed his non-response to amended
subparagraph 1.g as an admission. The case was assigned to me on March 28, 2013. 
Ruling of Evidence
At Department Counsel’s request, I took administrative notice of facts about
Pakistan and Afghanistan set forth in what I marked as Items I through X. The following
is a summary.
1. Pakistan is a developing country. Although it is ostensibly a federal republic, its
human rights record remains poor. (Item X at 1 and Item VII at 1) The Pakistani
government maintains several domestic intelligence services that monitor politicians,
political activists, and journalists. (Item X at 13) 
2. Pakistan’s government does not entirely control its country, and the infrastructure of
significant parts of the country has been devastated by natural disasters over the years.
Ongoing internal tensions, ethnic and religious strife, and general lawlessness prevail in
many parts of the country. (Item I at 2)
3.  Pakistan is home to a number of extremist groups, including the Taliban and Al-
Queda, that target American and other Western interests, high-level Pakistani
government officials, and members of indigenous minority and religious groups (Item IV
at 1; Item I at 2) Pakistan’s government actively and passively supports many terrorist
groups, frustrating U.S. interests. (Item VI at 4) U.S. citizens throughout Pakistan have
been kidnaped for ransom. (Item IV at 3) 
4. In May 2011, U.S. forces killed Osama bin Laden, mastermind of the 911 attacks and
numerous other terrorist attacks around the world. He had been living in hiding in an
affluent suburb of Islamabad, Pakistan’s capital, in a home eight times larger than any
homes in the community, reinforced by extraordinary security measures including 12 to
18 foot walls topped with barbed wire and two security gates. (Item VIII at 2)
5. Although Afghanistan has experienced more aggressive and coordinated terrorist
attacks from the Taliban and other groups in anticipation of the 2014 withdrawal of
Coalition forces, Afghan security forces have progressed in quantity, quality, and
effectiveness. (Items IV and V) 
6. Pervasive corruption remains a problem in Afghanistan. (Item VI at 5)
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 66-year-old married man with two adult children from a prior
marriage. He was born and raised in Afghanistan and immigrated to the United States in
3
1998. He worked as a cab driver for the next 13 years before taking a job with a
defense contractor as a translator in 2011. (Item 4 at 11-17)
Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in linguistics from a university in
Afghanistan in 1969. He then moved to Bulgaria in 1970 to pursue a graduate degree in
wine making. He lived there for the next seven years, returning to Afghanistan in 1977.
After returning, Applicant was drafted to serve in Afghanistan’s army. He served for six
months. (Item 4 at 25)
After the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in 1979, Applicant fled. He lived in
various countries throughout Europe for the next 19 years before immigrating to the
United States in 1998. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2005.   
Applicant’s parents immigrated to the United States during a year unknown from
the record. Applicant’s father died in 1994. His mother remains in the United States and
is a U.S. citizen. Applicant has five siblings. None of them are Afghan citizens. Three of
them are U.S. citizens. The other two are Canadian and German citizens, respectively.
(Item 4 at 27-28)
Applicant’s father was a prominent government official during the rule of
Afghanistan’s last monarch, during the 1960s and early 1970s. He owned an estate
located on hundreds of acres of land, in addition to several acres of land across
different areas in Afghanistan.  (Item 9 at 3) After the Soviet invasion, the puppet
government seized the property.  At some point during the ensuing 20 years, the
property was transferred to private owners. (Item 9 at 3) During the civil war, the
government lost the records containing the identity of the owners. The putative owners
did not live in the house and it remained vacant.
After the U.S.-led invasion of Afghanistan in 2001, Applicant and his siblings
sought to reclaim their property. For the next six to seven years, Applicant, on behalf of
his family, engaged in a protracted legal dispute with the Afghan government for their
property to be returned. During this period, he traveled to Afghanistan nine times,
staying, on average, approximately four months per trip. 
In 2008, Applicant prevailed. The Afghan government returned the property to
Applicant. Subsequently, he sold it for approximately $180,000 USD, splitting this profit
among his siblings. (Item 9 at 4; Item 5 at 11) Applicant and his siblings continue to own
miscellaneous property throughout Afghanistan. (Item 9 at 4; Response to FORM at 2)
Applicant does not intend to take any steps to reclaim this land. (Item 9 at 4) Applicant
owns no property in the United States.  
When Applicant was traveling frequently to Afghanistan, he stayed in touch with
several distant relatives who lived there. Other than a cousin with whom he talks to by
phone once per year, he no longer speaks with any of these relatives. (Item 9 at 6, 9)
4
Applicant’s wife is a citizen of Afghanistan. He met her in 2004 during one of his
trips to Afghanistan to resolve the property dispute, and they married later that year. In
April 2008, she moved to the United States. Currently, she is a permanent U.S. legal
resident. 
Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens of Afghanistan who live in Pakistan. His
father-in-law is a security guard, and his mother-in-law is a hairdresser. (Item 9 at 7) He
met them during his wedding in 2004 and visited them in Pakistan in 2005. He talks to
them approximately five times per year. (Item 9 at 7)
Applicant’s wife has eight siblings. (Item 6)  Four of them, (two brothers and two
sisters), live in Pakistan. All of them are students, and the youngest is 11 years old.
Applicant speaks with these siblings-in-law approximately once or twice per year. (Item
6)
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
5
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if
an individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interests.”  (AG
¶ 6) Although Afghanistan’s security forces have improved in quality, quantity, and
effectiveness, Afghanistan remains a developing country with an evolving rule of law.
Moreover, the Taliban insurgency is still resilient, and it is being supported by foreign
fighters primarily from Pakistan, a haven for extremist, anti-American groups, including
Al Queda. Consequently, Applicant’s cousin, an Afghan citizen and resident, and his in-
laws, Afghan citizens living in Pakistan, trigger the application of AG ¶ 7(a), “contact
with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other
person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, or coercion.”
Applicant’s relationship with his wife raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 7(d),
“sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that
relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion,” applies. Afghanistan remains a troubled country with an active insurgency
with whom it is still fighting, with U.S. assistance. However, Afghanistan is not
attempting to project power worldwide through the brute intimidation of its citizens
abroad.  Consequently, AG ¶ 7(d) does not apply to Applicant’s relationship with his
wife. 
Although Applicant once owned a substantial amount of land in Afghanistan, he
sold it and liquidated the proceeds between him and his relatives. All that remains of his
property in Afghanistan are some miscellaneous holdings scattered throughout the
country. AG ¶ 7(e), “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the
individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation,” does not apply. I
resolve SOR subparagraph 1.i in Applicant’s favor.
Applicant only talks to his cousin living in Afghanistan and his siblings-in-law
living in Pakistan approximately once per year. AG ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication
with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” applies. Applicant has mitigated the
security concern generated by these relatives. Therefore, I resolve SOR subparagraphs
1.e and 1.g in Applicant’s favor.
6
Conversely, there is a presumption that relationships with one’s parents-in-law
are not casual. Consequently, despite the fact that Applicant has only seen his parents-
in-law twice and talks to them only five times per year,  AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
Although Applicant has lived in the United States for approximately 15 years, he
has spent a substantial amount of time living in Afghanistan. He provided little evidence
about the depth of his relationships in the United States. Applicant deserves credit for
his work as a translator; however, he provided minimal evidence of variables that could
favorably influence the Guideline B analysis such as the quality of his work or whether
he was translating under dangerous circumstances. I conclude that neither AG ¶ 8(a),
“the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons
are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it
is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.,” nor AG ¶ 8(b), there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of
the U.S. interest,” apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.
Upon evaluating this case in the context of the whole-person concept, I conclude
Applicant has failed to carry the burden. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
7
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d: WITHDRAWN
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: WITHDRAWN
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: WITHDRAWN
Subparagraph 1.I: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
