 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08139 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 7, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. 
This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not find under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. On February 25, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 2, 2013, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel compiled the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 11.  
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) forwarded to Applicant a 
copy of the FORM with instructions to submit any additional information and objections 
within 30 days of its receipt. Applicant received the FORM on April 11, 2013. In an 
undated document, Applicant submitted a response to the FORM. His response 
contained documents that have been marked as Exhibits (Ex) A through O. Department 
Counsel had no objection to Applicant’s response. The case was assigned to me on 
June 21, 2013. Items 1 through 11 and Ex A through O are entered into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old systems engineer who works for a defense contractor. 
He has been working for his current employer since March 2009. His educational 
background is unknown. He served in the U.S. Navy from August 1988 to May 1999 
and received an honorable discharge. He is married and has three children, ages 9, 11, 
and 14. He appears to have held a security clearance since his service in the Navy.1 
 
The SOR alleged, under Guideline F, that Applicant had eight delinquent debts 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.h) totaling $320,581. Under Guideline E, it alleged that an agreed 
judgment was entered against Applicant in July 2010 for allegedly violating a state code 
provision (SOR ¶ 2.a); that he was found to be in violation of that agreed judgment in 
July 2011 for failing to make required payments (SOR 2.b); and that he was fired from a 
job in October 2008 for misconduct (SOR 2.c). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h totaling $34,000 and denied the remaining 
debts. He also admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b, but denied the allegation 
in ¶ 2.c. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 A Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) entry made by Applicant’s former 
employer on April 16, 2010 stated: 
 
2008 10 09 – Our customer directed the removal of [Applicant] from [a 
U.S. intelligence] facility immediately, as there seem[s] to be serious 
allegations against [Applicant] with the [state court]. The customer also 
reported that during working hours on site, [Applicant] has been soliciting 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
2 Items 1 and 3. Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, and 2.b and added the 
comment “with reason” for each of those admissions. However, he provided no reason or explanation 
with those admissions.  
 
3 
 
 
other employees for financial investments and other employee 
opportunities with a company he owns.3 
 
In response to Section 13C (Employment Record) of his Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) dated April 12, 2010, Applicant indicated that he 
was “laid off” from a job in October 2008. He stated the reason for being laid off was: 
 
The [state] has a court case against a company I worked parttime for. My 
name was put in the lawsuit. [My former employer] found out about this 
and released me from my contract.4 
 
In response to Section 13A (Employment/Unemployment Information) of the      
e-QIP, Applicant indicated that, once the “prime contractor” completed an investigation, 
he had his “full access granted” in October 2008. However, he also listed that he was 
unemployed from October 2008 to March 2009. From the evidence presented, it does 
not appear that Applicant ever returned to that job after being released in October 2008. 
The basis for him stating he was granted “full access” following a prime contractor’s 
investigation is unknown.5  
 
In response to Section 28 (Involvement in Non-Criminal Actions) of the e-QIP, 
Applicant stated that he was a party in litigation instituted by a state’s corporation 
commission in August 2008. He stated the litigation was brought against a company at 
which he worked, and he was named a party in the lawsuit. He further stated that he 
had a letter indicating he admitted “no guilt” and was in full cooperation with the state 
attorney handling the matter. He also stated, “I have to payback anything I made while 
employed by [the company]. I made a total of $9,000 while working there. I have agreed 
to pay this sum back to all parties involved.”6    
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he entered into an agreed 
judgment with the state corporation commission for an alleged violation of a state code 
provision. This legal action was brought against Applicant in July 2008. The specific 
code provision that was allegedly violated states: 
 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the offer or sale of any securities, 
directly or indirectly,  
*  *  * 
(2) To obtain money or property by means of any untrue statement of 
material fact or any omission to state a material fact necessary in order to 
                                                          
3 Item 10. It is unknown why the JPAS entry was made a year and a half after the reported event.  
4 Item 4. See pages 26-27 of the e-QIP. 
5 Item 4. See pages 12-16 of the e-QIP. 
6 Item 4. See pages 58-59 of the e-QIP. 
 
4 
 
 
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which they 
were made, not misleading, or . . . .7 
 
In a letter to a state attorney dated October 28, 2008, Applicant stated that he 
attended the company’s seminar explaining its investment program. Under that 
program, “homeowners would take out loans against their house ($50K) and [the 
company] would use it towards investments set to mature within 5-7 years at which 
time, [the company] would pay off each investor’s home and [the investors would] 
receive 50% of their investment return.” He noted that all of the seminars were held at a 
church, a pastor was involved in the program, and he thought it was a faith-based 
program. He served as a representative of the company and was involved in bringing 
potential investors to the seminars. He claimed that he had no involvement with the 
investors once they arrived at the seminars. In that letter, he stated that he brought four 
potential investors to the seminars. In another letter, he stated that all the people he 
recruited for the company were family, friends, and co-workers.8 
 
In responding to interrogatories, Applicant provided a portion of a transcript of a 
state corporate commission hearing. The caption of the transcript listed Applicant as the 
only defendant in the proceeding. The transcript indicated Applicant entered into an 
Agreed Settlement Order. Under that order, he was required to “pay $9,000 in 
commissions that he had received as a result of the sales of securities and to return 
those to 25 investors.” It also noted that he was required to begin making payments to 
the investors of $720 per month starting in July 2010 and to submit status reports of his 
payments. Applicant failed to take those actions. When state authorities later contacted 
him about this matter, Applicant stated that he lost his job and would provide a further 
explanation. The transcript indicated that he provided no further explanation.9 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a – collection account for $183,000. This account was a real estate 
mortgage loan. Applicant denied this debt. In the FORM, Department Counsel indicated 
that Item 7 (a credit report) provided evidence supporting this allegation. However, Item 
7 reflected that this account was being paid “as agreed” and also stated “Closed Paid; 
Current Account.” No other documents in the FORM support this allegation. Insufficient 
evidence has been presented to substantiate this allegation.10 
                                                          
7 Items 3, 6, and 11. 
8 Ex M and N. 
9 Items 5 and 6. The case summary of this legal action indicated that this matter was disposed of 
through a “judgment.” See Item 6. 
10 Items 3 and 7; Ex B and C. In the e-QIP, Applicant indicated he had a delinquent mortgage. He 
also provided documentation that he entered into a Loan Modification Agreement for a mortgage loan of 
$826,621 with a different creditor. From the evidence presented, it appears that the e-QIP entry and Loan 
Modification Agreement do not pertain to the mortgage loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
5 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b – collection account for $93,000. This account was a second 
mortgage loan. Applicant denied this debt. Item 7 indicated that this account was “late 
30 days” and had a high credit amount of $93,000. Item 7 also indicated that the 
account’s balance was zero, listed no amount as being past due, and noted this account 
was transferred or sold. In Item 7, a different entry with a later date of last activity 
reflected that a mortgage loan held by another creditor with a high credit amount of 
$93,000 was paid. No other documents in the FORM support this allegation. Insufficient 
evidence has been presented to substantiate this allegation.11 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.c – collection account for $8,676. This was a credit card account that 
was placed for collection. Applicant denied this debt. Item 7 indicated the account was 
charged off and the date of last activity on this account was January 2005. In response 
to the FORM, Applicant provided a letter from this creditor indicating an account with 
that company had a zero balance. His two most recent credit reports do not list this 
account. From the information provided, I find this account is resolved.12 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d – collection account for $1,655. This was a medical account that was 
placed for collection. Applicant denied this debt. Item 7 showed that this account had a 
zero balance and indicated it was paid. No other documents in the FORM support this 
allegation. Insufficient evidence has been presented to substantiate this allegation.13 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e – collection account for $250. This was a cable television account that 
was placed for collection. Applicant denied this debt. Item 7 indicated that the date of 
last activity on this account was April 2004. Item 7 did not list a balance or past-due 
amount, but indicated the high credit was $250. Applicant provided no proof that this 
debt has been resolved. This account is not listed on his two most recent credit 
reports.14 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – collection account for $28. The original creditor on this account was 
a music service club. Applicant denied this debt. Item 7 indicated that this account was 
past-due $28 and was placed for collection. The date of last activity on this account was 
in February 2010. Applicant provided no proof that this debt has been resolved. This 
account is not listed on his two most recent credit reports.15 
                                                          
11 Items 3 and 7; Ex D. Ex D is a certificate of satisfaction from the alleged creditor that indicated 
a mortgage had been paid. Item 7 indicated that Applicant had two mortgages from this creditor. From the 
information provided, it is unclear to which mortgage the certificate of satisfaction applies.   
12 Items 3, 7, 8, and 9; Ex E. From the information provided, it could not be confirmed the account 
listed on the creditor’s letter is the same account as that alleged in the SOR. 
13 Items 1, 3, and 5. 
14 Items 1, 3, 5, 7, 8 and 9. 
15 Items 1, 3, 5, 7, 8 and 9. 
 
6 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g – collection account for $25,000. This was an automobile loan that 
was late 90 days as of April 2010. Applicant admitted this debt. In his response to the 
FORM, he presented a Notice of Dismissal of a lawsuit in which he agreed to pay the 
creditor $7,028 plus interest and $1,054 in attorney’s fee at a rate of $200 per month 
beginning in March 15, 2013. He provided no proof of payments under that agreement. 
This debt remains unresolved.16 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – collection account for $9,000. This debt arose from Applicant’s 
Settlement Order discussed above in the Personal Conduct section. He admitted this 
debt. In his response to the FORM, Applicant presented a letter dated April 23, 2013, 
from a senior investigator of the state corporation commission. It stated:  
 
As part of your letter, you offer to begin making payments to [the 
company’s] investors. According to your letter it appears that you are 
contemplating paying $8 a month to each investor until you have paid at 
least $9,600 total. 
 
As you may recall you entered into a Settlement Order dated October 20, 
2009 wherein you agreed to pay the investors $9,000 within 150 days of 
that order. But this payment was not made. 
 
Due to your representation of having lost your job, on June 15, 2010 the 
Commission agreed to amend that Order and agreed to you making 
monthly payments of $720 to the investors. But these payments were not 
made. 
 
Due to the foregoing, the Commission entered a Default Judgment on 
April 20, 2012. According to this Order, you were to have paid the 
investors $9,000 and the Treasurer of [State] $1,000 by May 30, 2013. 
These payments have not been made. Although the Division of Securities 
and Retail Franchising (“Division”) encourages you to make the required 
payment even though the deadline has passed, please note the Division 
cannot change the terms of the Order, including payment amounts and 
dates. 
 
The payment plan that you are proposing would be self-imposed and will 
not affect the Commission’s ruling. As such, the Division’s encouragement 
to make the payments should not be construed as altering the 
requirements of the prior Order or as acceptance of the offer in your 
letter.17 
  
                                                          
16 Item 5; AE F. The date that Applicant was to begin making those payment was difficult to read, 
but appears to be March 15, 2013. 
17 Ex G. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant provided no proof of payments under the Settlement Order or default 
judgment. This debt remains unresolved.18   
 
In October 2012, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement (PFS) that 
reflected his net monthly income was $13,180, and his total actual monthly payments 
were $12,021, which left him a net monthly remainder of $1,159. Of particular note, the 
PFS indicated that he paid $4,035 per month in car expenses. In September 2012, he 
obtained financial counseling.19  
 
Applicant presented no character reference letters or work performance 
evaluations. 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
                                                          
18 Items 1-9. 
19 Items 1-9. 
 
8 
 
 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant accumulated two debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h) that he was unable or 
unwilling to pay over an extended period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Insufficient evidence was presented to establish that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, and 1.d were delinquent. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is resolved. The debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.e and 1.f are insignificant and raise no security concerns. I find in favor of Applicant on 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f.    
 
 Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h. These debts are ongoing, 
significant, and cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. He failed to establish that these debts arose due to conditions beyond his 
control or that he acted responsibly in trying to resolve them. He presented no evidence 
that he has made any payments towards these debts. Although Applicant has received 
financial counseling, he failed to show that his financial problems are being resolved or 
are under control. From the evidence presented, I am unable to find that his financial 
problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(c) applies partially. None of the other mitigating 
conditions apply to the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h.  
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available evidence 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or 
unreliable behavior . . . ; (2) . . . inappropriate behavior in the workplace; 
[and] (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
The three Guideline E allegations are related. In October 2008, he was 
terminated from a job for soliciting co-workers to participate in financial investments. In 
July 2008, those financial investments were the subject of a state corporation 
commission lawsuit alleging untrue statements or misleading omissions were made in 
the sale of those securities. In 2009, Applicant entered into a Settlement Order in which 
he agreed to pay $9,000 to 25 investors. He failed to make those payments. In April 
2012, a state corporation commission entered a default judgment against him. Record 
evidence is sufficient to show that Applicant was involved in the sale of financial 
investments that were in violation of state law and his employer’s policies. The above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 lists three personal conduct mitigating conditions that are potentially 
applicable: 
 
11 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline E. He 
stated that he admitted “no guilt” arising from the state lawsuit. He portrayed himself as 
having limited involvement in those financial investments. He told a state attorney that 
he only brought four potential investors to the financial seminars, but the Settlement 
Order required him to reimburse 25 investors. From the evidence presented, it is 
apparent that Applicant has not accepted responsibility for doing anything improper, 
although his misconduct led to him being terminated from his job and resulted in a 
default judgment against him. From the foregoing, I am unable to find that Applicant is 
unlikely to engage in such questionable conduct in the future. Questions about 
Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment remain.  AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 
and 17(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
12 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Navy and received an honorable 
discharge. He presented no character evidence. Since he elected to have a decision on 
the written record, I was unable to observe him and assess his demeanor and 
credibility. He failed to present sufficient whole-person information to mitigate the 
alleged security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. Therefore, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Guidelines F and E. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant 
    Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
