KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The record supported the Judge’s finding that Applicant’s uncle held a high rank in the
military.  The Judge’s conclusion that the presence of foreign relatives in Afghanistan raised
unmitigated security concerns is sustainable.  Applicant’s contention that the Judge was biased
against him does not overcome the presumption that the Judge was impartial.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 12-07670.a1
DATE: 07/08/2013
DATE: July 8, 2013
In Re:
-------------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-07670
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Christopher Graham, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 22, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Department Counsel requested a hearing.
On April 25, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge James F. Duffy denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s findings were
supported by substantial record evidence; whether the Judge was biased against Applicant; and
whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with
the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  Born in Afghanistan, he was educated in that
country and in the United States.  He left that country in the late 1970s and lived for several months
in another Mideast country.  He moved to a third Mideast country, working for an organization that
obtained aid such as food, clothing, etc., for persons in need.  He came to the U.S. in the early 1980s
and became a U.S. citizen in the mid-1980s.  He has numerous relatives living in Afghanistan,
including his mother, a citizen and resident of that country.  Applicant speaks with her about once
a month and provides her with between $2,000 to $4,000 per year.  Applicant has three siblings and
several siblings-in-law who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan.  He has two uncles and several
nephews who are citizens and residents of that country.  One uncle was a high-ranking official in
the military and, having left the service, later worked for the government of Afghanistan, assisting
in military and police matters.   Applicant has monthly contact with this uncle.  The other uncle is
retired from a position within the government of Afghanistan.  Applicant has received numerous
certificates for his dedication and outstanding duty performance.  Although he has never been in
combat, Applicant testified that he has been exposed to improvised explosive devices or to other
potential attacks.  Afghanistan has a poor human rights record.  It faces many daunting challenges,
including defeating terrorists.    
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge found that Applicant’s foreign relatives raised security concerns under Guideline
B.  He noted the instability of the government in Afghanistan and evidence that terrorists operate
within its borders and concluded that Applicant’s contact with his foreign relatives are neither casual
nor infrequent.  Given the poor security conditions in Afghanistan, the Judge stated that Applicant
could be placed in a position of having to choose between his relatives and the interests of the
United States.  The Judge addressed Applicant’s evidence that he had been exposed to danger in
support of U.S. military operations, concluding that it was not sufficient to mitigate the security
concerns arising from Applicant’s family connections.  
Discussion
Applicant challenged the Judge’s finding that one of his living uncles held a high rank in the
military.  He cites to his testimony that he did not know for certain what his uncle’s rank was.  We
examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by substantial record evidence.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 10-06195 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 4, 2011).  In this case, Applicant admitted the SOR
allegation pertaining to his uncle’s rank.  In addition, he testified that he took the word of another
uncle in stating the military rank in question.  Although acknowledging that he had no first-hand
knowledge of this matter, he did not deny that his uncle held the rank in question.  Even without his
SOR admission, the evidence is sufficient to support the Judge’s finding.  
Applicant contends that the Judge was biased against him because of his country of origin.
He cites to the Judge’s alleged error about the uncle’s rank in support of this argument, contending
that an error so purportedly egregious could only be explained as having resulted from bias.
However, as stated above, the challenged finding is supportable.  Applicant points to nothing in the
record likely to persuade a reasonable person that the Judge lacked the requisite impartiality.
Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge was impartial.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
11-03500 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2012).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The presence of terrorist activity in a foreign country is a significant factor in Guideline
B cases.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-09986 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2011).  In addition, the Judge’s
findings about the political instability in Afghanistan, human rights violations in that country, the
extent of Applicant’s family connections there, the prominence of some of his family members, and
Applicant’s frequent contact with his family support a reasonable conclusion that there exists a
foreseeable risk that Applicant could come to the attention of persons interested in acquiring U.S.
classified information, thereby subjecting him to a conflict between the interests of his family and
those of the U.S.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a
clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jean E. Smallin            
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody           
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
