 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-09362 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
foreign influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 20, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 11, 2012, admitted the three 
allegations raised, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case 
was assigned to me on April 24, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on May 1, 2013, setting the hearing for June 4, 2013. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1-6. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant objected to the fifth and sixth documents offered on the basis that, as 
journalistic and Internet-based information, respectively, they constituted hearsay. 
Recognizing the nature of the documents, I accepted GE 5 and a modified GE 6, 
according them appropriate weight. (Transcript (Tr.) at 19-26) In the form of a request 
for administrative notice regarding the country at issue, it also offered a Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) marked as HE-1, which was accepted without objection. Applicant testified and 
offered eight documents, which were received without objection as Exs. A-H. Two 
additional documents were accepted as Exs. I-J without objection the next day. The 
record was closed upon receipt of the hearing transcript on June 13, 2013.  
 
Procedural Ruling  
 
I take administrative notice of facts relating to Afghanistan. They are set forth in 
documents offered by Department Counsel, marked as HE 1. The facts administratively 
noticed are those limited to matters of general knowledge and not subject to reasonable 
dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant is a 53-year-old linguist who has worked for the DOD for over a year-
and-a-half. Growing up in Afghanistan, Applicant’s father worked for the former king’s 
government and his mother was a writer. Having been loyal to the last king of 
Afghanistan through the 1970s, Applicant’s family did not approve of the upcoming 
changes in their country. After the communist takeover in the late 70s, the family began 
fleeing Afghanistan in the early 1980s, about the time of the Soviet war in Afghanistan. 
(Tr. 51) Over time, his family immigrated to the United States. All of Applicant’s 
immediate family, including his parents and siblings, are naturalized U.S. citizens living 
in the same state as Applicant. They lead ordinary, suburban lives. Applicant moved to 
the United States in 1988, married in 1991, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
1994. In 2003, he took his last leisure trip to Afghanistan. During that trip, he belatedly 
received a master’s degree in engineering that he had earned in the 1980s. Like the 
rest of his family, he has led a routine suburban life. 
 
Applicant has no contact with or knowledge of extended family or family friends 
remaining in Afghanistan. As a whole, his side of his family has no notable contact with 
Afghanistan or its citizens. The have live contentedly as U.S. citizens and residents for a 
quarter of a century or more. 
 
Applicant’s wife is apolitical. His three children were born in the United States 
and have a broad range in ages, with the eldest attending college while the youngest is 
preschool. His current work keeps him away from his home and at a secure worksite 
most of the year, during which time he has little contact with his wife and children. 
Applicant presently earns about $96,000 a year. He has owned the same home in the 
United States for over a decade. His wife, who has a part-time job, contributes an 
additional income of about $10,000 to the family coffers.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Married for 22 years, Applicant met his wife’s father a “long time ago.” (Tr. 34) 
Applicant’s father-in-law was appointed to a high profile political position by a high 
ranking Afghani official in the late 2000s. From about 1990 until about 2007, Applicant 
and his wife had regular contact with Applicant’s in-laws as they lived in the same 
suburban area. Around 2007, contact became minimal when Applicant’s father-in-law 
returned to Afghanistan to assume his political appointment. (Tr. 69) The father-in-law 
was eventually assassinated. The assassination is believed to have been a symbolic act 
by the Taliban to show the current Afghani administration as weak. (Ex. 5 at 4) 
Applicant never had a genuine relationship with his father-in-law. His wife was “out of 
touch” with her father during the time leading to his death. (Tr. 60)  
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law splits or used to split her time between the United 
States, where she has a green card and has applied for U.S. citizenship, and 
Afghanistan, where she is a noted activist. She is in her 60s. Applicant does not follow 
her career or her travel, if any. They have had minimal contact over the years. He last 
saw her about two years ago at a family wedding in the United States. Applicant and his 
wife do not discuss the mother-in-law. He notes that he is too busy with his own life to 
follow his mother-in-law’s life. (Tr. 35.) The mother-in-law does not know what he does 
for a living. 
 
 Applicant has two sisters-in-law who are citizens and residents of the United 
States. At one point, one of the women operated a business in Afghanistan with the 
other woman’s help. The two women often traveled back and forth between the U.S. 
and Afghanistan. He does not believe they currently travel between countries or 
maintain the business. He does not know anything definitive about their current 
activities or their former business. They have little to no contact with Applicant. He last 
saw them about two years ago at a family wedding in the United States. They do not 
know what he does for a living.  In describing his life, Applicant noted: “I just work, eat, 
and sleep. I have no business with anybody. . . . And I have no contact with [my in-
laws]. I always visit with my own wife [when in the United States.]” (Tr. 42)  
 
 Applicant is highly regarded for his work. His most recent assessment has him 
rated as outstanding in seven areas and as exceeding criteria in the three remaining 
areas of evaluation. (Ex. H) His team leader notes the excellence of Applicant’s work, 
his dedication, his commitment to long hours, and his willingness to put his own life on 
the line in pursuit of the mission. (Ex. A) He writes that Applicant is “the most capable 
linguist on the base and the best linguist I have ever worked with.” (Ex. A) He further 
notes that Applicant “has the ability to translate more than one conversation at a time 
and translate while the other is still speaking, which is a rare and very extraordinary skill 
most linguists lack.” (Ex. A). Applicant’s commanding officer gives him a glowing 
recommendation. (Ex. B) A sergeant from his company writes that Applicant is honest, 
effective, trustworthy, and has a unique talent for conversation with those under 
observation. (Ex. C). His high reputation precedes his work with the defense industry. A 
former engineering associate, who has known Applicant since 1994, describes him as a 
hard working, diligent, and motivated individual who quickly rose within their company. 
He further notes that Applicant had keys and a security card at work, and that he 
 
4 
 
 
handled his access with responsibility. (Ex. D) A neighbor, who has known Applicant 
and his family for a decade, describes Applicant as friendly and honest. (Ex. E) 
 
         Administrative Notice  
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts, as derived from HE 1 with 
regard to Afghanistan. They represent highlights from that exhibit, but HE-1 was 
considered in its entirety.  
 
Afghanistan has been an independent nation since 1919. However, in 1989, a 
civil war ensued with the departure of the Soviet Union’s forces, who had occupied 
Afghanistan for ten years. In the mid-1990s, the Taliban rose to power. The Taliban 
were forced out of power in 2001 by U.S. forces and a coalition partnership. After a few 
years of control by an interim government, democratic elections took place in 2004 and 
again in 2009.  
 
Despite this and other progress made since the Taliban was deposed, 
Afghanistan still faces many daunting challenges, principally defeating terrorists and 
insurgents, recovering from over three decades of civil strife, and rebuilding a shattered 
physical, economical, and political infrastructure. The risk of terrorist activities in 
Afghanistan remains extremely high. Various groups, including the Taliban, oppose the 
strengthening of a democratic government and do not hesitate to use violence to 
achieve their means. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence, and 
the potential exists throughout the country for hostile acts, either targeted or random, 
against U.S. and other Western nationals at any time. In addition, the country’s human 
rights record remains poor. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
5 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence  
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern related to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.  
 
The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 are relevant:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
6 
 
 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
In these cases, the relationship between a spouse and his or her immediate relatives is 
generally imputed upon an Applicant. Here, it may be assumed that Applicant’s wife has 
a normal relationship with her mother and sisters. Consequently, Applicant’s wife’s 
relationships with her mother and siblings is imputed upon Applicant for the purposes of 
raising security concerns, thus raising disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b). 
  
The foreign influence guideline also includes factors that can mitigate security 
concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties to persons in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. The question is whether contacts 
with these individuals (mother-in-law and two sisters-in-law) are sufficient to create the 
potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified 
information. Here, Applicant's in-laws mainly live in the United States. The three women 
formerly commuted between the United States and Afghanistan with some regularity. 
Having so little contact with them in recent years, however, Applicant does not know if 
they continue with such travel. He believes his sisters-in-law do not. In general, he takes 
no interest in these relations.  
 
The burden in these proceedings, however, is on the Applicant. Here, Applicant 
has not provided persuasive evidence that his in-laws no longer travel to Afghanistan. A 
letter or testimony from one of the women or his wife could have addressed this issue. 
Lacking such evidence, it must be assumed one or more of these women still maintain 
an intermittent presence in Afghanistan, thus creating the potential for foreign influence. 
 
7 
 
 
The question remains if that potentiality could lead to the compromise of classified 
information.  
It is undeniable that Afghanistan has an on-going issue with maintaining political 
and economic stability in the face of opposition factions, including terrorist organizations 
such as the Taliban. This factor raises the level of scrutiny in this case. 
 
While Applicant’s wife’s relationships with her mother and sisters can be 
attributed to Applicant, Applicant acknowledges that his in-laws have made themselves 
notable in Afghanistan as opponents of those who threaten democratic stability in 
Afghanistan. His father-in-law left a quiet, suburban life in the United States to help 
rebuild Afghanistan. For his efforts, he was assassinated. However, it appears he was 
killed as the incumbent of his particular and high profile political position, not for being 
who he was. This seems to be somewhat reinforced by the fact that, for at least a few 
years, his widow and daughters maintained a periodic presence in Afghanistan without 
incident. His in-laws have a long-standing and selfless commitment to Afghanistan and 
its freedom; they bow to no external forces. The likelihood that Applicant would ever 
have to choose between one of these in-laws and the United States is highly unlikely. 
 
Applicant’s family comes from a family that has long supported a free 
Afghanistan and opposed both communist and terrorist factions there. However, they 
are not political activists. They have quietly lived in suburban United States for about a 
quarter of a century.  
 
In accepting his current position with the Department of Defense, Applicant 
chose to forsake a career in engineering. Instead, he made a noble and selfless choice 
to support the missions of the United States. This choice has left him working 
exceptionally long hours, in strained circumstances, and constructively estranged from 
his wife for nearly two years while earning a commensurately moderate salary. His 
superiors have noted his commitment and diligence in his work. His willingness to risk 
his own life in pursuit of the mission has also been noted. His testimony credibly 
expressed his general disinterest in the works of his in-laws and reinforced what the 
record shows to be a selfless dedication to his present work. In light of these 
considerations, it is unlikely that Applicant would have to choose between the interests 
of his in-laws during any future visits to Afghanistan and the interests of the United 
States. AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
  
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old engineer turned linguist who has served the 
Department of Defense for over a year-and-a-half with distinction. He is a well-rated 
employee. His superiors describe him as an honest, reliable, trustworthy, and talented 
linguist with highly advanced and unique skills in his field.  
 
Applicant’s father-in-law was assassinated while serving in the Afghani 
government. However, it appears he was killed not for being who he was or being a 
member of his family, but because of the position he held. Since his assassination, 
there have been no additional incidents involving foreign factions and Applicant’s in-
laws’ family. Meanwhile, Applicant has put his own life on the line in his work. He did so 
by intentionally turning his back on the comfort of home in favor of aiding this country. 
As noted by the Appeal Board, an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the 
United States is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a 
Guideline B case. (ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007)). 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no doubts about Applicant’s ability to 
find for the United States should there ever be a question of him choosing between his 
in-laws and this country. I similarly have no reservations regarding his eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance given the unique facts presented in this case. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the 
foreign influence guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
