 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------   )  ISCR Case No. 12-03661 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Michael E. Veve, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of being sexually attracted to children, including his 
daughter. In 1997, he intentionally rubbed his 13-year-old daughter against his erect 
penis when she was sitting on his lap. When his daughter was 15 years old, he 
attempted to get his daughter intoxicated so he could engage in sexual activity with her. 
However, there is insufficient evidence to support the allegation that Applicant suffers 
from an emotional, mental, or personality disorder affecting his judgment, reliability, or 
stability. Psychological conditions concerns are mitigated. Personal conduct concerns 
are mitigated as a duplication of sexual behavior concerns. Sexual behavior concerns 
are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 16, 2011, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or SF 86. (GE 1) On February 20, 2013, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) the President promulgated on December 29, 2005. 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual behavior), E 
(personal conduct), and I (psychological conditions). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOHA was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that 
his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On March 29, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. 
(HE 3) On May 6, 2013, Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed on 
Applicant’s case. On May 9, 2013, the case was assigned to me. On May 23, 2013, 
DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for June 19, 2013. (HE 1) Applicant’s 
hearing was held as scheduled. Department Counsel offered three exhibits, and 
Applicant offered one exhibit. (Tr. 24-27; GE 1-3; AE A) There were no objections, and I 
admitted GE 1-3 and AE A. (Tr. 25, 27) Additionally, I admitted the hearing notice, SOR, 
and Applicant’s response to the SOR. (HE 1-3) On June 27, 2013, I received the 
transcript of the hearing.     
  
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response denied the SOR allegations in whole or in part. (HE 3) 
He made some partial admissions. He also provided extenuating and mitigating 
information. (HE 3) His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old network engineer or systems engineering manager 
employed by a defense contractor. (Tr. 109; GE 1) He graduated from a nationally 
known university with a bachelor of science degree in systems engineering, and he 
earned a master’s degree from a nationally known university in computer science in 
1989. (Tr. 109-110). After graduating from college he served on active duty as a pilot for 
eight and a half years. (Tr. 110, 214) During his years on active duty, he served in some 
dangerous environments, and he is eligible to join the Veterans of Foreign Wars. (Tr. 
215-216) He served 13 years in the reserves, and he honorably retired as a commander 
(O-5). (Tr. 110, 214)  
 
In 1978, Applicant married, and about 18 months later, he and his spouse 
divorced. (Tr. 115-116, 142) One year after the divorce, he remarried his spouse. (Tr. 
116) His two children from that marriage were born in 1982 and 1984. (Tr. 116-117, 
202) In 2000, he and his spouse divorced after 18 years of marriage. (Tr. 116-117) In 
2002, he met his future spouse, and in December 2002, Applicant told her about the 
incident where he attempted to give alcohol to his daughter, and he told his spouse that 
“he wanted to have sex” with his daughter. (Tr. 237, 239, 245, 248-249) He did not 
disclose to his future spouse that he had fantasies about having sex with children, and 
she did not believe that would happen. (Tr. 246) He also related to her that he had a 
problem with his security clearance. (Tr. 239-240) In 2006, Applicant married his current 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
spouse. (Tr. 133, 238) His current spouse is 56 years old, and she does not have any 
children. (Tr. 238-239)  
 
In August 1986, Applicant held a top secret clearance with access to sensitive 
compartmented information (SCI). (Tr. 112) In 2001, Applicant’s security clearance was 
denied or revoked. (Tr. 203) In 2006, Applicant applied for a security clearance based 
on the favorable assessments of Dr. C and Dr. M, two psychologists he hired, who 
wrote letters on his behalf in 2003. (Tr. 128; GE 2 at I82-I91) In 2006, his request for a 
security clearance was withdrawn without a decision.  
 
A friend from Applicant’s church, who has known Applicant for about five years, 
described him as honest, extremely reliable, trustworthy, organized, thoughtful, 
considerate, generous, ethical, and honest. (Tr. 220-234) Applicant’s pastor served in 
the Air Force for over 20 years, and she has frequent contact with Applicant. (GE 2 at 
I98-I99) Applicant’s pastor described him as friendly, outgoing, helpful, honest, 
committed, reliable, and enthusiastic. (GE 2 at I98-I99) She recommended Applicant for 
a position having access to highly sensitive information and sensitive responsibilities. 
(GE 2 at I99) 
 
Over the years working for defense contractors, Applicant received several 
awards, including four personal excellence cash awards. (Tr. 115) Applicant is very 
religious and receives a great deal of support from his church. (Tr. 141-147) He 
describes himself as financially secure, conscientious, responsible, trustworthy, 
proactive, and security minded. (Tr. 144-147) Applicant’s spouse describes Applicant as 
highly ethical, honest, reliable, and conscientious about security. (Tr. 240)  
 
Sexual Behavior and Personal Conduct  
 
 Applicant admitted that he engaged in inappropriate behavior with his daughter 
and that he fantasized about sexual activity involving children. He denied that any of this 
conduct occurred after 2001. Applicant’s SOR does not allege that: (1) He obtained an 
erection while his 13-year-old daughter was sitting on his lap. He placed his hands on 
her hips, and he repositioned her so he could rub her against his erection; (2) He 
obtained an erection while a six-year-old girl was sitting on his lap in the 1980s; (3) He 
intentionally falsified his February 12, 2002 SF-86 when he denied that he left 
employment in the last seven years under unfavorable circumstances or by mutual 
agreement after allegations of misconduct or unsatisfactory performance because he 
was concerned that it would adversely affect his security clearance. He actually left 
employment with a bank in 2001 under such circumstances. (4) He lied at his hearing in 
the following instances: (a) He said he could not remember whether he masturbated at 
work while looking at pictures of women wearing short skirts and high heels on his 
computer; (b) He denied looking at child pornography; (c) He said that he could not 
remember having an erection while a six-year-old girl was sitting on his lap; (d) He 
denied that he told an AGA polygrapher about having an erection while the six-year-old 
girl was sitting on his lap; and (e) He claimed he did not remember rubbing his daughter 
against his erection when she was 13. (GE 2 at 110; GE 3) These four non-SOR 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
allegations will also be discussed; however, their consideration is limited.2 The 
consistency and credibility of Applicant’s statements are in issue and are described 
seriatim. 
 
2001 and 2006 Post-Polygraph Interviews 
 
In 2001, Applicant received three polygraph tests from another government 
agency (AGA). In his post-polygraph interviews, Applicant stated: 
 
(1) He developed a sexual interest in his daughter when she was 13 years old. In 
1999, when she was 15, he took her to a motel and offered her alcohol. (GE 3 at 3) 
Applicant believed if she became intoxicated, he could have sex with her. (GE 3 at 3) 
She declined the alcohol, and they did not have any sexual contact. (GE 3 at 3)     
 
(2) Applicant estimated that he masturbated ten times while fantasizing about his 
daughter. (GE 3 at 3)  
 
(3) Twice per month since 1996, Applicant visited websites that contained short 
stories about children engaging in sexual activity with each other and with adults. (GE 3 
at 3) This admission suggests that he visited such websites more than 100 times from 
1996 to 2001.  
 
(4) Applicant masturbates to sexual fantasies involving children between twice 
per day and twice per month. (GE 3 at 3) 
 
In 2006, AGA gave Applicant two lifestyle polygraphs. (Tr. 113) Applicant said, 
the polygraph test “did not go well.” (Tr. 202) Applicant made several statements, which 
the polygrapher summarized in his report. (GE 3 at 5-6) The summary has at least one 
error. The summary states, “[Applicant] first viewed his adopted daughter in a sexual 
manner, when she was six years old.” (emphasis added) (Tr. 202) Applicant’s daughter 
is not adopted. (Tr. 202) The AGA’s summaries of post-polygraph interviews are 
summarized as follows: 
 
(1) Applicant first viewed his daughter in a sexual way when she was six years 
old and most recently six months previously (in 2006). (GE 3 at 4) He fantasizes about 
                                            
2 The evidence from the post-polygraph interviews establishes these four non-SOR allegations by 
substantial evidence. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed 
five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07219 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Sep. 27, 2012) (stating same). 
Consideration of these four non-SOR allegations is strictly limited to these five circumstances. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
sexual intercourse and other sexual acts with her. (GE 3 at 4) He had recurring thoughts 
about sexual activity with her about every three years when she was 6 to 12 years old. 
(GE 3 at 4-5) Applicant most recently masturbated while thinking about his daughter in 
2001. (GE 3 at 5)  
 
(2) Applicant reported: 
 
[W]hen his daughter was 13 years old, he obtained an erection while she 
was sitting on his lap. [Applicant] denied inappropriately touching her 
during this encounter, stating that his hands were placed on her hips. 
[Applicant] later admitted that his hands were on her hips because this 
allowed him to reposition her. [Applicant] stated that during this incident he 
may have been gyrating her against his erection. [Applicant] reported a 
similar incident that took place during the 1980s, in which [Applicant] 
obtained an erection while a six year old girl was sitting on his lap. (GE 3 
at 5) 
 
(3) Applicant related that in 1999 when his daughter was 15 years old, he 
purchased alcohol with the intent of getting his daughter intoxicated so that he could 
have sexual intercourse with her. (GE 3 at 5)  
 
(4) Applicant read erotic stories involving children involved in sexual activities 
with other children and adults from once per week to twice per day between 1997 and 
2001. (GE 3 and 5) This admission suggests that he visited such websites more than 
250 times from 1997 to 2001. 
 
(5) He denied that he had sexual thoughts about his daughter, and he denied 
viewing child pornography after July 2001. (GE 3 at 5) 
 
(6) He indicated he had a constant battle to stop viewing child pornography. He 
routinely looks at young girls in church and then looks away “before becoming sexually 
attracted to them.” (GE 3 at 5) 
 
(7) Applicant admitted that he deliberately failed to list unfavorable termination of 
employment in April 2001, on his SF-86, and he did not disclose this negative 
information because he was concerned that it would adversely affect his security 
clearance. (GE 3 at 5-6)  
 
(8) Applicant stored pictures of women wearing short skirts and high heels on his 
office computer while employed at the office he left in April 2001. Co-workers found the 
pictures to be inappropriate. Applicant stated, “he could not recall if he used the 
photographs for the purpose of masturbation.” (GE 3 at 6) 
 
Applicant’s Hearing Statement  
 
Applicant admitted that between approximately 1996 and continuing until 2001, 
he deliberately viewed websites with short stories involving children engaged in sexual 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
activity. (Tr. 118-119; SOR response to SOR ¶ 1.a) Applicant defines pornography as 
pictures of women in various stages of undress, and he considers Playboy magazine to 
contain pornography. (Tr. 189-190) He also received pornography through the mail, 
including VHS tapes and magazines. (Tr. 149) He said he stopped visiting those 
websites after Dr. C and Dr. M advised him such behavior was problematic because of 
his security clearance. (Tr. 121)  
 
Applicant said he preferred to visit websites with pictures of women wearing short 
skirts, high heels and hose. (Tr. 118) He enjoyed watching videos of women 
undressing. (Tr. 119) He masturbated while viewing the content of those websites. (Tr. 
118) He denied that he had ever viewed an underage person getting undressed. (Tr. 
119) 
   
From at least 1997 until 2001, Applicant masturbated to sexual fantasies of 
children, including his daughter. (Tr. 120-121, 150; SOR response to SOR ¶ 1.b) He 
read about erotic situations involving children and “masturbated to each and every one 
of them.” (Tr. 150) He explained: 
 
I don’t think that I was thinking of doing anything with the children, during 
the reading of the stories, during the reading of the stories. They were just 
exciting stories, and I read the stories and masturbated while I was 
reading the stories. . . . I mean there w[as] certainly a time when the father 
daughter stories came along, and I had these ideas of hey, I wonder if [my 
daughter] would do that. (Tr. 194)    
 
He said he was focused on the seduction process involving the children; however, he 
was not focused on their physical size or sexual development. (Tr. 196)  
 
Applicant denied that he told the polygrapher in 2006 that he had sexual 
fantasies about his daughter when she was six years old. (Tr. 151-152) He claimed he 
started fantasizing about having sex with his daughter when she was 14 years old. (Tr. 
151) He denied that he sought out stories of children engaged in sexual activity; he 
denied seeking stories of incest; and he denied that he could remember most of the 
content of the stories. (Tr. 153) He said he could not remember having an erection while 
a six-year-old girl was sitting on his lap, and he denied that he told the polygrapher 
about having an erection while the six-year-old girl was sitting on his lap. (Tr. 163) He 
denied knowing the specific time frame when he read about children having sex on the 
web and began fantasizing about sex with his daughter, but it could have been around 
1995 or maybe around 1998 or 1999. (Tr. 154-156) He denied knowing the frequency of 
his sexual fantasies about his daughter. (Tr. 159) In response to a question about 
rubbing his daughter against his erection when she was 13, he said: 
 
Actually I don’t recall if I actually did that or not. Now, I may have had my 
hands on her hips, I may have moved her around. Why I moved her, I 
don’t know. So, no, I don’t think it would be fair to ask me do I remember, 
or did I do that on purpose for that, because I really do not remember. (Tr. 
156)   
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
He felt guilt and shame about having sexual fantasies about his daughter. (Tr. 159) 
After Applicant attempted to have sex with his daughter, he said he completely stopped 
having sexual fantasies about her. (Tr. 160) 
 
 In 2006, Applicant told the AGA polygrapher that he put some pictures on his 
computer at work that had something to do with his termination of employment. (Tr. 
199) He had difficulty remembering the pictures, but believed they were probably of 
adult women wearing short skirts. (Tr. 199-200)  
 
Applicant denied having sexual fantasies about children other than his daughter. 
(Tr. 161, 187) The following colloquy with Department Counsel occurred: 
 
Q: . . . [D]id you start having sexual fantasies about other children? 
 
A: I don’t recall having sexual fantasies about other children. In fact, I’m 
sure I didn’t. 
 
Q: Did you at some point find yourself to be sexually aroused when you 
would look at children? 
 
A: No. (Tr. 161) 
 
Applicant said he avoids looking a people under the age of 18 because he does not 
want to become titillated. (Tr. 162) He continues to struggle with his desire to view 
pornography. (Tr. 178) He denied that he viewed pornography at work. (Tr. 178)   
 
In about 1999, Applicant planned to get his daughter intoxicated so that he could 
engage in sexual intercourse with her. (Tr. 122-124; SOR response to SOR ¶ 1.c) He 
went on a trip with his daughter to see colleges. (Tr. 123) He purchased alcohol to 
provide to her; however, he denied that he brought a condom or lubricant on the trip. 
(Tr. 123-124) She refused the alcohol. (Tr. 123) They did not sleep in the same bed, 
and he did not engage in sexual activity with her. (Tr. 123) His daughter is now married 
and living in a different state from Applicant. (Tr. 124, 243) He said he has a positive, 
normal relationship with his daughter. (Tr. 124-125) Applicant’s daughter has no 
information about Applicant’s security clearance issues, and if she learned about his 
attraction to her “she would be sad, and upset, and shocked and dismayed, and so on.” 
(Tr. 126, 170-171) His son and former spouse are not aware of his sexual interest in his 
daughter or his security clearance issues. (Tr. 171) Later during his hearing, Applicant 
said, “I have never tried to have sex with my daughter. And no, there were no other 
fantasies about possibly having sex with my daughter prior to that, no. And none since. 
(Tr. 165)   
 
Applicant denied that in 2006, he said that it is a constant battle for him to stop 
from viewing child pornography. (Tr. 129, 157, 186; SOR response to ¶ 1.e) He 
conceded it was a constant battle for him to stop looking at adult female pornography. 
(Tr. 129-130, 186) He was uncertain what he told the AGA polygrapher; however, he 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
was sure he did not tell the AGA polygrapher that it was a “constant battle for him to 
stop from viewing child pornography. (Tr. 186) He agreed that he found looking at 
young girls at church to be “titillating,” and he made an effort not to look at them 
because of the thoughts he had. (Tr. 130-131, 188-189; SOR response to ¶ 1.e)  
 
When he was confronted with his admission that he moved his six-year-old 
daughter onto his erect penis, he said: 
 
Actually I don’t recall if I actually did that or not. Now, I may have had my 
hands on her hips, I may have moved her around. Why I moved her, I 
don’t know. So, no, I don’t think it would be fair to ask me do I remember, 
or did I do that on purpose for that because I really do not remember. (Tr. 
156) 
 
Applicant conceded that in 2006 he would have had a better recollection of the incident 
involving his six-year-old daughter. (Tr. 159) He denied remembering that he had an 
erection when a six-year-old child was sitting on his lap. (Tr. 163) He denied telling the 
polygrapher in 2006 that he had an erection while a six-year-old child was sitting on his 
lap. (Tr. 163)  
 
Around 2000, Applicant was having difficulties at work with his supervisor, who 
was making unreasonable demands about his work. (Tr. 207-208) Applicant left that 
employment by mutual agreement. Applicant stored some pictures on his computer at 
work of a woman wearing a short skirt and high heels. (Tr. 205, 208; GE 3 at 6) He did 
not remember any employees stating the pictures were inappropriate. (Tr. 209) 
Applicant told the polygrapher that he did not remember masturbating at work, and he 
reiterated that he did not recall masturbating in his cubicle. (Tr. 209) After a lengthy 
narrative answer about his memory, he concluded that masturbating at work was 
unlikely because of his cubicle’s location. (Tr. 209-2012; GE 3 at 6)   
 
 Applicant disclosed his sexual interest in his daughter to his current spouse, 
friends from church, his father, and some psychologists. (Tr. 171-173) He received 
some therapy and counseling, and he is actively involved in his men’s group and his 
church. His spouse is very supportive, and she encourages him in his fight against 
viewing pornography.  
  
Psychological Conditions 
 
In 2001, Applicant’s security clearance application was under review at AGA. An 
AGA psychologist, without interviewing Applicant, reviewed his file and concluded that 
Applicant suffered from “essential features of a sexual disorder in which an individual’s 
sexual focus involves sexual activity with a child” raising concerns about his “stability, 
reliability, and judgment.” (Tr. 37; SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 3.a; GE 2 at I80) There was no 
diagnosis under Axis I or II.  
 
In 2003, a Ph.D. psychologist, Dr. C, evaluated Applicant. (GE 2 at I82-I83) Dr. C 
knew Applicant for one year, and conducted psychological testing on Applicant. (Tr. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
190-191; GE 2 at I82-I83) Dr. C noted that Applicant spent “several hundred dollars 
visiting various websites.” (GE 2 at I82) Dr. C related that Applicant said these were 
similar to the exposure in “R-rated movies.” (GE 2 at I82) Dr. C indicated that Applicant 
may have exaggerated the pornographic nature of his viewing of web-based content, 
and Dr. C recommended reinstatement of Applicant’s access to classified information. 
(GE 2 at I82-I83)        
 
A psychologist (Dr. P), who completed his Ph.D. in 1991, and has more than 20 
years practice as a clinical psychologist, met Applicant at a men’s group in November 
2011. (Tr. 35, 69) Dr. P evaluated Applicant from March 2013 to June 2013 for a total of 
three hours. (Tr. 31-33, 72; AE A) Dr. P reviewed the SOR and other materials from 
Applicant’s file as part of the evaluation. (Tr. 36, 92, 105-108) Dr. P did not interview 
Applicant’s daughter. (Tr. 89) 
 
Dr. P described the AGA psychological assessment of Applicant as unreliable 
and unethical because of the absence of an interview of Applicant. (Tr. 45-47) Applicant 
began looking at pornography when he was 10 years old, and part of him may have 
remained sexually immature and not advanced much beyond the age of 10. (Tr. 74) 
Applicant’s interest in pornography increased over the years. (Tr. 75) He felt drawn to 
pornography; he had trouble controlling his urge to view pornography; and he was 
psychologically, but not physically addicted to it. (Tr. 75) From Applicant’s report to Dr. 
P, his addiction to pornography ended several years ago. (Tr. 76) Dr. P thought 
Applicant’s sexual interest in his daughter surfaced when she was about 13 to 15 years 
old, and Dr. P conceded that if Applicant was sexually attracted to his daughter when 
she was six years old, it would change his opinion and assessment of Applicant. (Tr. 79) 
 
Dr. P opined that Applicant “seemed quite normal to me, heavily influenced by 
[30] years of being exposed to pornography.” (Tr. 38-39) If his patients, who frequently 
view internet pornography are honest, they will admit that they may have seen females 
or males on those websites who are under the age of 18. (Tr. 40, 97, 100) Dr. P 
explained: 
 
[Pornographic websites] flash all kinds of scenes in the presentation or 
portals, if you will . . . so anyone who is honest would say, have I seen 
child pornography? Well, I have seen advertisements, I have seen 
promos, I have seen things, trying to lure me into that particular tunnel, if 
you will. . . [T]he truth is everyone of us in the room has probably read 
pornographic material through [E]nglish literature, that involves sex with a 
minor, in some way, that was arousing or titillating. We have all been 
exposed to it without asking for it. And just because you are exposed to it, 
and aroused by it, doesn’t mean, my gosh that means I have these 
tendencies in me. No, it just means that we are all capable of being 
aroused by far more things than we would actually do, or desire to do. (Tr. 
56)  
 
Dr. P did not believe it was “unusual” for a father to have his six-year-old 
daughter on his lap, for him to become sexually aroused by her presence, and then for 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
him to rub her body against his erect penis. (Tr. 80) Dr. P did not believe this constituted 
“pedophilic behavior.” (Tr. 80) Dr. P did not believe Applicant was a pedophile because 
Applicant denied sexual activity with children, he denied visiting child pornography 
websites, and he denied having a fascination or compulsion to engage in sex with 
children. (Tr. 41-42) Dr. P conceded that Applicant might be lying to him about his lack 
of sexual interest in children. (Tr. 101-102) Applicant did not exhibit a pattern of seeking 
sex with children. (Tr. 42) When Applicant sought sexual activity with his 15-year-old 
daughter, his sexual fantasy was beginning to merge into reality. (Tr. 42-43) No one 
knows what Applicant would have done if his daughter had taken the proffered alcohol. 
(Tr. 43) Applicant’s reading about children engaging in sexual activity is the only 
evidence of a pattern. (Tr. 44) 
 
Dr. P opined that Applicant does not suffer from an addictive pattern of being 
sexually attracted to children, sexual disorder, emotional, or psychiatric disorder, 
“unless he has been lying to all of us.” (Tr. 44-47; AE A) He agreed with the opinion of 
Dr. C and Dr. M, two psychologists who evaluated Applicant in from 2002 to 2003. (Tr. 
47-57; GE 2 at I82-I91) He noted patients often are unable to discern how their 
presentation of information, such as Applicant’s viewing of pornography, might be 
misperceived to be more aggravated than it really is. (Tr. 47-50) Applicant 
communicated an intent to commit a crime to the AGA (attempting to engage in sex with 
his daughter), when it was really just “a half-baked idea that comes about simply 
because you have trained your mind to be easily stimulated.” (Tr. 51) The attempt to 
have sex with his daughter was impulsive and not premeditated, and he had no difficulty 
ending his viewing of internet pornography. (Tr. 54-55; GE 2 at I90) Dr. P agreed with 
Dr. M that Applicant needed therapeutic help for situational anxiety and depression 
relating to the end of his marriage. (Tr. 53-54) Applicant had a history of depression, 
including suicide attempts, and an adjustment disorder because he was in a temporary 
difficult situation. (Tr. 87-88) Applicant did not have any other psychiatric diagnosis that 
called into question his trustworthiness or reliability. (Tr. 87)       
 
Dr. P believed that AG ¶¶ 14(a) and 14(c) did not apply to mitigate sexual 
behavior security concerns; however, AG ¶¶ 14(b) and 14(d) did mitigate sexual 
behavior security concerns. (Tr. 62-63)3 He concluded that AG ¶¶ 20(a) to 20(e) all 
applied to mitigate psychological conditions security concerns. (Tr. 65-67)4 
                                            
  3AG ¶ 14 provides four conditions that could mitigate sexual behavior security concerns including: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no evidence of 
subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under such unusual 
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
 4Five Psychological Conditions mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 29 are potentially applicable:  
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
                                                                                                                                            
 
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the individual has 
demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the treatment plan; 
 
(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment program for a 
condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is currently receiving 
counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified mental health 
professional; 
 
(c) recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed by, or 
acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an individual's previous 
condition is under control or in remission, and has a low probability of recurrence or 
exacerbation; 
 
(d) the past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g., one caused by death, 
illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been resolved, and the individual no longer 
shows indications of emotional instability; and 
 
(e) there is no indication of a current problem. 
  
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision 
on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
  The relevant security concerns are under Guidelines D (sexual behavior), E 
(personal conduct), and I (psychological conditions). 
 
Sexual Behavior 
 
  AG ¶ 12 describes the security concern pertaining to sexual behavior: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
  AG ¶ 13 lists four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying including: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
  AG ¶ 13(b) is not established. There is insufficient evidence to support the 
allegation that Applicant suffers from an emotional, mental, or personality disorder 
affecting his judgment, reliability, or stability. The opinions and conclusions of 
Applicant’s three psychologists are more credible and reliable than the AGA 
psychologist’s opinion. The AGA psychologist never met with Applicant, whereas 
Applicant’s psychologists interviewed him on multiple occasions. The AGA 
psychologist’s opinion is not sufficiently reliable to meet the substantial evidence test. 
SOR ¶ 1.d is refuted.5  
 
  Applicant has a strong urge to view pornography. On more than 250 occasions, 
he read stories of children being sexually assaulted, and he has admitted masturbating 
on numerous occasions while reading these stories. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) In 1999, he 
went on a trip with his 15-year-old daughter. He offered her alcohol because he thought 
it would reduce her inhibitions against engaging in sexual activity with him. (SOR ¶ 1.c) 
He admitted to the AGA polygrapher that he was attempting to stop viewing child 
pornography, and he looks away from children in church to avoid becoming sexually 
attracted to them. (SOR ¶ 1.e) He is ashamed of this conduct and does not want his 
former wife and children to know about it. His denial of viewing child pornography is not 
credible. AG ¶¶ 13(a), 13(c), and 13(d) apply. 
 
  AG ¶ 14 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns. See note 
3, supra (quoting the four mitigating conditions). Although Applicant presented some 
mitigating information, none of the mitigating conditions fully apply to mitigate all of the 
sexual behavior concerns. He did not sexually assault or view child pornography as an 
adolescent. He denied that he sexually assaulted any children or underage women after 
1997, when his 13-year-old daughter was sitting on his lap, and he was rubbing her 
against his erection.  As such, his criminal sexual activity is not recent. His private 
viewing of adult pornography, his reading of stories of incest and sexual abuse of 
children on a personal laptop computer or other privately owned media, and 
                                            
5Mitigation of SOR ¶ 1.d should not be interpreted to mean the opinions of Applicant’s three 
psychologists are accepted as accurate. His three psychologists provide sufficient impeachment of the 
AGA psychologist’s opinion so that the reliability of SOR ¶ 1.d is not substantiated. I disagree with the 
underlying factual basis of his three psychologists’ opinions. They accepted Applicant’s current version of 
his past sexual activity involving children, and his promise that he will not engage in future criminal sexual 
conduct as accurate, sincere, and truthful. His psychologists accepted his statements that he terminated 
his high-risk sexual misbehavior at face value. However, I have concluded that the AGA summaries of his 
sexual behavior in the post-polygraph interviews are accurate.  
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
masturbation in private are protected conduct under the First Amendment and the 
liberty interest of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. 
Constitution. See Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003)(discussing right to engage in 
private, consensual sexual behavior); United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group, 
Inc., 529 U.S. 803 (2000) (discussing adult pornography and First Amendment).  
 
  Applicant received some therapy and counseling, and he is actively involved in 
his men’s group and his church. His spouse is very supportive of his efforts to refrain 
from viewing pornography. His viewing of pornography is private and discrete (except 
for the occasion or occasions when he viewed pictures at his office and masturbated). 
Applicant disclosed his sexual misbehavior to AGA, three psychologists, members of his 
church, his spouse, and DoD security officials. His sexual misbehavior no longer serves 
as a basis for coercion or duress. His sexual behavior involving viewing adult 
pornography in the privacy of his home does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
  Applicant admitted a continuing interest in children as he tried to avoid looking at 
them in church. His masturbation on numerous occasions when considering children 
engaged in sexual activity causes continuing concern he will revert to acting out such 
behavior in the future with children, or he will return to viewing child pornography. He 
had an erection while a six-year-old child was sitting on his lap, and when his 13-year-
old daughter was sitting on his lap in 1997. He rubbed his penis against his 13-year-old 
daughter’s body. See n. 2, supra. 
 
  Applicant’s sexual assault upon his 13-year-old daughter and his viewing of child 
pornography are criminal conduct, and his attempted seduction of his daughter when 
she was 15 years old is arguably criminal conduct as an attempted statutory rape. All of 
his criminal sexual conduct continues to serve as a basis for coercion as he has not fully 
come to terms with his own misconduct. At his hearing, he minimized his sexual interest 
in children. He repeatedly denied remembering facts and details. His memory lapses 
and outright denials of the misconduct he previously admitted in the AGA’s post-
polygraph interviews were not credible. His denial that he viewed child pornography, 
even though he admitted doing so after his 2006 polygraph and his denial that he 
fantasized that he about sexual activity with children are not credible. Even his own 
psychologist, Dr. P, conceded that it is unlikely that he would not at least inadvertently 
view child pornography (pop-ups) when he was viewing adult pornography and 
masturbating while reading child-incest stories. He continues to admit that he receives 
visual sexual stimulation from viewing pictures and looking at children in church. Sexual 
behavior security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
 
15 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Three personal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially 
applicable. Those three disqualifying conditions provide:   
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: .  .  . (3) a pattern of . . . or rule 
violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing.  .  .  .   
 
AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) do not apply. SOR ¶ 2.a simply alleged, “That information 
set forth in paragraph 1” which is conduct alleged under the sexual behavior guideline. 
All of his sexual misconduct is covered under Guideline D. There is sufficient credible 
information under Guideline D for an adverse determination. However, if the evidence 
were not sufficient to resolve this case under Guideline D, then AG ¶ 16(c) would apply. 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) applies. When Applicant engaged in the conduct alleged under the 
sexual behavior disqualifying conditions, he engaged in conduct which adversely affects 
his personal, professional, and community standing. He was anxious that his former 
spouse and children not learn about his conduct. Further analysis concerning 
applicability of mitigating conditions is required.    
 
Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
16 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;   
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
The personal conduct allegations in SOR ¶ 2.a duplicated the sexual behavior 
allegations in SOR ¶ 1. The scope of his security-related conduct is thoroughly 
addressed under Guideline D and the Whole-Person Concept, infra. As such, SOR ¶ 
2.a is found for Applicant as a duplication of SOR ¶ 1. Applicant disclosed his sexual 
misconduct to two polygraphers and to a lesser extent to his spouse, members of his 
church, and three psychologists. I do not believe Applicant could be coerced or 
pressured into release of classified information by threats of public disclosure of the 
negative information detailed under Guideline D, supra. Personal conduct concerns are 
mitigated primarily as a duplication of Guideline D. 
 
Psychological Conditions 
 
AG ¶ 27 articulates the security concern relating to psychological conditions: 
 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is 
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified 
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) 
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, 
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of seeking mental health counseling. 
 
AG ¶ 28 provides three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but 
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent, 
paranoid, or bizarre behavior; 
 
 
17 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) an opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional that the 
individual has a condition not covered under any other guideline that may 
impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness; and  
 
(c) the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a 
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take 
prescribed medication. 
   
An AGA psychologist, without interviewing Applicant, reviewed his file and 
concluded that Applicant suffered from “essential features of a sexual disorder in which 
an individual’s sexual focus involves sexual activity with a child” raising concerns about 
his “stability, reliability, and judgment.” This allegation was detailed under SOR ¶ 1.d 
and duplicated in SOR ¶ 3.a.  
 
SOR ¶ 3.a simply alleged, “That information set forth in paragraph 1.d,” which is 
conduct and a sexual disorder alleged under the sexual behavior guideline. All of his 
sexual misconduct and sexual disorder are covered under Guideline D. There is 
sufficient credible information under Guideline D for an adverse determination. 
However, if the evidence were not sufficient to resolve this case under Guideline D, then 
AG ¶¶ 28(b) and 28(c) would apply. 
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 29 are potentially applicable. See note 3, 
supra (quoting the five mitigating conditions). The psychological conditions allegation in 
SOR ¶ 3.a duplicated the sexual behavior allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d, which was mitigated 
because the AGA psychologist did not have an adequate basis for his opinion, and 
Applicant’s three psychologists had ample contact with Applicant to support their 
opinions. The scope of his security-related conduct is thoroughly addressed under 
Guideline D and the Whole-Person Concept, infra. As such, SOR ¶ 3.a is found for 
Applicant because it is duplication of SOR ¶ 1.d. Psychological conditions concerns are 
mitigated primarily as a duplication of Guideline D. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
18 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines D, E, and I in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) warrant additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns under the whole-
person concept; however, they are insufficient to fully mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant is a 58-year-old network engineer or systems engineering manager employed 
by a defense contractor. He earned bachelor’s and master’s degrees from nationally 
known universities. After graduating from college he served on active duty as a pilot for 
eight and a half years, including service in some dangerous environments, and he is 
eligible to join the Veterans of Foreign Wars. He honorably retired as a commander (O-
5). Statements describe him as responsible, reliable, conscientious, trustworthy, and 
diligent. He received therapy to address his urges to fantasize about sexuality activity 
with children. He is an intelligent person, who understands the importance of 
compliance with security rules. His evident remorse is an important step towards 
rehabilitation and mitigation of security concerns.   
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant has a long history of viewing pornography and the urge to view 
pornography has not abated. His viewing of pornography and reading stories of children 
being sexually victimized is constitutionally-protected conduct. On about 250 occasions, 
he read stories of children being sexually assaulted, and he masturbated on numerous 
occasions while reading these stories. In the 1980s, he had an erection while a six-year-
old girl was sitting on his lap. In 1997, he sexually assaulted his daughter by pressing 
her against his erect penis while she was sitting on his lap. In 1999, he went on a trip 
with his 15-year-old daughter. He offered her alcohol because he thought it would 
reduce her inhibitions against engaging in sexual activity with him. He admitted to the 
AGA polygrapher that he was attempting to stop viewing child pornography, and he 
looks away from children in church to avoid becoming sexually stimulated. He lied at his 
hearing about various aspects of his sexual behavior in an attempt to minimize his 
sexual misconduct, showing that he is not rehabilitated. See n. 2, supra. His denial that 
he viewed child pornography is not credible. Accurate information in a security context 
is crucial to national security. His false statements at his hearing show lack of judgment 
and raise unresolved questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified information. 
  
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Psychological conditions concerns 
are mitigated and personal conduct concerns are mitigated as duplications of sexual 
behavior concerns. Sexual behavior concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
 
19 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline I:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
