 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09334 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant, 33, was born in Afghanistan and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
2004. His wife is an Afghan citizen, with a U.S. permanent resident card. She has been 
residing with her parents in Afghanistan for extended periods of time while he was 
deployed in support of U.S. interests in that country. In addition to his wife, her parents, 
and relatives, he also has extended family members and friends that live in Afghanistan. 
He failed to demonstrate that his contacts in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk, 
and that he is not in a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and his connections to family members. He failed to mitigate the foreign 
influence security concerns raised. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 20, 2011. On 
December 27, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence).1 
                                            
1 DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 22, 2013, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated February 20, 
2013, was provided to him by transmittal letter with that same date. Applicant received 
the FORM on April 4, 2013. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the 
FORM and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. He timely responded to the 
FORM on April 16, 2013, and provided additional information that was made part of the 
record. The case was assigned to me on April 26, 2013.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of certain facts 
concerning the government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (Afghanistan). She 
provided source documents (all official U.S. Government publications) to show detail 
and context for those facts. Applicant did not object, and I granted Department 
Counsel’s request. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the factual allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. He admitted the SOR 
allegation under ¶ 1.b. His admission is incorporated herein as a finding of fact. After a 
thorough review of the record evidence, including his answers to the SOR, the FORM, a 
screening questionnaire, and Applicant’s four statements, I make the following findings 
of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old linguist working for a government contractor in support 
of deployed U.S. military forces. Applicant, his wife, and both their immediate and 
extended family members were born in Afghanistan. In 1989, at age 10, Applicant, his 
siblings, and his mother left Afghanistan and immigrated to Pakistan. They stayed in 
Pakistan with his paternal relatives. He attended school in Pakistan where he received 
his high school diploma. His father had left Afghanistan some years earlier to avoid 
enlistment in the Soviet Union’s armed forces. His father immigrated to the United 
States in 1980. 
 
In 1997, Applicant emigrated from Pakistan to the United States with his mother 
and siblings. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2004. His father, mother, and 
siblings are now U.S. citizens and residents. Applicant completed some U.S. community 
college course work, and was certified as a medical assistant.  
 
Applicant met his wife in Afghanistan in 2007, while attending his sister’s 
wedding there. He married his wife in 2008, and sponsored his wife’s entry into the 
United States that same year. She immigrated to the United States in November 2009, 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
and received her U.S. permanent resident card in May 2010. According to Applicant, his 
wife is in the process of applying for her U.S. citizenship.  
 
During his June 2011 interview, Applicant told the investigator that he was 
departing within two days to support U.S. forces in Afghanistan. His wife traveled back 
to Afghanistan to live with her parents while he was deployed to Afghanistan. As of July 
2011, she was residing in Afghanistan. In his April 2013 response to the FORM, 
Applicant indicated that his wife had been in Afghanistan during five and one-half 
months while he was deployed to that country, but as of April 25, 2013, she would be 
living in the United States. It is not clear from his statements whether she was in 
Afghanistan from July 2011 until sometime in April 2013, when she would return to the 
United States. There is no information as to whether his wife returned to the United 
States or whether she is still living with her parents in Afghanistan. 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law is a retired doctor, and his mother-in-law always worked 
at home. In 2007, Applicant started providing about $100 to $200 once a month or every 
two months in financial assistance to his in-laws to help them with their daily living 
expenses. He has telephonic contact with his in-laws on a monthly basis to let them 
know that he is doing well. Applicant indicated he has ties of affection to his wife, but not 
as much with his in-laws. He claimed he does not have many relatives or friends in 
Afghanistan, and of those, the only ones that know he works for the U.S. forces are his 
in-laws. Applicant believes it would be close to impossible for anyone to influence him 
because he does not share with anyone in Afghanistan that he is married, who he is 
married to, and where his wife is living. 
 
Applicant travelled to Afghanistan to visit his family, friends, and for personal 
vacations in 2003, 2005 (20 days in Afghanistan in addition to spending three weeks in 
Pakistan), 2007 (30 days), 2008 (30 days), and 2009 (86 days). Although he claimed 
not having many friends and relatives in Afghanistan, in his July 2011 statement to an 
investigator, he disclosed at least four friends living in Afghanistan. He also disclosed 
numerous extended family members in that country and in Pakistan. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Afghanistan is located in 
Southwestern Asia and borders Pakistan, Iran and Russia. It has been an independent 
nation since 1919, after the British relinquished control. A monarchy ruled from 1919 
until a military coup in 1973. Following a Soviet-supported coup in 1978, a Marxist 
government emerged. In 1979, Soviet forces invaded and occupied Afghanistan. A 
resistance movement eventually led to an agreement known as the Geneva Accords, 
signed by Afghanistan, Pakistan, the United States, and the Soviet Union, which 
ensured Soviet forces withdrew by February 1989. The resistance party was not part of 
the Accords and refused to accept it. A civil war ensued after the Soviet withdrawal. In 
the mid-1990s, the Taliban rose to power largely due to anarchy and the existence of 
warlords. The Taliban sought to impose an extreme interpretation of Islam and 
committed massive human rights violations. The Taliban also provided sanctuary to 
Osama Bin Laden, al Qaida, and other terrorist organizations. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 After the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, demands to expel Bin Laden and 
his followers were rejected by the Taliban. U.S. forces and a coalition partnership 
commenced military operations in October 2001 that forced the Taliban out of power in 
November 2001. The new democratic government took power in 2004, after a popular 
election. Despite that election, terrorists, including al Qaida and the Taliban, continue to 
assert power and intimidation within the country. Safety and security are key issues, 
because these terrorists target United States and Afghan interests by suicide 
operations, bombings, assassinations, carjacking, assaults, and hostage taking. At this 
time, the risk of terrorist activity remains extremely high. The country’s human rights 
record remains poor and violence is rampant. 
 
 Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the violence and increased attacks and the 
country has significant human rights problems. Despite the loss of some key leaders, 
insurgents have adjusted their tactics to maintain momentum following the arrival of 
additional U.S. forces. It is suspected that the Taliban was most likely responsible for 
suppressing voter turnout in the August 2009 elections in key parts of the country. The 
Taliban’s expansion of influence in northern Afghanistan since late 2007 has made the 
insurgency a country-wide threat.  
 
 Afghan leaders continue to face the eroding effect of official corruption and drug 
trade. Criminal networks and narcotics constitute a source of funding for the insurgency 
in Afghanistan. Other insurgent groups and anti-coalition organizations also operate in 
Afghanistan. Insurgents have targeted non-government organizations, journalists, 
government workers, and United Nation workers. Instability along the Pakistan-Afghan 
frontier continued to provide al Qaida with leadership mobility and the ability to conduct 
training and operational planning, targeting Western European and U.S. interests. The 
United States Department of State has declared that the security threat to all American 
citizens in Afghanistan remains critical as no part of the country is immune to violence. 
The Haqqani Network (a foreign terrorist organization), the Taliban, and al Qaida 
continue to operate within Afghanistan orchestrating organized attacks against U.S. 
personnel and assets within the country. 
 
 In May 2012, the United States and Afghanistan signed a 10-year strategic 
partnership agreement that demonstrates the United States commitment to 
strengthening Afghanistan’s sovereignty and stability. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
5 
 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  The government’s concern under AG ¶ 6 is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.2 Applicant, by himself or through his wife, has 
frequent contacts and a close relationship of affection and/or obligation with his in-laws 
who are residents and citizens of Afghanistan. The extent of his close relationship is 
demonstrated by his frequent contacts, his providing financial support for his in-laws in 
Afghanistan, and his frequent travel to visit with his family and friends in Afghanistan. It 
is also demonstrated by his wife’s extended visits with her family in Afghanistan. 
 
These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because there is always the possibility that Afghan agents, criminals, or terrorists 
operating in Afghanistan may exploit the opportunity to obtain information about the 
United States. With its negative human rights record, its government, and the violent 
insurgency that operates within the Afghan borders, it is conceivable that Applicant’s 
family members could be vulnerable to coercion.  
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these two potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. As previously indicated, the burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. 
 
  Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
                                            
2  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
7 
 
 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that the above mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s evidence is 
insufficient to establish that it is unlikely he will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual and the interests of the United 
States. Applicant’s in-laws are residents and citizens of Afghanistan. His wife has been 
residing with her parents in Afghanistan during extended periods of time while he was 
deployed to Afghanistan in support of U.S. personnel. He has frequent contacts with his 
wife and his in-laws, and he provides his in-laws with monthly or bi-monthly financial 
assistance. 
 
Additionally, Applicant has extended family members and friends who are also 
citizens and residents in Afghanistan. He travelled to Afghanistan to visit his relatives, 
friends, and for personal vacations in 2003, 2005 (20 days in Afghanistan in addition to 
spending three weeks in Pakistan), 2007 (30 days), 2008 (30 days), and 2009 (86 
days). Although Applicant is concerned that, if members of the community became 
aware of his current occupation, his wife, in-laws, and extended relatives may be in 
danger or placed at unnecessary risk, he continues to have frequent contact with his in-
laws, provides them with financial assistance, and his wife spends significant periods of 
time with her parents.  
 
 In deciding whether Applicant’s family members are in a position to be exploited, 
I considered Afghanistan’s form of government.3 The nature of a nation’s government, 
its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are relevant in 
assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
                                            
 3 The focus is not the country or its people, but its rulers and the nature of the government they 
impose. This approach recognizes that it makes sense to treat each country in accordance with the level 
of security concern or threat it presents to the United States.  
 
 
8 
 
 
to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The relationship 
of Afghanistan with the United States places a significant burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his relatives and extended family 
members living in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist his relatives living in Afghanistan who might be coerced by 
terrorists, criminals, or governmental entities in that country.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
There is no evidence that intelligence operatives, terrorists, or criminals from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant, his wife, her parents, or other relatives living in Afghanistan. However, we 
cannot rule out such a possibility in the future. There is evidence of insurgency 
operations being conducted in Afghanistan against American forces. There is also 
evidence that Afghanistan has active terrorist groups operating within its borders. It is 
likely that terrorists would attempt to coerce Applicant through his relatives living in 
Afghanistan, if they determined it was advantageous to do so. This places the burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his contacts in Afghanistan do not pose a 
security risk, and he is not in a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the 
United States and his connections to family members. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationship with his family members living in 
Afghanistan. Applicant left Afghanistan in 1989, at age 10. He immigrated to Pakistan 
with his mother and siblings, and remained there until 1997, when he immigrated to the 
United States. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2004. 
 
Applicant met his wife in Afghanistan while attending his sister’s wedding in that 
country. His wife immigrated to the United States in 2009, and received her permanent 
resident alien card in May 2010. He has made the United States his home since 1997, 
and has been a productive U.S. citizen. Applicant, his parents, and siblings have 
established some connections to the United States, and they are citizens and residents 
of the United States. The available evidence does not establish whether all of 
Applicant’s financial and property interests are in the United States.  
 
 
9 
 
 
In 2011, Applicant sought employment as a linguist with a government contractor 
supporting U.S. personnel deployed to Afghanistan. There is no evidence to determine 
whether he is considered to be a reliable linguist and trustworthy employee.  
 
The record evidence fails to support a determination that Applicant’s ties and 
sense of obligation to the United State are sufficiently strong that he could be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States, even under 
circumstances detrimental to his wife and her relatives in Afghanistan.4  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-
person analysis. Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s favorable evidence is 
insufficient to demonstrate that his contacts in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk, 
and that he is not in a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and his connections to family members. On balance, and considering the 
evidence as a whole, Applicant failed to mitigate the Guideline B security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
4 See ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov 14, 2006). 
