 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09571 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
In 1986, Applicant was born in Iran. In 2004, he immigrated to the United States. 
In 2010, he became a U.S. citizen. His spouse is a citizen of Iran and immigrated here 
in 2011. His mother and one sister are citizens of Iran residing in the United States. 
Three sisters, a brother, and two in-laws are citizens and residents of Iran. He maintains 
contact with all of his Iranian family members. He produced insufficient evidence to 
mitigate foreign influence security concerns. Access to classified information is denied.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 30, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (hereinafter SF-86). On March 14, 2013, the 
Department of Defense (DoD) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
alleging security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on 
September 1, 2006. The SOR detailed reasons why DoD adjudicators could not make 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended referral 
to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 27, 2013, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 3.) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on April 11, 2013. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing seven Government 
Items was provided to Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt 
of the FORM.   
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on April 23, 2013, and returned it to the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). He did not submit any additional information. DOHA assigned the case to me 
on June 24, 2013. 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning Iran. 
(FORM.) Counsel provided supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts. (Item 7, Exhibits I through XX.) Applicant did not object to the documents and I 
granted Department Counsel’s request.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice in ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the underlying facts alleged in the SOR. His admissions, 
including those made in his response to DoD Interrogatories, are incorporated in the 
following findings of fact. (Items 3, 6.)   
 
Applicant was born in Iran in 1986 and attended high school there. In December 
2004, he immigrated to the United States, having been sponsored by his father who had 
become a naturalized U.S. citizen and resident. Applicant attended a U.S. university, 
from which he graduated with a bachelor’s degree in 2009 and a master’s degree in 
2010. From August 2009 to June 2010, he worked as a teaching assistant at the 
university he attended. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in May 2010. He returned 
to Iran in June 2010 for two months. He used his Iranian passport to enter and leave 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Iran. In September 2010, he began a position as a consultant with his current employer. 
In March 2011, he voluntarily surrendered his Iranian passport to his employer for 
destruction. (Items 4, 5.) 
 
Applicant’s wife was born in Iran in 1992. They married in July 2010 while 
Applicant was visiting Iran. In March 2011, Applicant vacationed with his wife in a 
different country for ten days. She immigrated to the United States in May 2011 on a 
spousal visa. She taught high school in Iran before immigrating. She is an Iranian 
citizen and has permanent U.S. resident status.  (Item 5.) 
 
Applicant’s parents were born in Iran. They were citizens and residents of Iran, 
before immigrating to the United States. His father became a naturalized U.S. citizen. 
He is deceased. His mother is an Iranian citizen, residing in the United States. He has 
two brothers and six sisters, all of whom were born and raised in Iran. One brother is a 
citizen and resident of Iran. He is a teacher. Applicant’s other brother’s is dual citizen of 
the United States and Iran, residing in the United States. He is a pediatrician.   
 
 Three of Applicant’s sisters are citizens and residents of Iran. One of those 
sisters works in the field of computers. Applicant has monthly contact with her. One 
sister is a psychologist. He has no contact with her. One sister is self-employed and 
also works in the computer field. He has contact with her every two to three weeks.  
 
One of Applicant’s sisters is a citizen of Iran, residing in France. He does not 
have contact with her. He has two sisters who reside in the United States. One sister is 
a citizen of Iran. She is unemployed. He contacts her every two or three weeks. Another 
sister is a dual citizen of the United States and Iran. She is a dentist. The frequency of 
his contact with her is unknown. (Items 4, 6.)  
 
Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens of Iran, residing in Iran. 
He contacts them every two months. (Item 6.)  
 
There is no derogatory information concerning Applicant’s police or financial 
records. He has never been fired from a job. There is no evidence of record showing 
any U.S. arrests, illegal drug possession or use, or alcohol-related incidents.   
 
I took administrative notice of the facts set forth in Item 7 concerning the Islamic 
Republic of Iran, which are incorporated herein by reference. Of particular significance 
are: Iran’s history of state sponsored terrorism; its dismal record of human rights 
violations; its expanding nuclear capabilities; its overall active and hostile anti-
democracy and anti-United States policies; and its commitment to illegally collecting 
U.S. technologies and proprietary materials.  
 
Policies 
 
 Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
in conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Iran is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. (See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001)).  
 
 Iran has significant internal anti-western terrorism threats that operate openly 
contrary to U.S. interests. It is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected 
information, and has a significant interest in acquiring defense-related proprietary 
information and advanced technology. Accordingly, Applicant’s strong family 
connections there have more potential to generate heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion under AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (d) 
than would similar connections to many other countries.  
 
 Applicant shares living quarters with his wife, who remains an Iranian citizen. His 
mother and sister, both of whom reside in the United States, remain Iranian citizens. He 
has contact with them. His brother and three sisters are citizens and residents of Iran. 
He maintains regular contact with three of those siblings. He communicates with his 
mother-in-law and father-in-law, who are resident citizens of Iran. These immediate-
family relationships are presumed to be close and loving, and Applicant offered no 
evidence to the contrary. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply. 
 
 These facts meet the Government’s burden of production by raising the 
aforementioned foreign influence disqualifying conditions. Applicant’s regular, close, 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and personally significant contacts, relationships, and connections with Iran shift a 
heavy burden to him to prove mitigation under applicable Appeal Board precedent.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns. 
Those with potential application in mitigating the above security concerns are: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Considered in light of the substantial anti-western terrorism threat and state 
sponsored terrorist activities in Iran, Applicant did not demonstrate that it is unlikely he 
could be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual or government and those of the United States due to family ties there. He has 
close relationships with family members living in Iran and an interest in protecting his 
siblings and in-laws. He should not be placed in a position where he might be forced to 
choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist his family members, 
who might be coerced by terrorists or other governmental entities in Iran. In addition, his 
communications with his Iranian family members since coming to the United States are 
neither casual nor infrequent. Accordingly, he failed to establish mitigating conditions 
set forth in AG ¶¶ 8(a) or (c). 
 
The evidence also fails to establish significant mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant provided insufficient evidence of longstanding relationships or deep ties to the 
United States since arriving here in December 2004 and becoming a U.S. citizen in 
2010. Other than having expressed connections to the university he attended, there is 
no information regarding his financial or real estate interests in the United States, 
community involvement, professional performance, or the level of responsibility his 
duties entail. He provided no character witnesses attesting to his devotion or loyalty to 
the United States. His wife, here since 2011, mother, and sister remain Iranian citizens.   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are a few facts supporting mitigation of the foreign influence security 
concerns. Applicant immigrated to the United States in 2004 and became a citizen six 
years later. Since then, he returned to Iran only one time, during which he married. His 
Iranian passport is destroyed. There is no derogatory information concerning Applicant’s 
police or financial records. There is no evidence of record showing any U.S. arrests, 
illegal drug possession or use, or alcohol-related incidents.  
 
The circumstances tending to support denial of Applicant’s clearance are more 
significant than the facts weighing toward approval of his security clearance. Applicant’s 
three sisters, brother, and in-laws are citizens and residents of Iran. Applicant has 
frequent contact with those family members, indicating his commitment to them and 
their welfare. Terrorists would not hesitate to coerce Applicant through his family in Iran 
to obtain classified information. His wife immigrated here two-years ago, and has not yet 
become a U.S. citizen. Two family members have not obtained their U.S. citizenship, 
although the record implies that they have lived in the United States for some time. A 
brother and sister maintain dual citizenship with Iran. These numerous family members’ 
connections to Iran indicate their attachment to Iran, and raise security concerns for 
Applicant. There is insufficient evidence documenting Applicant’s strong connections or 
ties to the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from foreign influence considerations.  
 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
