 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-04855    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant willfully divulged classified 
information to unauthorized persons. He does not accept responsibility for his actions 
and continues to minimize the seriousness of his security violation. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 20, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the handling protected information 
and personal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted its written case on March 12, 2013. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on March 25, 2013. He did not submit 
a response. The items appended to the Government’s brief are admitted as 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7. The case was assigned to me on May 8, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 26, is an employee of a federal contractor. He is married with no 
children. In 2005, at age 19, Applicant enlisted in the Navy. He was discharged under 
other than honorable (OTH) conditions in June 2010.2 
 
 Between January and December 2009, Applicant was stationed aboard a 
submarine, completing two deployments during that period. As a fire control technician, 
Applicant’s job involved the operation and maintenance of the ship’s weapons control 
systems. On December 14, 2009, Applicant received a letter from his commanding 
officer informing him that his access to classified information was suspended. The next 
day, Applicant was debriefed and his commanding officer ordered an investigation into 
dereliction of duty charges made against Applicant. Two days after receiving notice that 
his clearance was suspended, Applicant signed a handwritten confession, admitting that 
he willfully disclosed classified information to his parents and girlfriend in violation of 
Article 92 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) and the March 2007 non-
disclosure agreement he signed. Applicant believed that his acts were harmless, 
blaming the unauthorized disclosures on emotional distress caused by the death of his 
grandfather. At the non-judicial punishment (Captain’s Mast) convened on December 
18, 2009, Applicant was found guilty of dereliction of duty.3 
 
 Applicant’s squadron commander completed a Security Access Eligibility Report 
(SAER) in January 2010. Having lost all confidence in Applicant’s ability to maintain a 
security clearance, the squadron commander recommended that the Department of the 
Navy Central Adjudication Facility remove Applicant’s security clearance completely. He 
also recommended Applicant’s administrative discharge from active duty.4  
 
 In January 2012, Applicant completed a security clearance application. He 
disclosed his other than honorable discharge from the Navy, listing an administrative 
discharge as the reason for his separation. He also disclosed his December 2009 
Captain’s Mast, explaining that that he was charged with failure to follow an order. In 
                                                          
2 GE 5. 
 
3 GE 6. 
 
4 GE 6.  
 
3 
 
response to questions about his security clearance history, Applicant disclosed a 2006 
security clearance investigation conducted by the Navy and a 2011 public trust position 
investigation. He denied ever having a security clearance suspended or revoked in 
response to “Question 25: Denied Clearance: Have you EVER had a security clearance 
eligibility/ access authorization denied, suspended, or revoked?” Applicant denies he 
falsified the security clearance application. He believed his security clearance was 
administratively terminated when the Navy transferred him from the submarine to a 
command that did not require access to classified information. Question 25 also states 
that an administrative downgrade or administrative termination of a security clearance is 
not a revocation and does not need to be reported. Applicant cites his clearance status 
in the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) to support his assertion. However, 
the JPAS incident reports indicate that Applicant committed a security violation, and 
summarizes the disposition of the Captain’s Mast and Applicant’s OTH discharge from 
military service.5 
 
 Applicant also denies that he willfully disclosed any classified information. 
Applicant explains that he kept a journal that he intended to give to his girlfriend upon 
returning home from his deployments so that she could better understand “the stress 
and day to day living conditions [he] endured.” He explains that he did not record the 
ship’s coordinates or identify nearby countries in his journal, but wrote only general 
statements that described the activities of his day or general ship operations. The Navy, 
Applicant argues, did not provide him any security training about what type of 
information should be excluded from a personal journal. Nor, in Applicant’s opinion, did 
the Navy provide adequate training on handling personal relationships while on long-
term deployments or relieving stress after combat operations.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
5 GE 4-5, 7. 
 
6 GE 4.  
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Handling Protected Information 
 
 Applicant deliberately disclosed classified information to unauthorized persons.7 
His actions show his inability to properly handle or safeguard classified information or 
follow the rules regarding the protection of classified information.8 Even though the 
security breach occurred almost three-and-a-half years ago, the events continue to 
reflect negatively on Applicant’s current security worthiness. His claims that he did not 
receive adequate security training are not credible. Instead of taking responsibility for 
his actions, he continues to minimize the seriousness of the security violation he 
committed. Applicant failed to present any evidence to support a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation. Accordingly, none of the relevant mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant’s decision to reveal classified information to his family members shows 
questionable judgement and poor character.9 In the years since the security violation, 
Applicant continues to prove himself an unacceptable security risk. He deliberately 
omitted his December 2009 security clearance suspension from his January 2012 
security clearance application. Generally, evidence of omission alone is not sufficient to 
establish intentional falsification, but the record in this case contains direct and 
circumstantial evidence of Applicant’s intent to mislead the government about his past 
security violation.  
 
Loss of a security clearance is a consequential event. In Applicant’s case, it was 
caused by a security violation that resulted in his other than honorable discharge from 
military service.10 His purported confusion over the status of his clearance after 
December 2009 is disingenuous. Applicant knew that his past posed an obstacle to his 
                                                          
7 AG ¶ 34(a). 
 
8 AG ¶ 33. 
 
9 AG ¶ 15. 
 
10 AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 
5 
 
future employment as a federal contractor and his ability to obtain a security clearance. 
So, in an attempt to conceal his past from the Government, he presented accurate, but 
misleading information about his military service on his security clearance application. 
Applicant parsed out enough information to alert the Government that some type of 
serious misconduct occurred during his four-year enlistment, but he provided no 
information to suggest that the misconduct involved a security violation. To the contrary, 
Applicant intentionally created  the impression that despite the circumstances of his 
OTH discharge from the military that he held a security clearance and a public trust 
position in the past, without incident. In addition to this circumstantial evidence of 
Applicant’s intent to conceal information from the government, he cannot overcome the 
evidence that he received direct notice of his security clearance suspension from the 
ship’s commanding officer. 
 
None of the personal conduct mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s omission is 
neither minor nor immaterial. He sought to conceal information critical to an assessment 
of his security worthiness. Applicant has repeatedly shown that his self-interests 
supersede any government interests.  
 
 Applicant has not proven himself suitable for access to classified information. I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered the 
whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). The federal government must be able 
to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in persons granted access to classified 
information.11 Security clearance decisions are not an exact science, but rather are 
predictive judgments about a person's security suitability in light of that person's past 
conduct and present circumstances.12  Not only has Applicant breached his fiduciary 
duty to protect classified information in the past, he tried to conceal his prior bad acts 
from the government. He shows little contrition or remorse for his actions. Applicant 
presented no evidence to suggest that he will take his responsibility to protect and 
safeguard classified information more seriously today, than he did while serving in the 
Navy. Accordingly, his clearance is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Handling Protected Information:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
11 Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
 
12 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528-29 (1988). 
 
 
6 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraph 2.a – 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.                     
  
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
