 
1 
 
 
 
                                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
In the matter of: 
          ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08423 
                                                            )                      
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
                       
                                                                        
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the written record in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. His eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
                                                 Statement of Case 
 
Applicant completed several applications for consideration for security 
clearances and access to protected information. In January 1999 and again in April 
2008, he completed Standard Form 86 applications. In March 2009, he completed an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). In December 2010 and 
January 2012, he completed Questionnaires for National Security Positions. 
    
On February 20, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOD acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 25, 2013. He declined a hearing, and 
requested a decision on the written record. The Government compiled its File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on May 9, 2013. The FORM contained documents identified 
as Items 1 through 9. On May 10, 2013, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to 
Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information and objections within 30 
days of receipt. Applicant received the file on May 20, 2013. His response was due on 
June 20, 2013. He submitted two documents containing additional information, but he 
did not file any objections. On July 2, 2013, the case was assigned to me for a decision. 
I marked Applicant’s responses to the FORM as Item A and Item B and admitted them 
to the record without objection.     
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains six allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f.), and eleven allegations of disqualifying 
conduct under Guideline E, Personal Conduct (¶¶ 2.a. through 2.k.). In his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted five of the Guideline H allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., 
1.e., and 1.f.) He denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.c. He also admitted nine allegations 
under Guideline E (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.i.). He denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 2.j., 
and he neither admitted nor denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.k. Applicant’s admissions 
are entered as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 3.) 
 
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and by information provided by Applicant. The record evidence includes Applicant’s five 
security clearance applications; official agency records; Applicant’s responses to DOHA 
interrogatories; and letters of character reference provided by Applicant.1 (See Items 1 
through 9; Item A; Item B.) 
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including the documentary 
evidence, relevant policies, and applicable adjudicative guidelines, I make the following 
additional findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old and never married. In 1998, he earned a master’s 
degree in electrical engineering. In 2001, he earned a Master of Business 
Administration (MBA) degree. He has worked as a senior manager for his present 
                                            
1 Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on April 18, 2012. In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant reviewed the investigator’s 
report and made minor factual corrections to addresses and birthdates. On October 19, 2012, Applicant 
signed a statement affirming that, subject to those minor factual corrections, the investigator’s report 
accurately reflected his interview. (Item 9.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
employer, a government contractor, since March 2008. He was first granted a security 
clearance in about 1998. His security clearance eligibility was renewed in 2003 and 
continued until 2011. He was also awarded, at times, eligibility for special access 
programs. In 2011, his access eligibility was revoked.  (Item 4; Item 6; Item 7; Item 9.)  
 
 Applicant served in the U.S. military from April to December 1992. During his 
training as a recruit, Applicant was evaluated by a clinical psychologist and found to 
possess a personality disorder and a history of alcohol abuse that warranted treatment. 
He was offered alcohol treatment, which he declined. He was then ordered to 
participate in a treatment program, which he failed to complete. He was subsequently 
administratively separated from the military and received a general discharge under 
honorable conditions.2 (Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant has a history of substance abuse. He used marijuana about 25 times 
between 1985 and 1989. He used marijuana about two times a year from 1989 to 1996. 
He used marijuana approximately 20 times a year in 1997 and 1998. He used marijuana 
approximately ten times between 2001 and 2002, while holding a security clearance. He 
also used marijuana five to ten times yearly from about October 2003 to July 2010, 
while holding a security clearance and while intermittently holding program access. 
Applicant’s marijuana use is alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., and 1.f. (Item 3; 
Item 9.) 
  
 During his work assignments as a government contractor, Applicant completed 
security clearance applications in January 1999, April 2008, March 2009, December 
2010, and January 2012. His background was also investigated by another government 
agency in July 2004 and August 2010. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 6; Item 7; Item 8; Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application in January 1999. Section 27 
on the application asked the following: 
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs? 
 
Applicant answered “No” to Section 27. He failed to report that he had used marijuana 
approximately two times yearly from 1992 to 1996. He also failed to report that he had 
used marijuana approximately 20 times a year in 1997 and 1998. The SOR alleges at ¶ 
2.b. that Applicant’s failure to reveal this information was a deliberate falsification of 
material facts. (Item 1; Item 8.) 
                                            
2 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.c. that Applicant was diagnosed with cannabis abuse in 1992 while serving in 
the U.S. military. Applicant denied the allegation and provided his discharge records, which did not 
indicate cannabis abuse. (Item 3.) 
 
4 
 
 
 In July 2004, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from another 
government agency as a part of a background investigation. During his background 
interview, Applicant reported that he used marijuana two or three times while in high 
school. He did not report the full extent of his marijuana use as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.f. The SOR alleges at ¶ 2.c. that Applicant’s failure to report the full extent of 
his marijuana use during his 2004 background investigation was a falsification of 
material facts. (Item 1; Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application in April 2008. Item 27 on 
the application asked the following: 
 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), 
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs? 
 
Applicant answered “No” to Item 27. The SOR alleges at ¶ 2.d. that Applicant failed to 
report the information alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c., that he had been diagnosed with cannabis 
abuse in 1992 while serving in the U.S. military.3 (Item 1; Item 7.) 
 
 Item 28 on the security clearance application Applicant completed in April 2008 
asks: “Have you EVER used a controlled substance while possessing a security 
clearance; while employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom 
official; or while in a position directly and immediately affecting the public safety?” (Item 
7.) 
 
 Applicant answered “No” to Item 28. SOR ¶ 2.e. alleges that Applicant falsified 
material facts when he failed to disclose that he used marijuana ten times between 
2001 and 2002 while holding a security clearance, and when he also failed to disclose 
that he used marijuana approximately five to ten times a year from October 2003 to July 
2010 while holding a security clearance and intermittent program access.4 (Item 1; Item 
7.) 
 
 Applicant completed another security clearance application in March 2009. 
Section 23a on the application asks: 
 
In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for 
example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.), 
                                            
3 As noted previously, Applicant provided credible documentation to rebut the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.c. 
The record does not support that Applicant was diagnosed or evaluated with drug abuse or drug 
dependence. The allegation at SOR ¶ 2.d. is also rebutted by Applicant’s evidence submitted in response 
to the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.c. (Item 3.)  
  
4 SOR ¶ 2.e. alleges, in part, conduct which had not occurred when Applicant completed his April 2008 
security clearance application. (Item 1; Item 7.) 
 
5 
 
 
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants 
(amphetamines, speed, crystal methamphetamine, Ecstasy, ketamine, 
etc.), depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), 
hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants (toluene, amyl 
nitrate, etc.) or prescription drugs (including painkillers)? Use of a 
controlled substance includes ingesting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, 
experimenting with or otherwise consuming any controlled substance. 
 
Applicant answered “No” to Section 23a. SOR ¶ 2.f. alleges that Applicant falsified 
material facts on his 2009 application when he failed to disclose that he used marijuana 
ten times between 2001 and 2002 while holding a security clearance, and when he also 
failed to disclose that he used marijuana approximately five to ten times a year from 
October 2003 to July 2010 while holding a security clearance and intermittent program 
access.5 (Item 1; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant answered Section 23b when he executed his March 2009 security 
clearance application. Section 23b reads: “Have you EVER illegally used a controlled 
substance while possessing a security clearance; while employed as a law enforcement 
officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; or while in a position directly and immediately 
affecting public safety?” (Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant answered “No” to Section 23b. SOR ¶ 1.g. alleges that Applicant 
falsified material facts on his March 2009 security clearance application when he sought 
to conceal that he used marijuana ten times between 2001 and 2002 while holding a 
security clearance, and when he used marijuana approximately five to ten times yearly 
from October 2003 to July 2010 while holding a security clearance and intermittent 
program access.6 (Item 1; Item 6.) 
 
 In December 2010,7 Applicant completed a security clearance application. 
Section 23a on the application asks the following: 
 
In the last seven (7) years, have you illegally used any controlled 
substance, for example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, 
etc.), narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants 
(amphetamines, speed, crystal methamphetamine, Ecstasy, ketamine, 
etc.), depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), 
hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants (toluene, amyl 
nitrate, etc.) or prescription drugs (including painkillers)? Use of a 
                                            
5 SOR ¶ 2.f. also alleges, in part, conduct which had not occurred when Applicant completed his March 
2009 security clearance application. (Item 1; Item 6.) 
 
6 Like SOR ¶ 2.f., SOR ¶ 2.g. alleges, in part, conduct which had not occurred when Applicant completed 
his March 2009 security clearance application. (Item 1; Item 6.) 
 
7 The SOR states, incorrectly, that Applicant executed the security clearance application referenced in 
SOR ¶ 2.h. in April 2010. (Item 1.) 
 
6 
 
 
controlled substance includes ingesting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, 
experimenting with or otherwise consuming any drug or controlled 
substance. 
 
Applicant answered “Yes” to Question 23a and provided the following information: 
“Smoked marijuana with friends typically during vacations/long weekends. Used approx. 
50 times over 7 year period (5-10x per year) Last time used 7/4/2010.” He identified the 
period of use as October 2003 to July 2010. The SOR alleges at ¶ 2.h. that Applicant 
falsified material facts on his 2010 security clearance application when he sought to 
conceal his use of marijuana five to ten times yearly from about October 2003 to July 
2010 while holding a security clearance and intermittent program access.8  (Item 1; Item 
5.) 
 
 Question 23b on the application Applicant completed in December 2010 9asks 
the following: “Have you EVER used a controlled substance while possessing a security 
clearance; while employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom 
official; or while in a position directly and immediately affecting the public safety?” 
Applicant answered “No” to Question 23b. The SOR alleges at ¶ 2.i. that Applicant 
falsified material facts when he sought to conceal that he used marijuana approximately 
ten times between 2001 and 2002 while holding a security clearance and when he 
sought to conceal that he used marijuana five to ten times yearly from October 2003 to 
July 2010 while holding a security clearance and intermittent program access. (Item 1; 
Item 5.) 
 
 On two separate days in August 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an 
investigator at another government agency. During the first interview, on August 17, 
2010, Applicant admitted using marijuana approximately 25 times from 1985 to 1989 
while he was in high school. He stated that he used marijuana approximately twice a 
year from 1989 to 1998. He also stated that he used marijuana once in 2008, four times 
in 2009, and one time in 2010. When the investigator asked him why he used marijuana 
after being granted a security clearance in 1998, Applicant stated that he never 
considered how his drug use could affect his security clearance. He also admitted 
withholding information about his marijuana use when completing security forms 
because he feared that if his drug use were known, his clearance would be denied. 
(Item 9.) 
 
 One week later, Applicant was interviewed again. During his second interview, he 
revised his report of marijuana use. He stated that he used marijuana 20 times a year in 
1997 and 1998. He admitted using marijuana ten times in 2005 and five times during 
2006. He estimated that he used marijuana ten times in 2009 and five times in 2010. He 
reported that his last use of marijuana was in July 2010. He stated that he knew he was 
                                            
8 The SOR allegation at ¶ 2.h. is contrary to the evidence produced by the Government. (Item 5.) 
 
9 The SOR states, incorrectly, that Applicant executed the security clearance application referenced in 
SOR ¶ 2.i. in April 2010. (Item 1.) 
 
7 
 
 
expected to abstain from drug use while holding a security clearance. He stated he 
intended to refrain from illegal drug use in the future. (Item 9.) 
 
 In July 2011, another government agency revoked Applicant’s program access, 
citing his long-term use of illegal drugs and his recent illegal drug use while in security 
access. In revoking Applicant’s access, the other government agency noted that 
Applicant’s drug use was inconsistent with security standards required of individuals 
with access to sensitive programs. (Item 9.)  
 
 In January 2012, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions. In response to Section 23, he admitted illegal marijuana use in the past seven 
years, and he admitted using illegal drugs while holding a security clearance. When 
asked to estimate the month and year of his first use of an illegal drug, Applicant wrote: 
“10/2003.” (Item 4.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant asserted that he no longer associates with 
individuals who use drugs, and he had no intent to use illegal drugs in the future. In 
response to the FORM, Applicant provided letters of character reference from two 
former supervisors. Both individuals praised Applicant’s integrity, work ethic, and 
trustworthiness. (Item 3; Item A; Item B.)  
   
                                        Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  The "clearly 
consistent with the national interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable 
doubt about an applicant's suitability for access to classified information in favor of 
protecting national security. 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
the administrative judge applies these guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in 
the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is 
a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
8 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24(a) defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.” The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.” AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.” 
 
 The record in this case establishes that Applicant used marijuana, at various 
times, for 25 years, from 1985 to 2010. However, the record does not establish that 
Applicant was diagnosed with cannabis abuse in about 1992 while serving in the 
military. Accordingly, SOR ¶ 1.c. is concluded for Applicant. 
 
9 
 
 
 Applicant was first granted a security clearance in approximately 1998. His 
security clearance eligibility was renewed in 2003 and continued to 2011. During that 
time, he was also awarded special access. Applicant used illegal drugs while holding a 
security clearance. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. It also raises security concerns about his ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules, and regulations. I conclude that Applicant’s illegal drug use and his use of 
marijuana after being granted a security clearance raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 
25(a) and 25(g). AG ¶ 25(a) reads: “any drug abuse [as defined at AG ¶ 24(b)].”  AG ¶ 
25(g) reads: “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.” 
 
Two Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case. If Applicant’s drug use “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on [his] 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation. If Applicant demonstrated an “intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future by (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used, (3) abstaining from drug use for 
an appropriate period, or (4) signing a statement of intent with the automatic revocation 
of his security clearance for any violation,” then AG ¶ 26(b) might be applicable.  
 
Applicant used marijuana, at various times, from 1985 to 2010, a period of 25 
years. His drug use was sustained and habitual. His drug use occurred while he held a 
security clearance and was granted special access. 
 
Although Applicant claimed he had not used marijuana since July 2010, his past 
illegal drug use continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Applicant provided no information to demonstrate his intent not to 
abuse drugs in the future. He failed to provide documentation establishing that he had 
abstained from drug use for an appropriate period or that he had disassociated from 
those with whom he had used drugs in the past. He failed to demonstrate that he had 
changed his conduct to avoid environments where drugs are used. He did not provide a 
signed statement of his intent not to abuse drugs in the future, with automatic 
revocation of his security clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use occurred during his adult years and constituted an 
ongoing lifestyle choice. Insufficient time has elapsed to demonstrate whether he will 
abstain from illegal drug use in the future. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) do not 
apply in mitigation to SOR allegations at ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., 1.e., and 1.f. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
As an initial matter, I note that Applicant admitted nine of the eleven personal 
conduct allegations. He denied one allegation, and he neither admitted nor denied 
another. 
 
The allegation at SOR ¶ 2.d. cross-references the allegation at SOR at ¶ 1.c., 
which Applicant rebutted with evidence from his military record. I conclude the allegation 
at SOR ¶ 2.d. for Applicant because the same rebuttal information he provided to rebut 
the SOR allegation at ¶ 1.c. also applies to this allegation.   
 
The allegation at SOR ¶ 2.e. incorporates information from SOR ¶¶1.e. and 1.f. 
about Applicant’s drug use while holding a security clearance. Applicant admitted the 
allegation, even though it incorporates behavior in 2009 and 2010 which had not 
occurred when Applicant completed his security clearance application in April 2008. 
Nevertheless, when he completed his 2008 security clearance application, Applicant 
knew he had used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance in 2001 and 2002, 
and from 2003 until April 2008, and he did not reveal or acknowledge that information.  
 
The allegations at SOR ¶¶ 2.f. and 2.g. also incorporate information from SOR ¶¶ 
1.e. and 1.f. about Applicant’s drug use while holding a security clearance. Applicant 
also admitted these allegations, even though they reference behavior in 2010 which had 
not occurred when Applicant completed his security clearance application in March 
2009. However, when he completed his 2009 security clearance application, Applicant 
knew he had used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance in 2001 and 2002, 
and from 2003 until March 2009. He did not reveal that information. 
 
When Applicant completed his December 2010 security clearance application, he 
responded “Yes” when asked if he had used illegal drugs. He specified marijuana use 
from October 2003 to July 2010. However, SOR ¶ 2.h. alleges that Applicant answered 
“No” to illegal drug use on his December 2010 application. The allegation is 
contradicted by the Government’s evidence, and I conclude SOR ¶ 2.h. for Applicant. 
 
Applicant completed five security clearance applications. On three of those 
applications, he denied illegal drug use, and on four of the applications, he denied using 
illegal drugs while holding a security clearance. When he was interviewed in a 
background investigation by another government agency in 2004, Applicant concealed 
the extent of his drug use by stating that he had used marijuana only two or three times 
in high school. During a background investigation by another government agency in 
August 2010, Applicant again concealed the extent and duration of his drug use in the 
first of two interviews, and he only admitted the full extent of his drug use in a second 
 
11 
 
 
interview. The other government agency revoked Applicant’s program access when it 
learned of his long history of marijuana use, his drug use while in having access to 
classified information, and his lack of candor in providing full, frank and truthful answers 
about his drug use. Applicant’s personal conduct raises security concerns under AG ¶ 
16(a), AG ¶ 16(b), and AG ¶ 16(e)(1). 
 
 AG ¶ 16(a) reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.” 
 
AG ¶ 16(b) reads: “deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.” 
  
AG ¶ 16(e)(1) reads: “personal conduct, or concealment of information about 
one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . .  .”    
 
Applicant admitted that he failed to report his marijuana use on the security 
clearance applications he executed in 1999, 2008, and 2009. He admitted that he failed 
to report his drug use while holding a security clearance on the security clearance 
applications he executed in 1999, 2008, 2009, and 2010. 
 
Applicant admitted he concealed information about his drug use in a background 
interview in 2004 with an investigator from another government agency. The record 
established that Applicant was not forthcoming about the full extent of his illegal drug 
use in the first of two interviews he had with an investigator from another government 
agency in August 2010. Applicant acknowledged that he feared he would lose his 
security clearance if he told the truth about his drug use.  
 
 Several Guideline E mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of this case. 
Applicant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated under AG ¶ 17(a) if “the 
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” If “the refusal or failure to cooperate, 
omission, or concealment was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or 
inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security process” and “[u]pon being made aware of 
the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the individual cooperated fully and 
completely,” then AG ¶ 17(b) might apply.  If “the offense is so minor, or so much time 
has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not case doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 17(c) might apply. 
 
 
12 
 
 
 Additionally, AG ¶ 17(d) might apply in mitigation if “the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to occur.” AG ¶ 17(e) might apply if “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” 
   
 Applicant is a mature adult who has, in the course of his employment as a 
government contractor, completed several security clearance applications. He knew, or 
should have known, of the importance of telling the truth to the Government when 
seeking a security clearance. He also knew that his drug use was substantial and would 
raise security concerns, especially when it became known that he used illegal drugs 
while holding a security clearance. Applicant’s lack of truthfulness misled the 
Government and caused it to trust him with classified and privileged information. 
 
  Applicant made no good-faith efforts to correct the falsifications in his security 
clearance applications or in his background interviews before being confronted with the 
facts. He did not claim that the falsifications occurred as a result of improper or 
inadequate advice of authorized personnel. His falsifications were neither minor nor 
infrequent. Instead, they appear to constitute a pattern and cast doubt on Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 After thoroughly reviewing the documentary evidence in this case, I conclude 
Applicant used marijuana about 25 times between 1985 and 1989. He used marijuana 
about two times a year from 1989 to 1996. He used marijuana approximately 20 times a 
year in 1997 and 1998. He used marijuana approximately ten times between 2001 and 
2002, while holding a security clearance. He also used marijuana five to ten times 
yearly from about October 2003 to July 2010, while holding a security clearance and 
while holding special access intermittently. I also conclude that his falsifications on his 
security clearance applications and in his background interviews with another 
government agency were deliberate. Accordingly, none of the Guideline E mitigating 
conditions apply.  
 
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
13 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances raised by the written record in this case. Applicant is well-
educated and is considered to be a valued employee by his former supervisors. 
Applicant’s illegal drug use over many years raises serious concerns about his 
trustworthiness and reliability.  
 
When he executed his security clearance applications in 1999, 2008, and 2009, 
Applicant was not forthcoming about his illegal drug use. Because the Government did 
not know about Applicant’s drug use, it trusted him with a security clearance. Applicant 
then continued his drug use while entrusted with a security clearance. Applicant’s lack 
of candor raises serious security concerns about his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment. 
 
Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion in mitigating the Government’s 
security concerns under the drug involvement and personal conduct adjudicative 
guidelines. Overall, the record evidence in this case leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a. - 1.b.:      Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d. - 1.f.:             Against Applicant     
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:              AGAINST APPLICANT   
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.c.:  Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 2.d.:                       For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.e. - 2.g.:            Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.h.:   For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 2.i. - 2.k.:             Against Applicant 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
