1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 12-08164 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
 
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on the record in this case.1 Applicant’s clearance is denied. 
 
On 14 January 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines H, Drug 
Involvement, and E, Personal Conduct.2 Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting 
a decision without hearing. The record in this case closed 6 June 2013, the day 
Applicant’s response to the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) was due. 
Applicant submitted no materials for review. DOHA assigned the case to me 26 June 
2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
1 C onsisting of the FO R M , Item s 1-10. 
 
2 D oD acted under Executive O rder 10865, Safeguarding C las sified Inform ation W ithin Indus try (February 20, 
1960), as am ended; D oD D irective 5220.6, D efense Industrial Personnel Security C learance R eview Program 
(January 2, 1992), as am ended (D irective); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG ) effective within the D oD on 
1 Septem ber 2006. 
2  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, except for SOR 1.b, 2.a, and 2.b. He is a 
51-year-old senior staff engineer, who at the time of his January 2012 clearance 
application (Item 5) had been employed by a defense contractor since February 2005. 
He is currently unemployed. He seeks renewal of the security clearances he obtained 
and renewed based on falsified clearance applications he executed in March 1995 (Item 
6), December 2004 (Item 7), February 2007 (Item 8), and April 2010 (Item 9). 
 
When Applicant completed his March 1995 clearance application, he answered 
“yes” to a question requiring him to disclose any illegal drug use ever. He reported using 
marijuana a couple of times 1980-1981 while in college (SOR 1.a). He failed to disclose 
(SOR 2.a) that he had used cocaine several times between 1980 and 1988 (SOR 1.b). 
Based on this clearance application, Applicant received his clearance in August 1995. 
He was later admitted to a special access program in January 2001 (Item 7). He was 
also granted additional access in July 2002 (Item 8). 
 
On Applicant’s December 2004 clearance application (Item 7), Applicant denied 
using illegal drugs within the last seven years or while possessing a security clearance 
(SOR 2.b, 2.c). These denials were false, because Applicant had used marijuana on 
several occasions between 2002 and 2004 while he had a clearance (SOR 1.c). He also 
continued to use marijuana into 2005. However, in December 2004, Applicant’s 
employer advised him in writing of the potential consequences of using illegal drugs to 
both his employment and his clearances. Applicant retained his clearances. Applicant 
repeated these falsifications on his February 2007 clearance application (SOR 2.d, 2.e), 
and again retained his clearances. 
 
Applicant’s  April  2010  clearance  application  repeated  these  falsifications  yet 
again (SOR 2.f, 2.g). However, because his special access was also up for renewal, he 
underwent a counter-intelligence polygraph in June 2011 at another government agency 
(AGA).3 At the conclusion of the polygraph interview, in response to an open-ended 
question  by  the  polygrapher,  Applicant  volunteered  the  illegal  drug  use  he  had 
previously withheld, as well as the fact that he had self-medicated with marijuana 
several times from November 2010 to February 2011 (SOR 1.d), to deal with severe 
pain from several dental procedures. However, Applicant now insists that he never told 
the polygrapher that he had used cocaine while in college. He claims that he told the 
polygrapher that he might have used cocaine in college, and now maintains that his 
memory was probably better in 1995, so if he did not report any cocaine use in 1995, he 
thinks he did not use cocaine while in college. I find this explanation not credible. 
Applicant’s cocaine use, although minor, was still more serious than his marijuana 
abuse. Further, the polygrapher reported cocaine use during a span that went beyond 
Applicant’s  attendance  at  college.  Consequently,  I  conclude  that  the  polygrapher’s 
report of Applicant’s drug use is more credible than Applicant’s current claims. 
 
 
 
3 D uring Applicant’s M ay 2012 interview (Item 9), A pplicant told the investigator that the interview was in July 
2010. 
3  
As a result of  these  disclosures, Applicant’s special access was revoked in 
August 2011 by the AGA. Applicant lost his employment in August 2012 because of a 
reduction in force, when he was unable to find another position in the company which 
did not require special access. In May 2012, while this adjudication was pending, 
Applicant was offered a job with another company, conditioned on his having a 
clearance. However, because of the pending adjudication, Applicant’s clearance could 
not be transferred to the new job and that employment was terminated in September 
2012. 
 
Applicant submitted no work or character evidence. He admitted that he falsified 
his clearance applications because he feared the consequences for his job and his 
clearances if he told the truth. He also justified his falsifications because, in his view, he 
was not a drug abuser, i.e. did not consider that he had a problem with illegal drugs. 
 
Policies 
 
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors to evaluate a person’s suitability for 
access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented. 
Each decision must also show a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). The applicability of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is 
not, by itself, conclusive. However, specific guidelines should be followed when a case 
can be measured against them, as they are policy guidance governing the grant or 
denial of a clearance. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole, 
the relevant adjudicative guidelines are Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct). 
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden 
of persuasion. 
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the required judgement, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels deciding any 
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 See, D epartm ent of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U .S. 518 (1988). 
4  
Analysis 
 
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline H, by 
demonstrating Applicant’s illegal drug use during various periods between 1980 and 
February 2011, including periods during which he had a clearance.5  Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns. Although his drug abuse was neither frequent nor recent, 
the circumstances under which he used illegal drugs are likely to recur.6 Clearly, he 
knew the company’s and Government’s policy on illegal drug use and chose to use 
anyway. The infrequency of his use does not excuse it. Applicant used marijuana 
sporadically at various times over the last 30 years. He used it when it suited him and 
did not use when it did not suit him. He used marijuana regardless of its legality, its 
violation of company guidelines, and its violation of government policy. Given that 
Applicant used marijuana regardless of these considerations and apparently abstained 
from marijuana use for periods of more than three years at a time during the 30 years 
that he used marijuana, he is unable to demonstrate his now-stated intent to abstain 
from illegal drug use in the future.7 Accordingly, I resolve Guideline H against Applicant. 
 
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E by 
demonstrating Applicant’s falsification of his March 1995, December 2004, February 
2007, and April 2010 clearance applications, which resulted in his being granted a 
clearance, initially in August 1995, with subsequent renewals because he was not 
forthcoming about his drug use until June 2011. He falsified his clearances because he 
feared he would not get his clearance and lose his job if he told the truth.8 
 
None of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. The concealed information 
was relevant to a clearance decision. His eventual disclosures during a June 2011 
interview—nearly 16 years after his original clearance was issued based on a falsified 
clearance application—cannot be considered either forthright or prompt. Just as the 
infrequency of his illegal drug use does not excuse it, the infrequency of his drug use 
does not justify his failure to disclose it to the Government when required. Applicant’s 
 
 
 
5 ¶25 (a) any drug abuse ; (c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, m anufacture, purchase, 
sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance. 
 
6 ¶ 26 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circum stances that 
it is unlik ely to rec ur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgm ent [Em phasis supplied]; 
 
7 ¶ 26 (b) a dem onstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug 
using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environm ent where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statem ent of intent w ith autom atic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. 
 
8 ¶ 16 (a) deliberate om ission, concealm ent, or falsification of relevant and m aterial facts from any personnel 
sec urity ques tionnaire, personal history statem ent, or sim ilar form used to conduct in ve s tigations, . . . [or] 
determ ine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .; (b ) d elibe rately providing false or m isleading 
inform ation regarding relevant facts to an . . . investigator . . .; 
5  
failure to disclose his illegal drug use shows a lack of candor required of cleared 
personnel. The Government has an interest in examining all relevant and material 
adverse information about an applicant before making a clearance decision. The 
Government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse information in a 
timely fashion, not only when it is perceived to be prudent or convenient. Further, an 
applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about himself provides some 
indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security violations or other security 
concerns in the future, something the Government relies on to perform damage 
assessments and limit the compromise of classified information. Moreover, Applicant’s 
continued use of marijuana while cleared, and his willingness to substitute his judgment 
about what should and should not be reported on his clearance applications, 
demonstrates poor judgment and unreliability inconsistent with access to classified 
information. This  conduct suggests Applicant is willing to put his personal needs ahead 
of legitimate Government interests. I resolve Guideline E against Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1. Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs a-d: Against Applicant 
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs a-h: Against Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. Clearance denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR 
Administrative Judge 
