KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s challenged conclusions are support by the record evidence.  It was not a
denial of due process to apply the Directive to Applicant’s case.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-10691.a1
DATE: 07/12/2013
DATE: July 12, 2013
In Re:
--------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-10691
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Applicant’s Sister, Personal Representative
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 28, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
2
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On April 1, 2013, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
The Judge found: Applicant is 62 years old.  In August 2000, Applicant received a traumatic
brain injury in an accident.  As a result, he has received medical care for the last 10 years.  His
psychotherapist reported that the injury significantly impacted his executive function.  Early on, he
had great difficulty managing his administrative and financial affairs.  The psychotherapist indicated
that in recent years, Applicant has made significant progress.  He has obtained and maintained
employment commensurate with his expertise and experience.  Witnesses testified that Applicant
can handle complex thoughts and analysis, and can be trusted to handle classified information.
Applicant believes his brain injury does not affect his ability to safeguard classified information. 
 
Applicant has six delinquent debts, totaling $565,178.  One is a private judgment, one is a
private overdue account, three are state tax liens or debts, and another is a federal tax lien in the
amount of $365,000.  In January 2013, Applicant received a letter from the state seeking payment
of $66,000.  The status of this debt is unclear.  This may be a new state tax debt, a duplication of one
of the previous state tax debts, or a consolidation of the three previous state tax debts.  In addition
to his debts, Applicant did not timely file state income tax returns for 2002 and 2005 through 2011
as required by law.    
        
The Judge concluded: Applicant attributes his financial problems to his August 2000 brain
injury, divorce, IRS errors, and his exploitation by an unscrupulous financial advisor.  These were
circumstances beyond Applicant’s control.  However, he did not establish that he acted responsibly
under the circumstances.  A witness testified that Applicant has had the mental and executive
abilities to safeguard classified information for the last two years.  Applicant should have made
greater progress getting his state tax returns filed sooner and resolving the four substantial tax debts.
Applicant is not given full credit for the financial counseling he received because his progress has
been limited, and he did not provide a credible budget showing how he will pay his debts.  Applicant
is unsure about the extent of his federal and state income tax liability, and he was not able to explain
when his tax problems will be resolved.  Applicant did not provide enough details to establish the
link between the unanticipated circumstances he encountered and his inability to make greater
progress paying or resolving his SOR debts over the last two years.  He had the means to make more
progress resolving his delinquent debts and tax problems.  He did not prove that he maintained
contact with the IRS and state tax authority, and he did not prove that he made sufficient attempts
to timely establish payment plans.  He did not establish that there are clear indications that the
problem is being resolved or is under control.  It is likely that his financial problems will continue.
3
Applicant principally argues that the Judge ignored the continuous and sustaining nature of
his physical disability and its effect on his financial situation.  Applicant also argues that the Judge
erred in concluding he did not act responsibly under the circumstances he was faced with, and erred
because he downplayed Applicant’s efforts in attempting to clear up his financial problems.
Applicant also asserts that the Judge ignored an upward trend of improvement demonstrated by him
in dealing with his financial difficulties.  He argues that the Judge based his conclusions only on a
small slice of the record.  Applicant has failed to establish error on the part of the Judge.
Portions of Applicant’s brief state or suggest that the Judge did not consider important
evidence in the case.  A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record unless
he or she specifically states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20,
2009).  After a review of the Judge’s decision and the record, the Board concludes that Applicant
has failed to overcome this presumption.     
A review of the Judge’s decision indicates that he clearly recognized the factor of
Applicant’s injury and subsequent disability.  The gravamen of the Judge’s decision is that
Applicant’s condition has improved in recent years to the point where he holds demanding
employment that requires complex analysis and witnesses testified as to his ability to handle
classified information.  However, there has been no commensurate improvement in his ability to
address his financial problems.  While finding that Applicant has made progress in resolving his
SOR debts, the Judge concluded that Applicant should have made greater progress, especially in the
last two years, in debt resolution, considering his circumstances.  This conclusion is supported by
the record evidence.  
Applicant points to evidence indicating that notwithstanding the fact that he has made
significant strides in managing his disability, there are still numerous instances where it takes him
more effort to perform administrative functions as opposed to other functions. However, a review
of the record indicates a paucity of evidence on this particular point, and the evidence is not of
significant strength to undermine the Judge’s basic conclusion that if Applicant has been functioning
at a complex mental level for the past few years, he should be further along in resolving his financial
delinquencies.  The Board notes that most of the documentary evidence concerning Applicant’s
efforts to resolve his tax difficulties through the state and federal tax authorities is of very recent
vintage.  
The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a
favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as
a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice
versa.  See, e.g., ISCR case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement
with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the
evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions
in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at
3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).  Applicant’s appeal brief essentially argues for an alternate interpretation
of the record evidence.
1“[T]he conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss
of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances[.]” 
4
Applicant argues that the standard used by the Judge upon which the analysis of facts and
the decision are based is arbitrary in that it is based on a set of norms associated with the general
population, and not the particular circumstances of Applicant.  Although the brief is not a model of
clarity, this appears to be an argument for applying a different adjudicative standard to Applicant
based on his brain injury and the resulting difficulties experienced by him.  This argument lacks
merit.  The Directive provides only one set of standards for applicant’s with the ultimate
determination being whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to allow an applicant
access to classified information.  The circumstance of his disability was analyzed by the Judge under
Mitigating Condition ¶ 20(b),1 and Applicant was given partial credit under that provision.  It also
figured prominently in the Judge’s whole-person analysis.  It was not a denial of due process to
apply the provisions of the Directive to Applicant’s case.
In this case, the Judge made sustainable findings that, despite some progress, Applicant still
had a significant amount of overdue indebtedness, and there is no current indication as to how or
when the indebtedness will be resolved.  Applicant was still without a credible budget showing how
he would repay his sizable debt, and had not established payment plans.  He offered insufficient
proof that, in keeping with his improved mental functioning, he had been diligent in establishing and
maintaining contact with his creditors and taxing authorities.  The Judge listed the potentially
applicable mitigating conditions and then discussed several components of those factors in his
analysis.  The Judge found in favor of Applicant as to a number of the Guideline F allegations.
However, the Judge offered a narrative explanation as to why the disqualifying conduct under
Guideline F was not fully  mitigated.  The Board concludes that the Judge appropriately weighed
the Guideline F mitigating evidence against the seriousness of the disqualifying conduct, and took
Applicant’s disability and its effects into full consideration. 
Applicant asks for alternate forms of relief should the Board not decide to reverse this case
outright.  These include (1) a reversal where the Hearing Office Judge would presumably be entitled
to re-evaluation of the clearance decision after 18 months, upon receipt of Applicant’s tax status
with the IRS and the state department of taxation; (2) a request that the decision of the Hearing
Office Judge be vacated, the record below be reopened for another six months, and the Judge render
a decision after reevaluating the facts; and (3) a request that the Judge’s decision be vacated and the
case remanded for further testimonial and documentary evidence, whereupon the Judge would issue
a decision based on an expanded record.  The Board’s authority is limited to addressing the material
issues raised on appeal and then either affirming, remanding, or reversing the decision of the Judge.
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32-E3.1.33.
 The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
5
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Micahel Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                 
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
