 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-12310 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has limited contacts with his relatives living in Afghanistan and 
Pakistan. Applicant has honorably served as a linguist with special operations troops 
under dangerous conditions in Afghanistan, showing bravery, loyalty, and fidelity to the 
United States. He has one sibling serving with U.S. forces in Afghanistan as a linguist, 
and another serving as a linguist for a U.S. government contractor in the United States. 
He has substantial connections to the United States. Foreign influence security 
concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 13 and 28, 2012, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On March 19, 
2013, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of 
reasons (SOR) to Applicant, alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence) (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted for Applicant. 
 
On May 22, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) Department Counsel 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. (Tr. 16) On June 19, 2013, 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On June 21, 2013, the case was 
assigned to me. On June 21, 2013, DOHA sent notice of the hearing setting the hearing 
for July 10, 2013. (HE 3) The hearing was held as scheduled using video 
teleconference. I received the transcript of the hearing on July 18, 2013.     
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits, and Applicant did not 
offer any exhibits. (Tr. 21-23; GE 1-4) Applicant did not object to my consideration of 
any exhibits, and I admitted GE 1-4. (Tr. 22-24)  
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. (Tr. 15; HE 4, 5, AN Requests) Department Counsel 
provided supporting documents to show detail and context for those facts. (HE 4, 5, Ex. 
I to IX) Applicant did not object, and I granted Department Counsel’s request. I have 
also taken administrative notice of the U.S. Department of State, Background Note: 
Afghanistan, Nov. 28, 2011, http://www.state.gov/outofdate/bgn/afghanistan/index.htm 
and U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Pakistan, Oct. 6, 2010, 
http://www.state.gov/ outofdate/bgn/pakistan/index.htm. 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.e. (HE 3) 
He admitted that his wife, father-in-law, mother-in-law, and sister-in-law are citizens and 
residents of Pakistan. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d) His six nieces and one nephew are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. (SOR ¶ 1.e) His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups or locations to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more 
specific information.  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Applicant is a 21-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor. (Tr. 6) In 
2007, he graduated from high school in the United States. (Tr. 6) In 2008, he became a 
U.S. citizen and swore his allegiance to the United States. (SF 86) In 2009, he married, 
and he does not have any children. (Tr. 6-7) He lives with his mother, when Applicant is 
in the United States. 
 
In 1991, Applicant was born in Afghanistan. (Tr. 24) His parents and siblings 
were all born in Afghanistan. A 60-year-old Taliban man wanted to marry Applicant’s 
then 18-year-old sister, and Applicant’s father refused to permit the marriage. (Tr. 25) 
Taliban members attacked Applicant’s family. They struck Applicant’s brother on the 
head, causing a brain injury; they killed Applicant’s father; they burned Applicant’s 
father’s house, and his 18-year-old sister died before the family moved to the United 
States; (Tr. 25-26; SF 86) Applicant and his surviving family members fled Afghanistan 
and went to Pakistan—at that time Applicant was four years old. (Tr. 8, 24)  
 
In 2002, Applicant, his mother, brothers, and sister left Pakistan and came to the 
United States as refugees, and they are now U.S. citizens. (Tr. 25-27)  Applicant was 11 
years old when he immigrated to the United States. (Tr. 27)  
 
Applicant’s older brother arranged for Applicant to marry a woman in Pakistan. 
(Tr. 19) In early 2009, Applicant went to Pakistan with his mother and became engaged, 
and in late 2009, he returned to Pakistan and married his fiancé. (Tr. 19, 33, 43-44) 
Applicant was 18, and his fiancé was 14 when they married. (Tr. 31) She was born in 
May 1995. (SF 86) In late 2009, Applicant stayed in Pakistan about 20 days, and then 
he returned to the United States. (Tr. 20, 32) His spouse has never left her family in 
Pakistan, and Applicant did not return to Pakistan after his marriage in 2009. (Tr. 31-33, 
44) After they married, he frequently communicated with her for several months, and 
then he went to Afghanistan. (Tr. 20) Applicant has been serving with U.S. Armed 
Forces as a linguist in Afghanistan for 16 months. (Tr. 8, 28) Over the previous 16 
months, he only spoke to his spouse in Pakistan twice. (Tr. 20, 32) Applicant did not tell 
his spouse what he does for a living for reasons of security. (Tr. 21, 28) He did not tell 
her he was in Afghanistan and instead Applicant told her that he was working in Hawaii. 
(Tr. 28) Applicant has filed an application with the Immigration and Naturalization 
Service for her to move to the United States at the end of 2013. (Tr. 37-38) Applicant’s 
spouse and her family are not connected with the Pakistani government or military. (Tr. 
42) He sends money to his spouse every month. (Tr. 42) Applicant does not have any 
land or property in Afghanistan or Pakistan. (Tr. 43)  
 
In 2010, Applicant’s older brother, who was living in Afghanistan with his spouse 
and seven children, was murdered by the Taliban. (Tr. 35-36) Applicant said the Taliban 
murdered him because his brother had relatives in the United States; he refused to pay 
the Taliban; and he was providing medical care to the Afghan people. (Tr. 34, 45) 
Applicant talks to his sister-in-law three or four times a year. (Tr. 35) His conversations 
with his sister-in-law are brief and are mostly about how everyone is doing. (Tr. 36) 
Applicant and his family members living in the United States send her money, as she 
does not work outside her home in Afghanistan. (Tr. 36) Applicant’s family in the United 
States intends to bring his sister-in-law and her children to the United States. (Tr. 44-45)    
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
When Applicant worked in Afghanistan, he served in a dangerous province out in 
the field with special operations-type troops. (Tr. 29) His function was to go on patrols 
and enter villages with the troops. (Tr. 30) When a dangerous situation arose, the troops 
on patrol protected Applicant from getting shot. (Tr. 31) Applicant was on vacation in the 
United States from Afghanistan for his hearing. (Tr. 5, 8) Applicant’s annual salary as a 
linguist is $102,000. (Tr. 36) He hoped to continue to serve in Afghanistan for at least a 
year, until all the troops come back to the United States. (Tr. 53) 
 
One of Applicant’s brothers has served in Afghanistan as a linguist for 16 
months, and he was in Afghanistan at the time of Applicant’s hearing. (Tr. 39-41) 
Applicant has another brother, who is a linguist with a clearance, who is working in the 
United States. (Tr. 41) 
 
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is approximately the size of 
Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran 
borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country 
which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically elected 
president. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the 
Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from Afghanistan, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of 
the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies.   
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists 
including al-Qaeda and the Taliban continue to assert power and intimidation within the 
country. Safety and security are key issues because these terrorist organizations target 
United States and Afghan interests by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, 
car-jacking, assaults, or hostage taking. At this time, the risk of terrorist activities 
remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record remains poor and violence 
is rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents 
continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. 
Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from 
violence.  
 
The United States-Afghan relationship is summarized as follows: 
 
After the fall of the Taliban, the U.S. supported the emergence of a broad-
based government, representative of all Afghans, and actively encouraged 
a [United Nations] role in the national reconciliation process in 
Afghanistan. The U.S. has made a long-term commitment to help 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Afghanistan rebuild itself after years of war. The U.S. and others in the 
international community currently provide resources and expertise to 
Afghanistan in a variety of areas, including humanitarian relief and 
assistance, capacity-building, security needs, counter-narcotic programs, 
and infrastructure projects. 
 
During his December 1, 2009 speech at West Point, President Barack 
Obama laid down the core of U.S. goals in Afghanistan: to disrupt, 
dismantle, and defeat al-Qaeda and its safe havens in Pakistan, and to 
prevent their return to Afghanistan. . . . [T]he United States plans to 
remain politically, diplomatically, and economically engaged in 
Afghanistan for the long term.    
 
U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, Nov. 28, 2011 at 13. The 
United States has more combat troops deployed to Afghanistan than to any other 
foreign country. The U.S. Government plans to withdraw U.S. combat troops from 
Afghanistan within the next two years. The United States’ extraordinary commitment to 
Afghanistan is balanced against the inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in 
Afghanistan to citizens and residents of Afghanistan and Afghan Government problems 
developing and complying with the rule of law. 
 
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic with a population of more than 167 
million people. After September 11, 2001, Pakistan supported the United States and an 
international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom to remove the Taliban from power 
in Afghanistan. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in the 
Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
(Kpk), and in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Afghanistan.  
 
The Taliban, Lashkar e-Tayyiba (LT), the Haqqani Network, and al Qaida operate 
in Pakistan, and in some instances elements of the Pakistani Government may be 
covertly aiding these terrorist or anti-U.S. entities. Taliban financing has been traced 
from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to strengthen its 
military and technical capabilities. It is likely that in November 2008 LT was responsible 
for the attack in Mumbai, which caused numerous casualties. The Haqqani Network 
attacked the U.S. Embassy in Kabul in September 2011. Pakistan has intensified its 
counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has been mixed. 
 
The U.S. Department of State has defined several areas of Pakistan to be 
terrorist safe havens. The security situation in Afghanistan worsened in 2008, driven in 
part by insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous 
Afghan-Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide vital 
sanctuary to al Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups. Al 
Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the Afghan insurgency, 
while also planning attacks against the United States and Western interests in Pakistan 
and worldwide. Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremists groups, Al Qaida 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare regional and 
transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and supplies. Al 
Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of destabilizing suicide attacks 
throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high profile government, military, and 
western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in 2008 due to such attacks. 
In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan conducted at least 40 
suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed about 600 Pakistani 
civilians and security force personnel.   
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to 
Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several American citizens present in 
Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other personal reasons. The human rights 
situation in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, and disappearances 
occur. Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is widespread, and the 
Pakistani government maintains several domestic intelligence agencies to monitor 
politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
intelligence agents. Credible reports indicate that authorities use wiretaps and monitor 
mail without the requisite court approval, and also monitor phones and electronic 
messages. In addition, Pakistan continues to develop its own nuclear infrastructure, 
expand nuclear weapon stockpiles, and seek more advanced warhead and delivery 
systems. In the aftermath of Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United 
States cut-off military aid to Pakistan for several years.  
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the United States in 
counterterrorism methods. Pakistan committed to elimination of terrorist camps on the 
Pakistan-Afghanistan border and subsequently sent thousands of troops and sustained 
hundreds of casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency 
efforts, and demonstrated determination and persistence in combating militants. The 
United States is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster Pakistan’s military forces and 
security. In 2003, President Bush announced that the United States would provide 
Pakistan with $3 billion in economic and military aid over the next five years beginning 
in 2005.    
 
On May 1, 2011, U.S. special operation personnel raided a large compound in 
Pakistan and killed Osama bin Laden, the leader of al Qaida. The raid raised concerns 
that the Pakistani Government had knowingly permitted terrorists, militants, and 
insurgents to find safe havens in Pakistan.    
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant, his mother, and siblings were all born in Afghanistan. His mother and 
several of his siblings moved to Pakistan and then to the United States after several 
family members were murdered by the Taliban. Applicant lives with his mother.  
Applicant has limited contacts with his sister-in-law and her children, who are Afghan 
citizens living in Afghanistan. He provides some financial support to them. He has 
limited contact with his spouse and her family living in Pakistan; however, he provides 
financial support to his spouse. His financial support is an objective manifestation of his 
affection for his spouse in Pakistan and his sister-in-law in Afghanistan. Applicant is 
concerned about their welfare. His mother is concerned about Applicant’s sister-in-law’s 
welfare. There are widely documented safety issues for residents of Afghanistan and 
Pakistan because of terrorists and insurgents. Applicant has voluntarily shared in those 
dangers, and he is willing to do so in the future. Hundreds of other Afghan linguists 
support U.S. forces and have family living in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Thousands of 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
U.S. and coalition armed forces and civilian contractors serving in Afghanistan are 
targets of terrorists or the Taliban, along with Afghan civilians, who support the Afghan 
Government and cooperate with coalition forces. There is no evidence that Applicant’s 
family is receiving any special protection from the Afghanistan, Pakistan, or U.S. 
Governments to safeguard them from terrorists or the Taliban. On the other hand, there 
is no evidence that they are under any more danger to them than to any other resident 
of Afghanistan.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in 
Afghanistan or Pakistan, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. 
However, if an applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a 
foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally 
ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government; the government ignores the rule of law including widely accepted civil 
liberties; a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government; the 
government is engaged in counterinsurgency; terrorists cause a substantial amount of 
death or property damage; or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection 
operations against the United States. The complex relationships between Afghanistan, 
Pakistan, and the United States places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members 
living in Afghanistan and Pakistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed into a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist a family member living in Afghanistan or Pakistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan or Pakistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or 
through Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Afghanistan and 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Pakistan have an enormous problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with family 
members living in Afghanistan and Pakistan creates a potential conflict of interest 
because this relationship is sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire 
to assist family members in Afghanistan and Pakistan by providing sensitive or 
classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence of 
Applicant’s contacts with or concern for his family living in Afghanistan and Pakistan has 
raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 
and 7(d) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any 
mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant has sufficient contacts 
with his family living in Afghanistan and Pakistan, and he provides financial support to 
them. His loyalty and connections to his family living in Afghanistan and Pakistan are 
positive character traits. However, for security clearance purposes, those same 
connections to his family living in Afghanistan and Pakistan negate the possibility of full 
mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), and Applicant failed to fully meet his burden under AG ¶ 8(c) 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his relatives who are 
Afghanistan and Pakistan citizens] could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. In 2002, Applicant, his mother, sister, and brothers left 
Pakistan and came to the United States as refugees, and they are now U.S. citizens. 
Applicant was 11 years old when he immigrated to the United States. His two brothers 
are linguists, one holds a security clearance, and one is currently deployed to 
Afghanistan. Department of Defense contractors have employed Applicant as a linguist 
and cultural advisor for 16 months in Afghanistan. He has served with special 
operations troops, and has faced danger from U.S. enemies on behalf of the U.S. Most 
importantly, Applicant is willing to return to Afghanistan to assist U.S. Armed Forces in a 
dangerous combat environment. He has offered to continue to risk his life to support the 
United States’ goals in Afghanistan. He has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to 
the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family living in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan, and indirectly, his family’s relationships with other Afghan 
citizens living in those countries. He provides financial support to his family living in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan and he infrequently communicates with them. There is no 
evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Afghan Government, the Pakistani 
Government, or those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant 
or his family to coerce Applicant or his family for classified or sensitive information.2 As 
such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant or his family would be specifically 
selected as targets for improper coercion or exploitation. On the other hand, Applicant’s 
family, like every other family living in Afghanistan and Pakistan, is already at risk from 
terrorists and the Taliban. 
 
While the Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of such 
evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ huge investment of manpower and money in Afghanistan, 
and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and objectives in Afghanistan. Applicant and 
his family living in Afghanistan are potential targets of terrorists and the Taliban because 
of Applicant’s own activities and support for the United States. Applicant’s potential 
access to classified information could theoretically add some risk to Applicant and his 
family from lawless elements in Afghanistan and Pakistan.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Afghanistan and Pakistan. 
Applicant is not required to report his contacts with family members living in a foreign 
country. 
                                            
2There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8(f) has limited application because there is no evidence that Applicant has 
any interest in property or bank accounts in Afghanistan or Pakistan. However, this 
mitigating condition can only fully mitigate the disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 7(e), 
which provides, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the 
individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” All of Applicant’s assets 
are in the United States.   
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to family living in Afghanistan and Pakistan are 
significant; however, they are substantially less than his current family connections to 
the United States. His defense contractor employment, performance of linguist duties in 
a combat zone, and U.S. citizenship are more significant than his connections to his 
family living in Afghanistan and Pakistan. His connections to the United States taken 
together are sufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns under 
Guideline B. Foreign influence concerns under Guideline B are mitigated; however, 
assuming AG ¶ 8(b) is not applicable, security concerns are separately mitigated under 
the whole-person concept, infra.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
   
Several of Applicant’s family connections cause foreign influence security 
concerns; however, they are not sufficient to merit denial of Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant has close connections to family living in Afghanistan 
and Pakistan. He provides financial support to them. His family in Afghanistan and 
Pakistan is at a greater risk due to Applicant’s position as a linguist and, if his clearance 
is granted, there is a theoretical increase in the risk to his family in Afghanistan and 
Pakistan.    
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
The factors weighing towards approval of Applicant’s security clearance are more 
substantial than the factors weighing against its approval. Applicant has lived in the 
United States since 2002. He served in Afghanistan supporting U.S. forces for the 
previous 16 months. In 2008, he became a U.S. citizen and swore an oath of allegiance 
to the United States. His mother and two brothers are citizens and residents of the 
United States. His brother has been deployed to Afghanistan as a linguist for 16 
months, and his other brother is a linguist and security clearance holder working in the 
United States.  
 
There is no evidence that Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused 
alcohol or illegal drugs, or committed any security violations. Department of Defense 
contractors have employed him as a linguist and cultural advisor for 16 months in 
Afghanistan. He went on combat missions in Afghanistan and made contributions to the 
U.S. military at personal risk. Applicant is willing to continue to serve in Afghanistan in 
support of U.S. Armed Forces as a linguist and translator, risking his life as part of his 
duties on behalf of the U.S. combat forces in Afghanistan. He is fully aware of the risks 
to himself, and he is also aware that his family members in Afghanistan and Pakistan 
are at risk from terrorists and the Taliban. All these circumstances increase the 
probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign 
power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit him. See ISCR Case No. 
07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). Applicant does not own property in Afghanistan. 
His desire for employment as a translator and oath of allegiance to the United States 
document his loyalty, trustworthiness, and reliability, and they weigh towards approval 
of his security clearance.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Afghanistan and Pakistan must take into 
consideration the geopolitical situation and dangers there.3 Afghanistan and Pakistan 
are dangerous places because of violence from the Taliban and terrorists. The Taliban 
and terrorists continue to threaten the Afghanistan and Pakistan Governments, the 
interests of the United States, U.S. Armed Forces, and those who cooperate and assist 
the United States. The Afghanistan and Pakistan Government do not fully comply with 
the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many instances. Applicant’s linguist duties in 
Afghanistan will be personally dangerous. The United States, Pakistan, and Afghanistan 
Governments are allies in the war on terrorism. The United States is committed to the 
establishment of a free and independent Afghan Government. Afghanistan, Pakistan, 
and the United States have close relationships in diplomacy and trade.      
 
I have carefully assessed Applicant’s demeanor and sincerity at his hearing, and 
I find his statements to be credible. I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in 
Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and 
the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
Applicant has carried his burden and foreign influence concerns are mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
                                            
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
14 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
