 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 10-06586 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and G (alcohol consumption). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 7, 2010, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF-86). On February 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F and G.  The SOR 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended 
 
2 
 
 
that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his 
clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On March 23, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On May 20, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On June 1, 2015, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On June 11, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for July 7, 2015. 
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 12, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant did not call 
any witnesses, testified, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through I, which were 
received into evidence without objection. I held the record open until July 24, 2015, to 
afford Applicant an opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely 
submitted AE J and K, which were received into evidence without objection. On July 
15, 2015, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.d with explanations, 
and admitted the remaining allegations with explanations. After a thorough review of 
the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old lead mechanical technician employed by a defense 
contractor since May 1996. He seeks a secret security clearance to comply with 
company job requirements. (GE 1; Tr. 14-15)  
 
Applicant was awarded his General Educational Development certificate in 
1979, and did not pursue higher education. He served in the U.S. Navy from 
December 1979 to August 1988, and was honorably discharged as a torpedoman’s 
mate first class (pay grade E-6). (GE 1; Tr. 16-18; AE E) Applicant was married from 
September 1982 to August 1999, and that marriage ended by divorce. He remarried in 
June 2010. He has two adult sons from his first marriage, and has an adult stepson 
and an adult stepdaughter from his current marriage. His wife works part time as a 
housekeeper for a resort. (GE 1; Tr. 18-22) 
 
 Applicant’s stepson is incarcerated and his stepdaughter is “in and out of jail” 
and dependent on Applicant for support. Applicant and his wife were granted full 
custody of their six-year-old grandson, the son of his stepdaughter, on December 8, 
2014. (AE G; Tr. 22-25) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
During Applicant’s March 3, 2015 Office of Personnel Management Personal 
Subject Interview (OPM PSI), he stated that his past driving under the influence (DUI) 
arrests, discussed infra, had a negative impact on his career and financial situation. 
His driver’s license was suspended four times and affected his ability to get to work.  
 
After his last 2007 DUI arrest, he was put on leave of absence for 16 months 
because he was not allowed to drive on his work site. Applicant used his credit cards 
to pay attorney fees and associated court costs and was unable to remain current on 
his credit cards because he was out of work. (GE 5) Applicant reiterated during his 
hearing the adverse impact alcohol had on his financial situation. (Tr. 25-27) 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists four debts, and the following summarizes the status of 
those SOR debts:  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d – 2009 credit card company judgment for $9,020, and a 
charged-off credit card company debt for $13,281, respectively. These amounts are 
for the same creditor and same debt. By letter agreement dated March 18, 2015, 
Applicant settled his debt with this creditor in the amount of $11,325, with his first 
payment of $1,325.24 due by May 8, 2015, and eight payments of $1,325.24 due by 
the 18th of each month. Applicant submitted proof of payments to date. DEBT BEING 
RESOLVED. (SOR answer; GE 4; AE C; Tr. 25-32) 
 
SOR ¶1.b – 2009 credit card company judgment for $5,551. Applicant 
submitted a Satisfaction and Release of Lien of Judgment dated June 23, 2015, 
reflecting that Applicant paid $6,461.01 on April 15, 2015, and this debt had been paid 
and satisfied. DEBT RESOLVED. (SOR answer; AE A; Tr. 32-33) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c – Delinquent medical account for $207. Applicant successfully 
disputed this debt, and by letter dated March 31, 2015, the creditor stated this account 
was closed and to disregard any previous notices for this account. DEBT RESOLVED. 
(SOR answer; AE B; Tr. 33-34) 
 
Applicant did not participate in financial counseling. (Tr. 34-35) He is current on 
his daily living expenses and is living within his means. Applicant’s annual income, 
taking into account his wife’s wages, ranges from $80,000 to $90,000. (Tr. 36-39) 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Applicant’s alcohol-related problems span a 12-year period and are 
summarized as follows:  
 
In November 1997, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI and driving 
with .08 or higher blood alcohol content (BAC). He pled guilty to the DUI, the BAC 
charge was dismissed, and he was sentenced to six months probation, ordered to 
 
4 
 
 
attend a first offenders program, and his driving privileges were restricted for 90 days 
in lieu of two days in jail. (SOR answer; GE 8; Tr. 39-40); 
 
In April 1999, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI. In November 1999, 
he was found guilty and sentenced to six months probation, ordered to perform 
community service, required to attend courses, fined, and ordered to pay court costs. 
His driver’s license was suspended for six months. (SOR answer; GE 9; Tr. 40-41, 
43); 
 
In July 2003, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI. In October 2003, 
he was found guilty and sentenced to 180 days detention, of which 170 days were 
suspended, sentenced to probation for 12 months, ordered to attend DUI school, 
required to install an interlock device on his car for one year, and ordered to pay court 
costs. (SOR answer; GE 10; Tr. 41-42, 44);  
 
From November 2003 to March 2004, Applicant was treated as an outpatient at 
an alcohol counseling center and was diagnosed with alcohol abuse and alcohol 
dependence. (SOR answer; Tr. 44-47); 
 
In February 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI, a felony, 
driving with a suspended license, and unlawful use of a driver’s license. In June 2008, 
he was found guilty of reckless driving, sentenced to supervised probation for one 
year concurrent with any active sentence, ordered to attend DUI school and a victim 
awareness panel, and to pay court costs, and fined. (SOR answer; GE 11; Tr. 47-48); 
and  
 
From November 2008 to May 2009, Applicant was treated at the same alcohol 
counseling center and diagnosed with alcohol dependence. As of March 2010, 
Applicant was still consuming alcohol. (SOR answer; GE 12; Tr. 48-49) 
 
Applicant stopped drinking on June 11, 2010. He attributes his ability to refrain 
from drinking to inner strength, his wife, the need to remain sober to raise his 
grandson, and co-worker support. Applicant’s wife no longer drinks and quit at the 
same time he did. Applicant credibly testified regarding the adverse impact alcohol 
has had on his life and of his continuing commitment to refrain from alcohol. (GE 7; AE 
J; Tr. 49, 51-57) 
 
 Post-hearing, Applicant submitted a substance abuse evaluation dated July 9, 
2015. He was evaluated by a clinical psychologist, who was credentialed as a certified 
addiction professional (CAP) and as a certified alcoholism and drug abuse counselor 
(CADAC). Her conclusions and recommendations read in part: “Currently, [Applicant] 
does not meet clinical criteria for any substance use disorder, given his self-report of 
maintained abstinence for the duration of at least 1 year. Therefore, substance abuse 
treatment is not clinically indicated or appropriate at this time.” (AE J) 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted numerous letters from professional sources as well as 
work-related certificates and awards. The collective sense of these documents is very 
favorable regarding his character, work performance, reliability, and accomplishments, 
and indicative of an individual maintaining sobriety. (SOR answer; AE F, AE H(1) – 
H(9), AE I(1) – AE I(10). 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
 
6 
 
 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                                     Analysis 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
 
7 
 
 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. His 
debt is a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See 
ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Nevertheless, he receives partial credit under AG ¶ 
20(a) because the debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and 
his behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
The facts do not support application of application of AG ¶¶ 20(b) or 20(c). 
However, the facts support full application of AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e). Applicant has 
fully resolved the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, and is making substantial progress in paying off 
the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c; those two debts were determined to be the same 
creditor and were combined. Although Applicant maintained contact with his creditors 
during a period of unemployment, he was unable to repay them because he was not 
earning income. Applicant successfully disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. He has 
resolved two of his debts and is in the process of resolving his one remaining debt.1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 
8 
 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the security concern relating to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of 
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
 AG ¶ 22 provides two alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, (a) “alcohol-related 
incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence,” and (d) 
diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical 
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence.” Applicant’s 
history of alcohol-related concerns is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(d). 
Two alcohol consumption mitigating conditions under AG ¶  23 are potentially 
applicable: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
Applicant presented credible evidence of actions taken to overcome his four 
DUI arrests and problems with alcohol spanning a 12-year period. He has not 
consumed alcohol in over five years and received a favorable current substance 
abuse evaluation. Applicant’s work performance, work-related certificates and awards, 
and reference of letters are indicative of his sobriety. Additionally, his sobriety is 
supported by his own credible testimony. Applicant acknowledged the problems 
misuse of alcohol has caused him, and demonstrated remorse and a steadfast 
commitment to continue lifestyle changes consistent with responsible use of alcohol. 
AG ¶¶ (a) and (b) are fully applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guidelines F and G are incorporated in this whole-person section. 
However, further comments are warranted. 
Applicant’s combined 30 years of military service and employment with a 
defense contractor weigh heavily in his favor. He is a law-abiding citizen and a 
productive member of society. He is current on his day-to-day expenses, lives within 
his means, and his SOR debts have been resolved or are being resolved. The Appeal 
Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases 
stating: 
 
In evaluating F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept 
of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
Applicant’s debts have been resolved or are being resolved. Despite his 
financial setback, it is clear from Applicant’s actions that he is on the road to a full 
 
10 
 
 
financial recovery. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
Applicant has mitigated financial considerations concerns. 
 
I was particularly impressed with Applicant’s demeanor during his hearing and 
the apparent effect the misuse of alcohol has had on him. Applicant has been willing 
to do whatever is necessary to recover from his alcohol-related problems. The process 
has been costly for him, not only financially, but also personally and professionally. 
Additionally, he has also taken on the added responsibility of caring for his grandson. 
Applicant has demonstrated the correct attitude with regard to alcohol abstinence and 
has mitigated alcohol consumption concerns. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
         Paragraph 2, Guideline G:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.e:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
