KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The totality of Applicant’s appeal is simply a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing
of the evidence and does not demonstrate error.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-04481.a1
DATE: 10/15/2015
DATE: October 15, 2015
In Re:
-------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-04481
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Sharon Steele, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
23, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
1The Judge noted that the SOR did not allege falsification.  He stated that he was considering this apparent false
statement in assessing Applicant’s credibility, evidence in mitigation, rehabilitation, whole-person, etc.  See, e.g.,ISCR
Case No. 09-06771 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jan. 4, 2011).
2
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). Applicant requested a hearing.
On June 17, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant attended a university.  During his clearance interview, he stated that he had not
received a degree.  However, in a resume prepared later, he claimed to have a degree from this same
university.1   Applicant’s SOR alleged several delinquent debts, including a Federal tax lien of over
$137,500, a credit card debt, and an installment account.  Applicant stated that he had not disclosed
this lien in his security clearance application due to an oversight.  The Judge concluded that this
claim was not credible.  Although the SOR did not allege falsification, as with Applicant’s claim to
have had a college degree, the Judge considered this matter for other things, as set forth in Footnote
1.  Applicant claimed that, after it had reviewed his amended tax returns, the IRS reduced the
amount of the lien to $62,000.  Applicant did not corroborate this claim, however.
Applicant attributed his tax problem to his having turned his responsibility to file tax returns
over to an accountant.  He stated that he received notice from the IRS that, in fact, his returns had
not been filed.  Upon receiving a series of letters from the IRS, he hired his current accountant.
Applicant provided documentation for payment of some of his debts, including creditors not listed
in the SOR.  Applicant stated that the only financial counseling that he had received was during
conversations with his current accountant.  Applicant enjoys a good reputation for his fidelity to
national security.  His character references recommend him for a clearance.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge resolved several of the debts in Applicant’s favor, including a smaller lien for
Federal taxes.  The Judge concluded that Applicant’s tax problems were affected by circumstances
outside his control.  However, he noted that Applicant had provided no corroboration for his claim
that he was resolving the large tax lien.  He also stated that Applicant had not provided independent
evidence of his contention that the tax lien was too high.  The Judge stated that Applicant
undermined his own credibility by his claim to have a college degree and his failure to have
disclosed his $137,500 tax lien.
3
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in his analysis.  Specifically, he argues that he had
indeed provided enough evidence of debt resolution to establish mitigation.  He cites to a letter from
his accountant, for example, as well as to other matters, including his own testimony, his response
to the SOR, and his answers to interrogatories.  We have considered Applicant’s argument in light
of the entirety of the record and find therein no reason to disturb the Judge’s analysis.  The Judge
noted Applicant’s contention that the larger tax lien had been reduced.  However, the letter from the
accountant confirmed the existence and legitimacy of Applicant’s liens but said nothing about a
basis for disputing their amounts.  By the same token, an acknowledgment by the IRS that
Applicant’s financial condition was too perilous to enable him to pay his delinquent taxes does not
provide a reason to believe that the amounts sought by the IRS were inaccurate.  There is nothing
in the record to undermine the Judge’s finding that Applicant failed to corroborate his claim that the
IRS reduced the large lien to $62,000.  We note Applicant’s argument that the Judge mis-stated the
account number for a credit card debt in the amount of $155.  However, even if the Judge erred in
his findings or analysis of this relatively small debt, it did not likely affect the overall outcome of
the case.  We have considered the totality of Applicant’s appeal argument and conclude that, in
essence, it is simply a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, which is not enough
to undermine the manner in which the Judge evaluated Applicant’s case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-00251 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 10, 2014).
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record, in light of the Judge’s material findings and his
adverse credibility determination.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan               
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                
William S. Fields
4
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
