 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07944 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a U.S. citizen. In 2010 and 2011, he invested $35,000 in two 
Chinese companies through a Canadian company, with a subsidiary in the United 
States, which handled the financial transactions. Applicant has strong ties and sufficient 
financial interests in the United States to mitigate the foreign influence security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 27, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 13, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on March 13, 2015, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on June 18, 2015, and issued a Notice of 
 
  2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Hearing on June 26, 2015, scheduling the hearing for July 22, 2015. The hearing 
convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified. He 
offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1 through 18 into evidence, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 30, 2015. The 
record remained open until August 14, 2015, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit 
additional documents. He submitted three additional exhibits that I marked as AE 19 
through 21, and admitted without objection. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
China. She provided 20 supporting documents, available on line, to show detail and 
context for those facts (HE 1). Applicant did not object to the request or documents, and 
I granted Department Counsel’s request. (Tr. 12.)  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004); and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.b. His admissions, including those made in an August 2011 Personal Subject 
Interview (PSI), are incorporated herein as findings of fact. (Answer; GE 2.)  
 
Applicant was born in the United States. He is 47 years old and married. He and 
his native-born American wife have two children. All three of them were born in the 
United States. He served in the U.S. Army from 1986 to 1988, and received an 
honorable discharge. He held a security clearance during his service. Both his father 
and grandfather served in the U.S. military. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
engineering from a U.S. university after completing military service. In 2008 he started 
working with his current employer, a defense contractor. In that capacity he continues to 
work with the military. He is a manager. (Tr. 26-30, 59.)  
 
In June or July 2010, Applicant and his wife attended a financial seminar given 
by a Canadian investment company. Subsequently, they deposited $25,000 with a U.S. 
partnership that is a subsidiary or holding company for the Canadian company. That 
partnership invested their money in a Chinese pharmaceutical company, located in 
China. In 2011 they deposited another $10,000 with the U.S. partnership to invest in a 
Chinese clothing company, located in China. (GE 2.) The Canadian company maintains 
Applicant’s personal records. All communication about the investments comes through 
 
  3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
the Canadian company. The U.S. partnership handles the financial and tax issues. (Tr. 
43, 46.) The Chinese companies do not have any of his personal information and do not 
contact or communicate with him. (Tr. 47, 58.) Applicant explained that he does not 
have a “collaborative relationship” with the Chinese companies. (Tr. 58.) “It is purely a 
risk capital investment.” (Tr. 58; AE 15.) Applicant has not visited China. (Tr. 44.) 
 
Applicant and his wife have held the investments for five years and not earned 
any money. He has not considered divesting himself of the $35,000 investment because 
of a penalty that will be assessed for withdrawing it, and because the Chinese 
companies do not have any of his personal information. (Tr. 45-47.) He hopes that when 
the companies sell stock on the U.S. stock exchange, he will be able to sell his 
investments without a penalty or decrease in the investment amount. (Tr. 49.) 
 
Applicant has owned a home since 1997. He built the home for $165,000 and 
has a $140,000 mortgage. (Tr. 32, 36.) His salary is $133,000. He has about $30,000 to 
$40,000 in retirement and investment accounts. He and his wife are paying off a 
business debt that now has a balance of about $7,000. A few years ago they started a 
consulting business which did not succeed. They also owe about $24,000 in credit card 
debt, which they are paying. (Tr. 61-62.)  His wife does not work outside of the home, 
but has a retirement portfolio from the time she was employed. (Tr. 31- 34.) She is 
looking for a position, as their children are now older. (Tr. 62.) 
 
Applicant provided credible evidence concerning the quality of his professional 
performance and the level of responsibility his duties entail. His supervisor stated that 
Applicant “demonstrates high integrity and ethics in all aspects of his job.” He is 
confident that Applicant will diligently protect classified information. (AE 19.) Applicant 
received a good performance rating for his annual evaluations for 2013 and 2014. (AE 
20, 21.) He is a Boy Scout leader for his children’s troop. 
  
China 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Administrative Notice 
documents concerning China, which are incorporated herein by reference.  
 
China is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over a 
billion people and an economy growing at about 10% per year. China has an 
authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. It has a poor 
record with respect to human rights, suppresses political dissent, and engages in 
arbitrary arrests and detentions, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners.  
 
China is one of the most aggressive countries in seeking sensitive and protected 
U.S. technology and economic intelligence. It targets the United States with active 
intelligence gathering programs, both legal and illegal. As a result, it is a growing threat 
to U.S. national security. In China, authorities routinely monitor telephone 
conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, and internet 
communications. Authorities open and censor mail. Its security services have entered 
 
  4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
personal residences and offices to gain access to computers, telephones, and fax 
machines. All major hotels have a sizable internal security presence, and hotel 
guestrooms are sometimes bugged and searched for sensitive or proprietary materials. 
There are several recent cases involving actual or attempted espionage and the illegal 
export of information to China. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states that, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
  5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government; its relationship with the United States; and 
its human rights’ record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant is 
vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States, or is a 
known terrorist haven. These facts place a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant 
to demonstrate that his $35,000 financial investment in two Chinese companies does 
not create a heightened risk of foreign influence and does not pose a security risk. 
Applicant should not be placed in a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a financial interest in China. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise potential security concerns under AG ¶¶ 7(b), and 7(e). The 
 
  6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Government met its burden of production by raising the above disqualifying conditions 
and shifts the burden to Applicant to prove mitigation. 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Those with potential application in mitigating the security concerns in this 
case are: 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property  
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) provides mitigation. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,” such that he 
“can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” He is a 
natural-born American citizen, as are his wife and children. He honorably served in the 
U.S. military for two years and held a security clearance. He has worked for a defense 
contractor for seven years, where he continues to work with the military. He earned a 
degree from a university in the United States. He and his wife own a home they built in 
1997. They established investment and retirement accounts through their employer. 
Applicant has deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties to the United States 
such that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest that would possibly arise 
in favor of the United States. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c) provides mitigation for the security concerns raised. Applicant credibly 
stated and verified that he does not have communication or contact with either Chinese 
company and that neither has any of his personal information. The Canadian company 
insulates him from a direct relationship with the companies. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has application. Applicant’s assets in the United States are sufficient to 
outweigh the $35,000 Applicant invested in the American subsidiary of a Canadian 
investment company, which invested his money in two Chinese companies. He has a 
home that he built in 1997 and maintained since then. He and his wife have between 
$30,000 and $40,000 in retirement accounts. His annual salary is $133,000. Although 
he has a large mortgage and about $40,000 in debt, his financial assets in the United 
States are greater than his investments in two Chinese companies, and are unlikely to 
create a conflict or be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure him.  
 
 
  7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept.  The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors 
listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Sufficient mitigating evidence 
weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security clearance. He is an intelligent, articulate, 
and hardworking U.S. citizen. He served on active duty for two years and has worked 
for a defense contractor for seven years, continuing his work with the military. He 
submitted objective character references describing and complimenting his judgment, 
trustworthiness, integrity, and reliability. He and his wife have family and financial ties in 
the United States. He participates in a youth organization. He credibly testified that he 
has no contact or communication with the Chinese companies with whom he invested 
$35,000 in 2010 and 2011 through a Canadian company. He stated that he has not 
withdrawn his money from the companies because he would suffer a loss and he is 
confident that they do not have any of his personal information. While it may be prudent 
for him to divest himself of interests in those companies when practicable, his 
explanation for not doing so now is reasonable. His connections and demonstrated 
dedication to the United States are significant. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the record evidence leaves no doubt 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
__________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
