1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 12-06840
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. He was involved in an alcohol-related incident
away from work in 2011, when he became heavily intoxicated after arguing with his
wife, who then left the family home. The incident escalated when he locked his wife out
of the house, and he pointed a firearm at his son. The incident was resolved when
Applicant surrendered to the police, who had deployed a SWAT team to the family
home. Subsequently, he pleaded guilty to two counts of disorderly conduct involving
domestic violence and was placed on a term of probation, which ended in April 2015.
Although Applicant has established a good case in reform and rehabilitation, the
security concerns stemming from a serious alcohol-related incident of criminal conduct
are simply too much to overlook, mitigate, or explain away. Accordingly, this case is
decided against Applicant.
 Exhibit 1 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,2
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate3
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
 Exhibits C, I–O. 4
2
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (Standard Form 86) on December 1, 2011.  After reviewing the application1
and information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense
(DOD), on September 11, 2014, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR),
explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant him eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a2
complaint.  It detailed the reasons for the action under the security guidelines known as3
Guideline J for criminal conduct, Guideline G for alcohol consumption, and Guideline E
for personal conduct. He answered the SOR on October 22, 2014, and requested a
hearing.  
The case was assigned to an administrative judge on January 22, 2015. The
hearing was scheduled for February 11, 2015, but was postponed at Applicant’s request
due to medical reasons. The case was reassigned to me on May 1, 2015. The hearing
was held as scheduled on June 2, 2015. Department Counsel offered Exhibits 1–4, and
they were admitted. Applicant offered Exhibits A–O, and they were admitted. Applicant
testified, but no other witnesses were called. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received
on June 9, 2015. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a major defense contractor and industrial
corporation. He is seeking to retain a security clearance previously granted to him. He
has worked for his current employer since 2006, and he has a good employment
record.  His employment history includes teaching school for several years as well as4
military service (active duty) in the U.S. Marine Corps during 1989–1995. His
educational background includes master’s degrees in the fields of education and
business. He married in 1994, and he and his wife have two sons, ages 20 and 15. 
 I am not persuaded that Applicant provided false and misleading information as alleged in SOR ¶ 3.b, and5
this matter is resolved in Applicant’s favor without further discussion. 
 Tr. 67, 94–95.6
 Exhibit 3. 7
 Exhibit 4. 8
 Exhibits 2, 3, and 4. 9
3
The SOR alleged essentially two matters. The first matter is Applicant’s
involvement in an alcohol-related incident of criminal conduct in 2011. It was alleged
under the three security guidelines at issue. The second matter is an allegation that
Applicant provided false and misleading information about the 2011 alcohol-related
incident during an interview conducted as part of his background investigation. It was
alleged solely under Guideline E for personal conduct. In his answer to the SOR,
Applicant denied the allegations. For the first matter, although he did not dispute that
the incident had occurred, he explained that it was now mitigated. For the second
matter, he denied providing false and misleading information during the interview, and
he explained that his statements were based on his recollection of events, which was
degraded because of his level of intoxication.    5
The October 2011 alcohol-related incident occurred when Applicant became
heavily intoxicated after arguing with his wife, who then left the family home. He stated
at the hearing that he started drinking at 7:30 or 8:00 in the morning and consumed
about a half-gallon of rum during the day by drinking rum-and-coke cocktails.  The6
incident escalated when he locked his wife out of the house, and he pointed a firearm at
his youngest son. The firearm was a Smith and Wesson 9mm pistol, which had a
magazine with 13 live rounds in it, but none in the chamber. The incident was resolved
when Applicant eventually surrendered to the police, who had deployed a SWAT team
as part of the response. The various reports of the incident show that the police took the
incident quite seriously because they believed Applicant was intoxicated and
barricaded in the family home with access to several firearms.  Applicant self-reported7
the incident to his employer’s facility security officer on October 28, 2011, which was
shortly after the incident occurred.8
In February 2012, Applicant pleaded guilty to two counts of disorderly conduct
involving domestic violence, both Class 6 undesignated offenses, non-dangerous, non-
repetitive offenses under state law.  His guilty plea was necessitated to resolve the two9
felony-level offenses he was originally charged with committing. The state court
suspended imposition of sentence and placed Applicant on probation for a period of
three years for each offense, to be served consecutively (for a period of six years in
total). He was also required to complete domestic violence counseling or treatment,
complete 40 hours of community service, abstain from alcohol, and forfeit the right to
 Exhibits A and B. 10
 Exhibit F. 11
 Exhibits G and H. 12
 Exhibit I. 13
 Tr. 85–86. 14
 Exhibit D. 15
 Tr. 95–97.16
 Tr. 86–89, 98. 17
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to18
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.19
4
bear arms. He was discharged from probation in April 2015 (apparently ahead of
schedule), and the two offenses were re-designated as misdemeanors.  10
Applicant initiated counseling in October 2011, which is before the charges were
resolved.  Issues addressed included emotional maturity, emotional age, empathy, and11
marital cohesion and enhancement. During probation, he completed a domestic
violence orientation course as well as 39 hours of domestic-violence treatment.12
Likewise, he completed a 18-hour course of substance-abuse therapy.  He has not13
participated in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization.  Also14
during probation, he completed his master’s degree in business administration in March
2014.  15
In October 2011, the time of Applicant’s misconduct, he typically consumed two
to three strong rum-and-coke cocktails daily, perhaps consuming as much as a half-
gallon of rum every two to three days.  As required by the court order, he abstained16
from alcohol during the period of probation. He resumed drinking once his probation
ended, and his intention is to limit himself to social drinking.17
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As18
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt19
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 20
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 21
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.23
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.24
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.25
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 26
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).27
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.28
5
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An20
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  21
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting22
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An23
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate24
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  25
In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a
preponderance of the evidence.  The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s26
reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence
standard.27
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. The
Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those
persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it28
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 30, 31, and 32 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 29
 AG ¶¶ 21, 22, and 23 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions).30
 AG ¶ 15, 16, and 17 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 31
6
Discussion
The criminal conduct, alcohol consumption, and personal conduct concerns are
discussed together because they are factually interrelated. Under Guideline J for
criminal conduct,  the concern is that criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s29
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness, and calls into question a person’s ability or
willingness to follow laws, rules, and regulations. Under Guideline G for alcohol
consumption,  the concern is that excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the30
exercise of questionable judgment or failure to control impulses, and it can raise
questions about a person’s reliability and trustworthiness. And under Guideline E for
personal conduct, the concern is, in relevant part, that conduct involving question
judgment can raise questions about a person’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  31
Applicant has a history of excessive drinking based on his admission that, before
the October 2011 incident, he typically consumed two to three strong rum-and-coke
cocktails daily, perhaps consuming as much as a half-gallon of rum every two to three
days. His pattern of heavy drinking led to an episode of binge drinking, which was the
basis for the October 2011 alcohol-related incident involving criminal conduct. Those
circumstances raise concerns under the following disqualifying conditions:
AG ¶ 15(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information; 
AG ¶ 22(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace,
or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the [person] is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
AG ¶ 22(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
AG ¶ 31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
7
AG ¶ 31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted. 
  In addition to disqualifying conditions, each of the three guidelines has conditions
that may mitigate security concerns. Based on the evidence, the following mitigating
conditions are potentially applicable:
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
[person’s] reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
AG ¶ 17(d) the [person] has acknowledged the behavior and obtained
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthiness, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such
behavior is unlikely to recur; 
AG ¶ 23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent,
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the [person’s] current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
AG ¶ 32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the [person’s] current
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
AG ¶ 32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not
limited to the passage of time with recurrence of criminal activity, remorse
or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement. 
Applicant stands convicted of two misdemeanor offenses of domestic violence
stemming from the 2011 alcohol-related incident. This is a serious matter as shown by
(1) the extensive police deployment to resolve the situation at Applicant’s home, which
included Applicant brandishing a firearm, (2) the original charges of felony-level
offenses, and (3) the six-year period of probation imposed by the court, which was
terminated after three years. When the record closed in this case (June 2015), he had
been discharged from probation for about two months. In addition, I have  concerns and
doubts whether Applicant’s history of marital strife and heavy drinking is safely in the
past and will not recur. On that point, it is telling that Applicant resumed drinking alcohol
upon his discharge from probation. Although he reports that he is consuming alcohol at
a moderate and responsible level, the fact that he is currently drinking means he is only
a step or two away from another episode of binge drinking, which obviously is a high-
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).32
8
risk situation for Applicant. Taken together, those circumstances militate against a
favorable decision.
I have considered all the mitigating conditions mentioned above, and none,
individually or in combination, is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised by the
October 2011 incident. I also considered that Applicant voluntarily self-reported the
information. The circumstances surrounding the October 2011 incident establish that
the nature, extent, and seriousness of Applicant’s misconduct are simply too much to
overlook, mitigate, or explain away. Indeed, the October 2011 incident had the potential
for tragedy. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice
versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  I am convinced that32
Applicant accepts responsibility for his actions, but I am not convinced that the risk of
recurrence of another alcohol-related incident involving criminal conduct is acceptably
low. Accordingly, I conclude that he did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to
show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for
access to classified information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: For Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Eligibility is
denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
