 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-10801 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 27, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 On May 26, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and he elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 22, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
 
2 
 
 
mailed to Applicant, and it was received on August 20, 2015. Applicant was again put 
on notice of the security concerns raised by the Government. He was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s documents, which were then admitted into 
evidence. In response to the FORM, Applicant submitted additional information, which 
was also admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on 
October 5, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except ¶ 1.i. I have incorporated his 
admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He married in 2002 and divorced in 2007. He remarried 
in 2009 and divorced in 2012. He has a six-year-old child from that marriage. Applicant 
served in the Army from 2002 to 2005 and was honorably discharged. He has worked 
for his present employer since February 2012. He did not list any periods of 
unemployment.1  
 
 Applicant signed his security clearance application (SCA) on May 21, 2012. In it 
he disclosed that he failed to file his 2010 federal and state income tax returns. He 
stated he intended to file the returns in 2012 and arrange a payment plan. He estimated 
he owed approximately $800.2  
 
 Applicant admitted in his answer to the SOR that he also failed to file his federal 
and state income tax returns for 2011 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.c).3 He did not provide 
proof that he filed his 2010 and 2011 federal and state income tax returns. He stated he 
had a payment plan to resolve his federal tax debts. It appears he owes federal taxes, 
but it is unknown what specific tax year he is referring to. The date of inception of the 
plan and its requirements is not known. In his response to the FORM, he provided a 
bank statement that showed three monthly payments to the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS) of $316 for October through December 2014, and ten monthly payments of $316 
for January through August 2015. He indicated he paid his delinquent 2010 state tax 
lien debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c ($3,530), but did not provide documentary proof of 
payment.4  
 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Applicant failed to explain why he did not disclose on his May 2012 SCA that he also did not file his 
2011 Federal and state income tax return. Delinquent federal taxes were not alleged. I have not 
considered these facts for disqualifying purposes, but will consider them when analyzing Applicant’s 
credibility and the whole person. 
 
4 Item 2, 3. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant also disclosed in the SCA a debt for rent he owed from July 2005 that 
had a remaining balance of $748. He indicated he moved and was unable to pay the 
amount owed at the time. He said he was working on a payment plan for this debt (SOR 
¶1.p). In his answer to the SOR, he stated the debt was paid. He did not provide proof 
of payment.5  
 
Applicant disclosed a debt for a car repossession from 2005 with a balance of 
$21,090 that was charged off (SOR ¶ 1.k). He indicated in his SCA that the debt was 
resolved in 2012. He did not provide documentary proof that it was resolved. In his 
answer to the SOR, he indicated he planned to set up a plan to pay the account. He did 
not provide documentary proof of any actions he has taken to resolve the debt.6  
 
Applicant disclosed that he had delinquent student loans from 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.m-
$517; ¶ 1.n-$1,033) that he was unable to pay, but he had begun making payments. In 
his answer to the SOR, he stated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.m was paid, and he was 
arranging a plan to pay the debt in SOR ¶ 1.n, which contradicts the comments in his 
SCA that he had begun paying the debt. He did not provide documentary proof of 
payment or action he has taken to arrange a payment plan for these debts.7  
 
Applicant disclosed he was disputing debts to a telecommunication company 
(SOR ¶ 1.q-$1,190) and a credit card company (SOR ¶ 1.i-$2,495). Both accounts are 
in collection status. Applicant did not provide documentary proof of actions he has taken 
to dispute the debts.8    
 
Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($2,919). He indicated in his answer to 
the SOR that he was making payments to resolve the debt. In his response to the 
FORM, he provided a document showing he made five payments in 2011; four 
payments in 2012; nine payments in 2013; two payments in 2014; and two payments in 
2015. He has a current balance of $574.9  
 
Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that the following debts were paid; 
SOR ¶ 1.e ($3,530) state tax lien; SOR ¶ 1.f ($2,503) education account in collection; 
SOR ¶ 1.g ($1,473) mobile phone account in collection; and SOR ¶ 1.l ($100) debt to 
local government in collection. He did not provide any documentary proof of payment or 
resolution of these debts.10  
 
                                                          
5 Items 2, 3. 
 
6 Items 2, 3. 
 
7 Items 2, 3. 
 
8 Items 2, 3. 
 
9 Item 2. 
 
10 Item 2. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant admitted owing the remaining debts in SOR ¶ 1.h ($5,992) educational 
account in collection; SOR ¶ 1.j ($1,285) charged off educational account; and SOR ¶ 
1.o ($6,184) educational account in collection. He indicated in his answer to the SOR 
that he planned to set up a repayment plan with the creditors.  
 
The debts alleged in the SOR are supported by entries on credit reports from 
May 2012 and November 2014.11 Applicant attributed his financial problems to having a 
child and getting married in 2009, moving in 2010 and again in 2011, and his divorce in 
2012.12 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
11 Items 5, 6.  
 
12 Answer to SOR.  
 
5 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
Applicant did not timely file his 2010 and 2011 federal and state income tax 
returns. He has 14 debts delinquent from at least 2005 totaling approximately $51,059 
that are unpaid or unresolved. Applicant is unable or unwilling to satisfy his debts. He 
has a history of not meeting his financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions 
have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR debts, except one. He failed to provide proof 
that he filed his 2010 and 2011 federal and state income tax returns. He provided 
evidence that he made some payments to the IRS, but it is unknown what tax year or 
years these payments apply to. He has numerous delinquent debts that are unpaid and 
unresolved. He attributed his financial problems to the birth of his child and marriage in 
2009, and moves in 2010 and 2011. His record shows that he has had unpaid bills since 
at least 2005. I am unable to find his financial problems occurred under unique 
circumstances and are unlikely to recur. His conduct casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s moves and the birth of his child were conditions that may have been 
somewhat beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b) he must provide 
proof that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant had delinquent 
debts prior to these events. It has been six years since these events, and he has not 
provided evidence of acting responsibly in resolving his financial problems. AG ¶ 20(b) 
has little application.  
 
 No evidence was provided that Applicant has received financial counseling. 
Applicant has made some inconsistent payments toward the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, but it is 
not yet resolved. Despite statements that other debts are paid or that he is arranging 
payment plans, he failed to provide documented proof to support his position. AG ¶ 
20(c) has limited application. AG ¶ 20(d) also has limited application to said debt on 
which he made some inconsistent payments. There is no evidence of good-faith efforts 
 
7 
 
 
to repay or resolve the 13 remaining delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply to 
them.  
 
 Applicant asserted that he disputed certain delinquent debts, but he failed to 
provide documentary proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He has had steady employment. He served honorably 
in the Army. Applicant has a history of financial problems that he has not resolved. He 
failed to provide substantiating evidence of payment or resolution for delinquent debts 
that he indicated he had paid. He failed to show he has filed his delinquent federal or 
state income tax returns. He failed to provide proof of the actions he has taken to 
arrange payment plans. His financial problems raise questions about his 
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. The record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.q:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
