Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-6, hearing exhibit (HE) I, and Applicant exhibits1
(AE) A-K.
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 12-10070
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Rhett E. Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel
David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is granted.1
On 5 September 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the2
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 17
August 2015 and I convened a hearing 7 October 2015. DOHA received the transcript
16 October 2015.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations. He is a 47-year-old
manufacturing engineer employed by a defense contractor since June 2009. Although
this is his first clearance application (GE 1), he appears to have held an interim
clearance since applying in June 2009. He seeks to retain the clearance permanently.
He has been married for 18 years, and has four daughters—one from a brief first
marriage—two of whom still live at home.
The SOR alleges, Government exhibits (GE 4-6) substantiate, and Applicant
admits six delinquent accounts totaling nearly $86,000. Over $82,000 of that debt is for
a delinquent first mortgage. The other debts consist of state tax debt and two unpaid
medical accounts. Applicant also admits failing to file his state income tax returns in
2008 and 2009 (SOR 1.b) and filing for chapter 7 bankruptcy and receiving a discharge
of all dischargeable debts in 2004 (SOR 1.f)(AE B).
Applicant attributes his chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in August 2004 to several
factors. His fourth child was born in December 2003, and he had unexpectedly became
the primary guardian of his older child from his first marriage. He was also assisting his
mother-in-law when she was experiencing health and financial issues. Applicant found
he could not manage the additional expenses, and rather than founder, he sought the
new start provided by bankruptcy. His mother-in-law has since died.
The $3,400 state tax debt at SOR debt 1.a was the result of Applicant’s failure to
timely file his state income tax returns for 2008 and 2009 (SOR 1.b). Applicant failed to
timely file his 2008 state income tax return because he was having a disagreement with
the state about his tax liability for 2008, a year in which he was unemployed for eight
months between April and December. He failed to timely file his 2009 state income tax
return because he had not filed his 2008 return, and the 2009 return would be
predicated on the 2008 return. However, Applicant filed both returns in 2012, and he
entered into a repayment agreement with the state in August 2013. Through his regular
payments and diversion of his 2013 Federal income tax refund, Applicant paid the full
balance by September 2014 (AE F).
 Applicant believes he already paid the two medical debts at SOR 1.c and 1.d
and is disputing the debts with the creditors. However, because he wanted to remove
the potential security concerns raised by these debts, he paid them in October 2015 (AE
D, E), preferring to pursue his dispute outside the clearance process.
When Applicant lost his employment in April 2008, he approached his lender
about a loan modification or other mortgage relief. However, the relief offered required a
lump-sum payment so large that if Applicant had that kind of money in the bank, he
would not need the mortgage relief. The house fell into foreclosure, and Applicant
eventually received a notice from the lender to vacate the house by October 2009,
Unbeknownst to Applicant, the lender did not complete the foreclosure, but sold the house to another lender.3
The new lender started sending Applicant notices for payment, but Applicant initially did not examine the
notices, thinking they must be a mistake. W hen he finally learned that the lender was essentially attempting
to reinstate the mortgage, he attempted to negotiate some mortgage relief. But, as before, the relief offered
required a large lump-sum payment out of Applicant’s reach. The house is again in foreclosure, and Applicant
is prepared to resolve any deficiency that should result from sale of the house.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
3
which he did (AE C).  Since that time, Applicant has rented housing, and has been an3
excellent tenant at the two properties he has rented (AE J, K).
Applicant makes about $70,000 per year. He has a budget (AE G), and a positive
monthly cash flow of $300-500 (Tr. 60). He and his wife have undertaken some self-
help financial education (Tr. 55). He has about $6,000 in a savings account. He has
also resolved some miscellaneous debts that were not alleged in the SOR (AE H, I).
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.4
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, but
Applicant mitigated the security concerns. Applicant experienced financial problems in
¶ 19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;5
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that6
it is unlikely to recur . . . 
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and7
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications8
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.9
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. 21 May 2008).10
4
2003, when his family circumstances changed unexpectedly, and again in 2008, when
he was unemployed for eight months.5
          
The mitigating factors for financial considerations give Applicant substantial aid.
While his financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, Applicant’s employment is
now stable; so the circumstances that caused them most recently are less likely to
recur.  Further, his financial problems were largely due to circumstances beyond his6
control, and he began addressing his delinquent debts once he obtained stable
employment in June 2009. He has continued to address his other delinquent debts
since then, including debts that were not alleged in the SOR.  He and his wife have7
undertaken some financial education, and he has clearly acted to get his finances under
control.  He resolved his state income tax debt before the SOR was issued. The only8
debt not completely resolved is his foreclosed mortgage. However, he is prepared to
resolve any deficiency that remains. Having addressed his other financial obligations, I
am confident this final obligation will also be addressed, if necessary. Overall,
substantial progress has been made addressing his delinquent debt.  The Appeal Board9
has stated that an Applicant need not have paid every debt alleged in the SOR, need
not pay the SOR debts first, and need not be paying on all debts simultaneously.
Applicant need only establish that there is a credible and realistic plan to resolve the
financial problems, accompanied by significant actions to implement the plan.10
Applicant’s efforts to date constitute such a plan, and his consistent payments reflect
significant actions. I conclude Guideline F for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-f: For Applicant
5
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
   
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR.
Administrative Judge
