 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00320 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 22, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The DOD CAF acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 25, 2014, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
 
2 
 
 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 2, 2015.1 The FORM was 
mailed to Applicant and he received it on May 29, 2015. Applicant was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant submitted several documents, which I marked as Items A1 through A10 and 
admitted into the record. The case was assigned to me on August 25, 2015.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning the country of Russia. Department 
Counsel provided references to supporting documents that verify, detail, and provide 
context for the facts stated in the FORM. The facts are summarized in the FORM and 
will not be repeated in the Findings of Fact. Reference to some of the facts about 
Russia contained in the FORM will be made in the Analysis section.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.2 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations with 
explanations. Those admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He is a native-born U.S. citizen. He is married and has 
five children. He served in the Army from 1984 to 2004 and retired with an honorable 
discharge. There is no information about his rank other than he was an enlisted service 
member. He has worked as a security manager for a government contractor since 
2010.4   
 
 Applicant has the following relatives who are residents and/or citizens of Russia:  
 
                                                          
1 The FORM included as evidence Items 1-20. I admitted Item 1-4 into the record, Items 5-20 are 
administrative notice items, which will be discussed infra. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). 
 
3 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
4 Items 3, 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 1. His wife is now a U.S. citizen and she has a U.S. passport. She was 
naturalized in March 2015. She has no loyalty or obligation to Russia. She lives in the 
United States. She works as a caregiver and housewife. She communicates with her 
mother (once a week) and father (every three months) who reside in Russia. All 
communication is about family matters. She communicates with her two brothers who 
reside in Russia about every six months.5  
 
 2. Two of Applicant’s daughters (his wife’s daughters) are citizens of Russia, but 
reside in the United States with Applicant and his wife. Applicant adopted these two 
daughters. Both daughters have applied for U.S. citizenship. Both attend school in the 
United States. They have no loyalty or obligation to Russia. They communicate 
infrequently with their Russian grandparents and uncles about family matters.6 
 
 3. His father-in-law and mother-in-law. Applicant does not speak Russian and 
only communicates with his in-laws through his wife. His in-laws are disabled pensioned 
senior citizens who have no political or government affiliations.7    
 
 4. His two brothers-in-law. Both work for a joint stock oil company. Applicant, 
through his wife, only has contact with them about every six months. There is no 
evidence of any Russian government affiliations by either of them.8 
 
 Applicant is supported in his effort to gain a security clearance by contractor and 
diplomatic personnel who worked with Applicant in various positions in Columbia and 
Iraq. Those people include a senior State Department officer and an in-country program 
manager. One example of the high regard Applicant is held by these people is the 
following excerpt from a letter: “He is a completely trustworthy American of outstanding 
moral character, and I would personally trust him to ensure protection of my life in a 
situation of danger or jeopardy.” His civilian job appraisals from 2010 through 2015 
consistently rate him in the highest category, which is “exceeded expectation.”9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Policies 
 
                                                          
5 Items 2, 5; A1, A4-A5. 
 
6 Items 2, 5. 
 
7 Items 2, 5. 
 
8 Items 2, 5. 
 
9 Items A2-A3, A6-A10. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
Analysis 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
5 
 
 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Russia is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a 
close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The relationship of 
Russia with the United States places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of 
 
6 
 
 
persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his relatives living in 
Russia do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a position where 
he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist 
his relatives living in Russia who might be coerced by governmental entities.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”10 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Russia seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or his relatives 
living in Russia, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. Department 
Counsel produced substantial evidence to raise the issue of potential foreign influence.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply because of Applicant’s relationships with his relatives 
who live in Russia. AG ¶ 7(d) applies because he resides with his two step-daughters. 
Applicant communicates with these Russian relatives on a sporadic basis. There is a 
rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, their 
immediate family members, including in-laws. Applicant has not attempted to rebut this 
presumption. Given Russia’s aggressive intelligence approach toward the United 
States, Applicant’s relationships with his relatives living in that country are sufficient to 
create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.”  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) partially applies. Applicant’s in-laws are not in government positions 
and do not have affiliations with the Russian government. Applicant’s immediate family 
resides in the United States and he has limited contact with his in-laws. It is unlikely that 
Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose between his in-laws 
interests and those of the United States. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply to these in-laws. 
 
Applicant has met his burden to establish his “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He is a native-born U.S. citizen who honorably 
served in the Army for 20 years before he retired. He has since worked for government 
contractors supporting U.S. interests throughout the world. In performing his duties, he 
earned the admiration and respect of a co-worker and a diplomat with whom he served. 
The evidence supports that Applicant has longstanding loyalties toward the United 
States and would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) 
applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support granting Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards denying his clearance at this time. I considered the ties he established in this 
country and his military service, thereby demonstrating his longstanding loyalty to this 
country. Therefore, he provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
8 
 
 
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
