1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-04452
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
October 28, 2015
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on November 27, 2012. (Item 2.) On September 27, 2014, the Department of
Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct) concerning Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 30, 2014, and requested a
decision by an administrative judge without a hearing. (Item 1.) Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s written case (FORM) to Applicant on April 22, 2015. The
FORM contained three documents. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on
June 6, 2015. He was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to submit any additional
documentation. Applicant submitted additional information. Department Counsel had no
objection, and Applicant’s statement of June 12, 2015, is entered into evidence as
Item 3 is the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of1
Personnel Management on March 5, 2013. Applicant discusses, adopts, and certifies the truthfulness of this
statement in Applicant Exhibit A. Accordingly, under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation summary
is admissible and will be considered.
Applicant stated that purchase and use of marijuana is legal in the Netherlands. That may well be true, but2
is not determinative in reaching this decision, which is concerned with whether his drug use is compatible with
holding a security clearance. There is no allegation that Applicant engaged in criminal conduct.
2
Applicant’s Exhibit A.  The case was assigned to me on July 21, 2015. Based upon a1
review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 45, single, and has bachelor’s and master’s degrees. He is employed
by a defense contractor and seeks to retain a security clearance. Applicant admitted all
the allegations of the SOR, with the exception of 1.c, which he admitted in part and
denied in part. He also provided additional information to support his retention of a
security clearance. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated into the following findings of
fact, including those in Item 3.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H, Drug Involvement)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he purchased and used marijuana while holding a security
clearance.
Concerning Applicant’s use of marijuana, the Summary of Personal Subject
Interview of Applicant by an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management
states, “Subject [Applicant] volunteered the fact that during his foreign travel to the
Netherlands, in July of 2008 and July of 2011, Subject smoked marijuana. . . . Subject
smoked roughly 6 times between the two trips.” (Item 3 at 4.) (See Applicant Exhibit A at
1.) The 2008 usage was the first time Applicant used marijuana, and the 2011 usage
was the last time he used marijuana. He has never used marijuana in the United States.
(Item 1 at 3.) Applicant also admitted that he purchased marijuana during these two
visits to the Netherlands.  During the times he purchased and used marijuana Applicant2
held a Top Secret security clearance.
Applicant stated that he no longer associates with his friend and co-worker who
is an “avid user of marijuana and enjoys the lifestyle.” He went on to state that he no
longer has direct contact with this person as Applicant has moved across the country,
and their current relationship is strictly business-related. (Item 3 at 5.) 
3
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E, Personal Conduct)
Applicant is a single man, who has never been married and has had no long-term
relationships. He admitted visiting prostitutes in legal brothels both in Mexico and the
Netherlands. The visits in Mexico occurred several times between 2008 and 2009. The
visits in the Netherlands occurred during the trips he made to that country in 2008 and
2011. Item 3 states at 5:
Subject [Applicant] went alone and the purpose of the prostitution was to
blow off steam from the stresses of his employment. . . . Subject has
never used prostitution in the U.S. and has only engaged in it in Mexico
and Netherlands because it is legal in those respective areas. All of
Subject’s friends are aware of these trips, and there are no issues with
blackmail or coercion.
The Government also alleges that Applicant’s conduct in purchasing and using
marijuana while holding a Top Secret security clearance is cognizable under this
paragraph.
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
4
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1)
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved
medical direction.
5
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and especially
considered the following:  
(a) any drug abuse; 
(c) illegal drug possession, including . . . purchase: and
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and especially
considered the following: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
Applicant purchased and used marijuana a total of about six times in July 2008
and July 2011, when holding a security clearance. All three of the disqualifying
conditions have application to this case.
Applicant has, however, overcome the Government’s case. His use was
infrequent, the most recent use happened four years ago, and it is very unlikely to recur.
He has been truthful with DoD about his use, volunteering the information during an
interview, and credibly states that he will not use marijuana or other drugs in the future.
He no longer associates with the person he used drugs with in the Netherlands.
Guideline H is found for Applicant. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The security concern relating to Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty or
unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.
6
I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 and especially
considered the following:  
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information; and 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress, such as
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or another group.
I have also considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17, with particular
emphasis on the following:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused the untrustworthy,
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to
recur; and
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
Applicant freely admitted visiting prostitutes in Mexico and the Netherlands from
approximately 2008 to 2011. He does not engage in this conduct any more, and credibly
states he will not engage in it in the future. As stated, Applicant is single and was not in
a long-term relationship at the time of the incidents. In addition, Applicant has not kept
this information a secret, and it is known by friends and family members. All three of the
stated mitigating conditions apply.
Applicant’s conduct in purchasing and using marijuana six times in 2008 and
2011 while holding a security clearance was untrustworthy behavior. The incidents were
7
minor in nature, occurred four years ago, are very unlikely to recur, and do not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Applicant has mitigated both allegations under this guideline. Paragraph 2 is
found for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. My comments under Guidelines H
and E, above, should be viewed under the whole-person concept as well. Certainly,
Applicant’s conduct was not appropriate for a security clearance holder, even if he
believed it to be legal in both countries. However, under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), Applicant’s
conduct is not recent, last occurring about four years ago. Based on the state of the
record, I find that there have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6).
Accordingly, at the present time, I find that there is little potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)), and that there is also little likelihood of recurrence
(AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug use and
personal conduct. 
On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance. Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding for Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations
expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a through 1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
