 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06038 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations and handling protected 
information security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and K (handling protected information). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 4, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 23, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 2, 
2015, scheduling the hearing for July 21, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Department Counsel called one witness and submitted Government Exhibits 
 
2 
 
(GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified 
and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through K, which were admitted without 
objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He 
submitted an e-mail that was marked AE L and admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 29, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2000. He worked for another defense contractor for almost 
20 years before he accepted his current job. He served in the U.S. military, on active 
duty or in the reserves, from 1979 until he was honorably discharged in 2001. He has 
held a security clearance for more than 30 years. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is 
married with six children.1 
 
 Applicant developed financial problems in the mid to late 2000s. His children had 
expensive dental work, and one of his children had legal problems. He had costly home 
and auto repairs. Applicant and his wife both had extensive medical problems. He had 
difficulty paying his mortgage loan. He filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in May 2010. 
He paid a total of $45,498 into the bankruptcy plan before the case was dismissed in 
January 2012. Applicant’s home was lost to foreclosure after the bankruptcy was 
dismissed. There is no indication of a deficiency owed on the mortgage loan.2 
 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling $1,431 and the Chapter 13 
bankruptcy case. Applicant submitted evidence that he paid or is paying three of the 
debts. The only debt he has not addressed is an unidentified $50 medical debt that was 
listed on a September 2014 credit report. He was unable to locate the holder of the 
medical debt. He indicated that his finances are not great, but they are getting better.3 
 
 Applicant was the custodian of a secure cabinet in a secure lab. In January 2012, 
Applicant and a security person did an inventory of the cabinet and inadvertently left a 
classified board on the rack beside the cabinet. Although it was a secure lab, the board 
still had to be maintained in the cabinet. The classified board was discovered during an 
inspection not too long after the inventory. It was determined that there was no risk of 
compromise. Applicant was removed as custodian of the cabinet, and he was given a 
verbal warning.4 
 
 Applicant had ongoing medical problems in 2012. He felt barely well enough to 
go to work. In March 2012, Applicant was working in a different secure lab. He was told 
by the lab custodian that he had “open/close” for the lab, which meant he should have 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 67, 81-82; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 54-63, 73-74; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3, 5. 
 
3 Tr. at 62-63, 73-79; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4; AE D, F, G. 
 
4 Tr. at 31-34, 71-73, 85-87, 92; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE B, I. 
 
3 
 
had the ability to lock the lab and set the alarm. The person responsible for the lab left 
at about 6:00 p.m. and turned the lab over to Applicant, who was the only person left in 
the lab. Applicant finished his work about 45 minutes later and attempted to close the 
lab. The procedures for securing the lab required that the lab be locked and the alarm 
set. Applicant was able to lock the lab, but he was unable to set the alarm.5 
 
 Applicant called the contacts listed on the door of the lab, but was only able to 
reach their voice mails. He then called security who told him to keep calling the contacts 
and that he would have to stay in the lab until someone who could activate the alarm 
showed up. He called the contacts again to no avail and he also called security again. 
He did not think that he would receive any help from the contacts, and he thought he 
might have to stay in the lab all night, with no bathroom or a place to sleep. He called 
security after about an hour of attempting to contact someone and told them that he was 
leaving. When he opened the door to leave a security guard was outside the lab. The 
guard told him that if he left without setting the alarm he would receive a security 
violation. Applicant locked the lab and went home. One of the contacts on the door went 
to the lab about an hour and a half after Applicant left and activated the alarm.6 
 
 Applicant received a verbal reprimand for his action. He admitted that he reacted 
to the situation badly, but be believes that his action was reasonable under the 
circumstances. He stated that he was not feeling well, and that he was able to make it 
through a nine-hour shift, but he did not think that he could last until morning.7 He wrote 
in his response to the SOR: 
 
The incident did not result in a data spill. I left the lab in a secure state 
(security guard outside the door). This whole episode did not have to 
happen. I still don’t see where posting a guard at the door after I made a 
good faith attempt to solve the problem wouldn’t have been a reasonable 
thing to do. Just for the record, I have had security clearances for decades 
and have not compromised secure data. 
 
 Applicant admitted that he never told the security guards that he was sick. He 
testified that he should have reacted differently, but he stated that there was no security 
spill and that “it shouldn’t have been anything in [his] estimation. But if it had to be 
something, an infraction.”8 He stated that if something similar happened again, he 
“would sit in the lab until somebody showed up.”9 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 38-54, 87-92; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 6; AE C, E, J. 
 
6 Tr. at 38-54, 63-67, 91-92; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 6; AE C, E. 
 
7 Tr. at 90-91; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE C, E. 
 
8 Applicant was concerned that his company considered his conduct to be a security violation, when he 
believed it should have been designated a security infraction. I informed him that I would make an 
independent decision about its security significance. 
 
9 Tr. at 49-54, 69-71, 82; AE C, E. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
  
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had debts that he was unable or unwilling to pay. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s children had expensive dental work, and one of his children had legal 
problems. He had costly home and auto repairs. Applicant and his wife both had 
extensive medical problems. Applicant’s financial problems were mostly beyond his 
 
6 
 
control. He paid a total of $45,498 into the Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan before the case 
was dismissed in January 2012. He paid or is paying three of the four debts alleged in 
the SOR. He was unable to locate the holder of the unidentified $50 medical debt that 
was listed on a September 2014 credit report.  
 
  I find that Applicant made a good-faith effort to pay his debts. There are clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are under control. They 
occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. All of the above mitigating 
conditions are applicable.  
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 The security concern for handling protected information is set out in AG ¶ 33: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
 AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information.  
 
 In January 2012, Applicant and a security person did an inventory of a secure 
cabinet and inadvertently left a classified board on the rack beside the cabinet. In March 
2012, Applicant locked a secure lab and left without setting the alarm. AG ¶ 34(g) is 
applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate handling protected information security concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 35. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training 
and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security 
responsibilities. 
 
 The first incident was an honest mistake that could have happened to almost 
anyone. However, it put Applicant on notice, and he should have exercised more care 
during the second incident. Applicant was ill and had already worked a long day when 
he tried to secure the lab before going home. He called the contacts listed on the door 
 
7 
 
of the lab, but was only able to reach their voice mails. Security personnel were unable 
to assist him and told him to wait until someone showed up who could set the alarm. 
 
 Applicant admittedly reacted poorly and left the lab with a guard standing outside. 
He abrogated his responsibility to ensure the lab was secure to the guard standing 
outside the door. Nonetheless, this was the only significant security infraction in more 
than 30 years. There was no chance of a compromise. There has been no indication of 
any additional problems in more than three years. Applicant stated he regrets the 
incident and that if something similar happened again, he “would sit in the lab until 
somebody showed up.” Both mitigating conditions are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and K in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service and his long employment with 
defense contractors while holding a security clearance. Applicant’s actions were 
serious. Security violations and infractions are some of the strongest possible reasons 
for denying or revoking access to classified information, as they raise very serious 
questions about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Once it is 
established that an applicant has committed a security violation or infraction, he has a 
very heavy burden of demonstrating that he should be entrusted with classified 
information. Because security violations and infractions strike at the very heart of the 
industrial security program, an administrative judge must give any claims of reform and 
rehabilitation strict scrutiny. In many security clearance cases, applicants are denied a 
clearance for having an indicator of a risk that they might commit a security violation or 
infraction (e.g., alcohol abuse, delinquent debts, or drug use). Security violation and 
 
8 
 
infraction cases reveal more than simply an indicator of risk.10 The frequency and 
duration of the security violations and infractions are also aggravating factors.11  
 
Nonetheless, this was one significant security infraction in more than 30 years of 
holding a security clearance. I further believe the experience of going through the 
adjudicative process had an additional value, in that Applicant is cognizant that he must 
be more diligent in his responsibilities for safeguarding classified information. He has 
met his heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue his security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the financial considerations and handling protected information security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 03-26888 (App. Bd. Oct. 5, 2006). 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 97-0435 at 5 (App. Bd. July 14, 1998). 
