 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-06428   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 29, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated two delinquent debts totaling $13,525.05. Applicant 
resolved one debt and is making consistent monthly payments on the other debt. 
Resulting security concerns were mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On June 2, 2014, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On January 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on March 4, 2015. (Item 2.) He 
requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record 
without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on 
July 8, 2015. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five 
Items, was received by Applicant on July 15, 2015. He was afforded an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days 
of his receipt of the FORM. He provided additional information in response to the FORM 
within the 30-day period, marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A. Department Counsel 
had no objections to AE A, and it was admitted into the record. DOHA assigned the 
case to me on September 1, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He has been employed with his current employer, a 
Government contractor, since 2003. He served on active duty in the Navy from 1981 to 
2002. In 2002, he retired from the Navy with an honorable discharge. He is married to 
his second wife, and has three adult children and three adult step-children. (Item 3.) 
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant owes approximately $13,525 in delinquent debt on 
two financial obligations. In his Answer, Applicant admitted both of the allegations. His 
debts are documented in the record credit report dated June 13, 2014. (Item 5.) After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings 
of fact: 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a to be indebted to a collection agency in the 
amount of $1,139.05. Applicant contested this debt because he did not recognize the 
name of the creditor. When he learned it was a legitimate debt, he contacted the 
creditor to arrange payments. This debt has been delinquent since at least 2012. In his 
Answer, Applicant asserted that he had a payment agreement with the creditor to make 
monthly payments of $198.84 until it was resolved. Applicant produced a letter from this 
creditor dated August 10, 2015, which showed Applicant successfully made payments 
from March 2015 through August 2015, and the account balance on this debt was now 
$0. This debt is resolved. (Item 2; AE A.) 
 
 Applicant was alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b to be indebted to a collection agency in the 
amount of $12,386. Applicant had contested this debt because he did not recognize the 
name of the creditor. When he learned it was a legitimate debt, he contacted the 
creditor to arrange payments. In his Answer, Applicant indicated that he was paying a 
collection agent $300 per month toward the resolution of this debt. In his Response to 
the FORM, he produced copies of cancelled checks showing that he consistently made 
payments from April 2015 through August 2015. This debt is being resolved. (Item 2; AE 
A.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s most recent credit report reflects no new delinquencies. (Item 5.) He 
indicated that he will be “vigiliant in [his] affairs concerning [his] financial health and 
maintain [his] reliability as a security clearance holder.” (AE A.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
 
4 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant accumulated two delinquent debts totaling $13,525.05. These debts 
establish both a history of delinquencies and an inability or unwillingness to satisfy his 
obligations. The evidence raises security concerns under the above conditions, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties. I find the following two provide 
mitigation: 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant addressed the two delinquent debts. One is fully resolved and he is 
making payments on the other. As he resolved his first debt through payments, he has 
shown a track record of making consistent payments. His financial delinquencies are 
under control and he is making a good-faith effort to repay his creditors. Applicant’s 
 
 
5 
 
 
indebtedness does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. The security concerns with respect to his financial delinquencies are 
mitigated. The above conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served in the Navy 
for 20 years and retired honorably. He acted responsibly by resolving one debt and 
making payments on the other. The most recent credit report in evidence reflects no 
new debts or delinquencies. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubt as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He met his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
