KEYWORD: Guideline C; Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant’s appeal raises the issue of whether documents she submitted were included
in the record.  Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 14-05412,a1
DATE: 10/15/2015
    
DATE: October 15, 2015
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 14-05412
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation.
On January 27, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and Guideline
2
B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On September 16, 2015, after
considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Philip S. Howe denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether she had been denied due process in
that she submitted documents that were not included in the record.  Consistent with the following,
we remand the case to the Judge.  
In their respective briefs, both Applicant and Department Counsel assert matters from outside
the record regarding Applicant’s response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM).  Department
Counsel states that Applicant submitted matters to DOHA that, through administrative oversight,
were not presented to the Judge.  As a general matter, we cannot consider new evidence on appeal.
Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  However, we have considered new evidence that bears upon threshold issues
of jurisdiction or due process.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-01038 at 1-2 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2013).
Department Counsel recommends that we remand the case to the Judge for further processing.  We
agree with this recommendation.
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan           
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
