 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02946   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant mitigated the concerns 
raised by his April 2012 and February 2013 alcohol-related arrests. Furthermore, he did 
not try to conceal the April 2012 arrest from his employer. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and Department of Defense (DOD) 
Directive,1 on October 15, 2014, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the alcohol consumption and personal conduct 
guidelines. DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960; as amended, as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing 
convened on April 16, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, without objection. Applicant testified and 
presented the testimony of three witnesses. After the hearing, Department Counsel 
submitted GE 8 and Applicant submitted AE D. These documents were also admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 24, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 55, has worked as an electrical engineer for a federal contractor since 
2000. Before working as a federal contractor, Applicant served in the U.S. Army, retiring 
as a senior noncommissioned officer (E-8) under honorable conditions. He has held a 
security clearance for 35 years.3  
 
 This adjudication began with an incident report filed in the Joint Personnel 
Adjudication System (JPAS) by Applicant’s employer in June 2013, regarding 
Applicant’s February 2013 arrest for driving while intoxicated (DWI). On the security 
clearance application Applicant submitted in April 2013, he disclosed the February 2013 
arrest and an earlier alcohol-related arrest in April 2012. The resulting SOR alleged, 
under the alcohol consumption guideline, both arrests as well as Applicant’s history of 
alcohol use dating back to age 17. The arrests are also cross-alleged under the 
personal conduct guideline along with an allegation that Applicant received a security 
violation from his employer in May 2012 for failing to timely report the April 2012 arrest. 
Applicant admits the allegations in the SOR.4  
 
Although not alleged, Applicant admits two additional arrests. In 1986 for DWI; 
however, that charge was dismissed because Applicant was the passenger in the 
vehicle. Applicant also admits receiving an Article 15 in 2000 for fighting with another 
soldier at a company carwash charity event while on active duty. The soldier attempted 
to play a prank on Applicant that resulted in him being hit with a bucket. Applicant 
slapped the soldier. Applicant admits that he had consumed alcohol during the event, 
but was not intoxicated. He was demoted one pay grade and fined.5  
 
 In April 2012, Applicant was arrested for public intoxication after the police were 
called to his apartment complex to intervene in a conflict between him and a neighbor. 
The neighbor was being evicted because the neighbor’s child burglarized Applicant’s 
apartment as well as several others in the complex. When the police arrived, they 
                                                          
2 The discovery letter from Department Counsel is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3 Tr. 44, 46-48; AE B. 
 
4 GE 1, 6-7.  
 
5 Tr. 70-79; GE 2-3, 5.  
 
3 
 
arrested Applicant, who had been drinking beer on the stoop of his apartment, for public 
intoxication/open container. He pleaded no contest to the charge and was sentenced to 
60 hours of community service.6 
  
Applicant reported the incident to his supervisor the next business day. The 
facility security officer (FSO) learned of the incident a few days later after someone left 
a local publication containing Applicant’s arrest photo on display in the breakroom. 
According to the internal policy in effect at the time, cleared employees and their 
supervisors were required to report adverse information to the FSO. The policy did not 
specify what constitutes a timely report. Applicant’s supervisor reported the incident to 
the FSO, but it is unclear when he made the report. In May 2012, Applicant’s FSO 
issued a security violation to Applicant. The corresponding memorandum acknowledges 
that the April 2012 incident occurred and represented a security concern under the 
alcohol consumption guideline. The memo also informed Applicant that another alcohol-
related incident would result in an incident report being filed in the JPAS. The memo did 
not discuss the timeliness or lack thereof of Applicant’s report.7  
 
 Ten months later in February 2013, Applicant was arrested for DWI in a 
neighboring state. Because the arrest occurred on the weekend, Applicant was jailed 
until the next business day. He reported the incident to his supervisor when he was 
released. Applicant’s supervisor reported the arrest to the FSO, as required. Concerned 
about the two arrests in a short period, Applicant’s employer offered him the opportunity 
to participate in an alcohol-rehabilitation program. Applicant declined. Leading up to the 
February 2013 arrest, Applicant described his drinking history as moderate, even 
though he began consuming alcohol in his late teens. He would drink a few beers on the 
weekend while watching sporting events, he seldom drank alcohol during the work 
week, and he reported drinking to intoxication no more than four times per year. 
However, after the DWI arrest, Applicant decided to abstain from alcohol and did so for 
the following 13 months.8  
 
 As required, Applicant kept the FSO apprised of the status of the DWI case, 
including his conviction, by bench trial, in December 2013. Applicant completed the 
terms of his sentence, which required participation in an alcohol-education program. He 
was not diagnosed with either alcohol dependence or abuse. Applicant continues to 
drink moderately. He has not consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication since August 
2014.9  
 
 Between 2010 and 2014, Applicant was rated a high performer by his employer. 
Applicant presented three witnesses at the hearing, a co-worker who is also a friend, his 
current supervisor, and his former supervisor. Each witness has worked closely with 
                                                          
6 Tr. 50-54; GE 2, 4. 
 
7 Tr. 67-70, 80-82; GE 7-8.  
 
8 Tr. 54-58, 63-64, 83-85; GE 2-5; AE D. 
 
9 GE 7.  
 
4 
 
Applicant for at least 10 years, often traveling together to remote locations for long 
periods. None of the witnesses have observed any behaviors that indicate Applicant has 
an alcohol problem or an inability to properly handle or safeguard classified 
information.10  
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
10 Tr. 17-44; AE A. 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption  
 
 An applicant’s history of excessive alcohol consumption becomes a security 
concerns when it is direct evidence of questionable judgment and a failure to control 
impulses.11 Applicant’s two alcohol-related arrests in the 10 months between April 2102 
and February 2013 legitimately raise concerns about his ongoing suitability for handling 
classified information.12 However, the record contains sufficient mitigating evidence. The 
April 2012 public intoxication/open container incident happened under unusual 
circumstances not likely to recur. Given the circumstances, it is more than likely that any 
interaction between Applicant and his former neighbor would have resulted in a 
confrontation. The February 2013 DWI arrest, and subsequent conviction, happened 
over two years ago. Applicant completed the terms of his sentence and has not 
engaged in any other alcohol-related misconduct. Furthermore, the record does not 
support a finding that Applicant has ongoing alcohol issues. He is a moderate drinker 
and does not have a diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence.  Accordingly, the two 
arrests do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current ability to properly handle classified 
information.13 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 An applicant’s personal conduct becomes a security concern when he acts in a 
way that raises questions about his judgment or his ability to protect classified 
information.14 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s two alcohol-related arrests are also 
disqualifying under the personal conduct guideline. As discussed in the analysis of the 
alcohol consumption mitigation conditions, these incidents do not support a negative 
whole-person assessment indicating that Applicant is incapable of handling or 
safeguarding classified information.15 Nor do the incidents serve as a potential source of 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Applicant’s supervisors and several 
co-workers know about his alcohol-related arrests. These incidents have not diminished 
or tarnished Applicant’s personal or professional standing.16 
 
                                                          
11 AG ¶ 21. 
 
12 AG ¶ 22(a). 
 
13 AG ¶ 23(a). 
 
14 AG ¶ 15. 
 
15 AG ¶ 16(c)  
 
16 AG ¶ 16(e). 
 
6 
 
The SOR also alleges that Applicant received a security violation, not for the 
compromise of classified information, but for failing to timely report the April 2012 public 
intoxication/open container incident. The allegation is not supported by the record. The 
issue of timeliness is not mentioned in the security violation memorandum.17 Nor does 
company’s reporting policy contain a provision regarding the timeline for reporting 
adverse information.18 While Applicant received the security violation memorandum the 
month after the incident occurred, there is nothing in the record to explain the delay. 
Even if Applicant was delayed in reporting the incident to the FSO, it was not done with 
the intent to hide the incident from his employer. He reported the incident to his 
supervisor soon after it occurred. After receiving the memorandum, Applicant continued 
to update his FSO about the status of the case. He also promptly reported the February 
2013 incident and supplied the necessary follow-up information, showing his willingness 
to comply with company policy.19 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ability to protect 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2. While those granted access to classified information are held 
to a high standard of conduct, they are not held to a standard of perfection. Nor is the 
purpose of a security clearance adjudication to punish applicants for past misconduct. 
All that is required is that an applicant’s past is not indicative of a current inability to 
properly handle and protect classified information. Here, it is not. Applicant has held a 
security clearance for 35 years and worked in his current position for the last 15 years. 
While he has made mistakes in his personal life, there is no indication that these 
mistakes reflect negatively on his current security worthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Alcohol Consumption:  FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:     For Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:    For Applicant 
                                                          
17 GE 7.  
 
18 GE 8.  
 
19 GE 7. 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light the record in this case, it is clearly consistent with national interest to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
