 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06895 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges a Chapter 7 discharge of his 
nonpriority unsecured debts in January 2008, and one judgment and six charged-off or 
collection accounts totaling $35,670. He failed to provide sufficient documentation of his 
progress in resolving his financial problems. Financial considerations concerns are not 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 5, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 3) On May 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 
(Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 
20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006.    
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
information and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On June 9, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived his 
right to a hearing. (Item 2) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated August 5, 2015, was mailed to him on August 6, 2015.1 Applicant did not respond 
to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on October 15, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted his nonpriority unsecured debts were 
discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code.3 He admitted the SOR debts in ¶¶ 
1.b through 1.d and 1.f through 1.h. He provided extenuating and mitigating information 
as part of his SOR response. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old security employee, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since November 2013.4 He did not disclose any college attendance. In 1981, 
he married his spouse. His three children are adults. He honorably served in the U.S. 
Marine Corps from 1980 to 2000. There is no evidence of security violations or use of 
illegal drugs. He disclosed his delinquent debts on his SF 86. He was unemployed from 
September 2012 to November 2013.  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s credit reports and SOR allege a Chapter 7 discharge of his 
nonpriority unsecured debts in January 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a), and one judgment and six 
charged-off  or collection accounts totaling $35,670. The status of his SOR debts is as 
follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a charged-off bank debt for $9,711. The creditor wrote that the 
balance is $18,427 and the next $50 payment is due on April 12, 2015. (Item 2 at 10) 
Applicant’s checking account showed a $50 payment to the creditor on April 6, 2015.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a charged-off bank debt for $9,473. On April 21, 2015, a law 
firm wrote Applicant that the debt was $9,373. (Item 2 at 6) Applicant provided a money 
order showing a $50 payment to the creditor and a $50 payment to a law firm on March 
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated August 6, 2015, 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated August 19, 2015. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he 
had 30 days after his receipt to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s SOR response. (Item 2)   
 
4Unless stated otherwise, Applicant’s May 5, 2014 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86) is the source for the facts in this 
paragraph. (Item 3) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
5, 2015. (Item 2 at 2, 11) On May 27, 2015, a collection company wrote Applicant that 
the debt was $7,476. (Item 2 at 13) Applicant’s May 14, 2015 credit report shows two 
charged-off accounts owed to the same creditor for $7,475 and $9,374; each account 
has a different account number; and both entries indicate the debts resulted from 
vehicle loans. (Item 5)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a charged-off debt owed to a store for $7,060. SOR ¶ 1.g 
alleges a judgment for $7,060. Applicant admitted responsibility for this debt; he said the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.g are duplications of the same debt; and the debt is being 
collected by a law firm. (Item 2) Applicant’s checking account statement showed $100 
payments on March 5, 2015, and April 6, 2015. (Item 2 at 2, 3, 9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a bank-credit card account placed for collection for $1,035. 
Applicant denied this debt and indicated it was paid. (Item 2) He did not provide any 
corroborating documentation showing resolution of this debt. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a charged-off store debt for $1,155. Applicant is making 
payments to a collection company. (Item 2) Applicant paid $61 on March 3, 2015; April 
3, 2015; and May 5, 2015, (Item 2)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a telecommunications account placed for collection for $176. 
On May 12, 2015, Applicant paid the creditor $10, and the current balance is $166. 
(Item 2 at 7) He provided a bill from the same creditor for another account seeking 
$226, and money orders showing payments of $20, $50, and $10. (Item 2 at 12)  
 
Applicant’s SF 86 notes that he sought assistance from a law firm to contest 
entries on his credit report. (Item 3) In total, he provided proof of payment of $623 to his 
SOR creditors, and it appears the payments were made in March through May 2015, 
although the dates for some money orders are not legible. 
 
Applicant’s FORM noted the absence of other mitigating information. The FORM 
explained that Applicant had 30 days from the receipt of the FORM “in which to submit a 
documentary response setting forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or 
explanation, as appropriate. If you do not file any objections or submit any additional 
information . . . your case will be assigned to an Administrative Judge for a 
determination based solely” on the evidence set forth in this FORM. (FORM at 4) 
Applicant did not file a response to the FORM.   
              
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”; and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, SF 86 
and SOR response. Applicant’s SOR alleges a Chapter 7 discharge of his nonpriority 
unsecured debts in January 2008, and one judgment and six charged-off or collection 
accounts totaling $35,670. Applicant admitted responsibility for one judgment and five 
charged-off, or collection accounts totaling more than $30,000.  
 
  In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. (internal 
citation omitted). 
 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;5 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
 Applicant’s conduct in resolving his delinquent debt does not establish full 
application of any mitigating conditions to all of his SOR debts. He did not provide 
sufficient information about his finances to establish his inability to make greater 
progress paying his creditors. Unemployment is a circumstance largely beyond his 
                                            
5The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
control, which caused his financial problems; however, and he did not provide sufficient 
proof that he acted responsibly under the circumstances after he obtained employment.   
 
 Applicant did not provide documentation showing his income and expenses, and 
he did not provide a budget. He presented insufficient evidence about what he has done 
since becoming employed with his current employer to pay his SOR debts or his other 
debts. Aside from the evidence from March through May 2015 showing a total of $623 
in payments and some recent correspondence from creditors, he did not provide 
sufficient documentation relating to resolution of his SOR debts. He is credited with 
mitigating the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d for $7,060 because this debt is a duplication of the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.g for $7,060. I have also credited him with mitigating the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h 
for $176. I note that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a charged-off bank debt for $9,711; 
however, the debt’s balance is $18,427. I did not credit him with paying the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.e for $1,035 because he did not provide proof that the debt is resolved, such as 
checking account statements or a letter from the creditor showing payment or 
resolution. He did not provide evidence of financial counseling or other evidence of 
progress or resolution of his SOR debts after his SOR response on June 8, 2015. 
  
 Applicant’s failure to prove that he has made more substantial steps to resolve 
his debts shows a lack of judgment and responsibility that weighs against approval of 
his security clearance. There is insufficient evidence that he was unable to make 
greater progress resolving his delinquent debts, or that his financial problems are being 
resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, 
he failed to establish that financial consideration concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is a 61-year-old security employee, who has worked for a defense contractor since 
November 2013. He honorably served in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1980 to 2000. He 
disclosed his delinquent debts on his SF 86. There is no evidence of security violations 
or use of illegal drugs.  
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. His SOR and 
credit reports allege a Chapter 7 discharge of his nonpriority unsecured debts in 
January 2008, and one judgment and six charged-off or collection accounts totaling 
$35,670. He admitted all of the SOR allegations, except for SOR ¶ 1.e for $1,035. He is 
credited with mitigating the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d for $7,060 because this debt is a 
duplication of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g for $7,060. I have also credited him with mitigating 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h for $176. I note that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a charged-off 
bank debt for $9,711; however, the debt’s balance is $18,427. He provided proof of 
payments from March through May 2015 totaling $623. After he received the FORM, he 
had an opportunity to show more progress resolving his SOR debts; however, he did 
not respond to the FORM. 
Applicant’s failure to provide more corroborating documentation shows lack of 
financial responsibility and judgment and raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. 
More information about inability to pay debts, documented financial progress, or a 
longer track record of debt payment is necessary to mitigate security concerns. 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not established at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary to 
justify the award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards 
documented resolution of his past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent 
with his obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his 
security clearance worthiness. Based on the facts before me and the adjudicative 
guidelines that I am required to apply, I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, supra, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations concerns are not mitigated.   
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e through 1.g:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
