KEYWORD: Guideline C
DIGEST: The Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Any error the Judge made with
regard to Applicant’s attitude on his foreign passport was ultimately harmless.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 14-06346.a1
DATE: 10/28/2015
DATE: October 28, 2015
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 14-06346
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
2
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation.
On February 3, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On August 28, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Matthew E. Malone denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness
designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant was born in Brazil and naturalized a U.S. citizen in the early 2000s, obtaining a
U.S. passport at the same time.  However, he has continuously used a Brazilian passport, which was
still active at the close of the record.  He has renewed this passport twice since becoming a U.S.
citizen.  Applicant has traveled to Brazil annually during the last 10 years, using his Brazilian
passport when he does.  Until such time as he relinquishes Brazilian citizenship, Applicant’s use of
a Brazilian passport saves him money and delays in obtaining the necessary visas.  
During his subject interview, Applicant expressed a willingness to renounce his Brazilian
citizenship, if required for a public trust position.  At the hearing, however, he testified that he did
not wish to do this because he can only manage his property and financial interests in Brazil if he
is a citizen of that country.  Applicant owns a condominium in Brazil and also has a bank account
there.  After the hearing, Applicant relinquished his Brazilian passport to his company’s facility
security officer.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge noted evidence that Applicant uses his foreign passport due to large part to the
requirements of Brazilian law.  However, he concluded that Applicant remained a Brazilian citizen
for personal convenience in order the better to manage his financial interests.  The Judge stated that,
given these interests, it is unlikely that Applicant will travel to Brazil as a U.S. citizen in the
foreseeable future.  He found Applicant’s relinquishment of his passport to be “a somewhat hollow
gesture” (Decision at 5), in that Applicant can be expected to exercise his Brazilian citizenship with
regard to travel.  
Discussion
In making his argument on appeal, Applicant cites to information from outside the record.
We cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.   See also ADP Case No. 14-
03956 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015).  Applicant contends that the Judge misinterpreted his
testimony in which he expressed unwillingness to relinquish his Brazilian passport.  Applicant has
3
a point.  He had testified about his perceived need for a Brazilian passport, and the Judge questioned
him as to his willingness to surrender the document, which Applicant was reluctant to do.  Tr. at 33-
41.  The Judge cited this colloquy in support of a finding that Applicant was not willing to relinquish
his foreign citizenship altogether, not simply the passport.  However, the Judge’s detailed findings
of fact and analysis focused upon the likelihood that Applicant would continue to visit Brazil with
a Brazilian passport in order to conduct business affairs in that country.  The Judge also discussed
some of the complexities Applicant would face were he to renounce his Brazilian citizenship and
the convenience of using the Brazilian passport for travel to that country.  Accordingly, even if the
Judge erred , he would most likely have decided the case in the same way.  Therefore, any error is
harmless.  ADP Case No. 13-01074 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2014). 
Applicant contends that the Judge may have interpreted his testimony as displaying a lack
of loyalty to the U.S.  An adverse decision under the Directive is not a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant.  Directive, Enclosure 1, SECTION 7.  In this case, the Judge did not find
that Applicant had ever displayed disloyalty to the U.S.  Rather, he found that Applicant, a U.S.
citizen, had exercised certain prerogatives of Brazilian citizenship, raising a concern that he could
be tempted to act or make decisions not in the best interests of the U.S. in the future.  See Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 9.  The Judge’s ultimate conclusion that Applicant had failed to meet his burden of
persuasion as to mitigation of this concern is supportable, based on the record that was before him.
See Directive ¶ E3.1.15 for the proposition that the applicant bears the burden of persuasion as to
obtaining a favorable decision.  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness
cases is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding
security clearances:  such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’” See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2013).
See also Kaplan v. Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013), cert. denied.
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett        
Jeffrey D. Billett
4
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
