 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05761 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement and personal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and H (drug involvement). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 28, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 27, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 28, 
2015, scheduling the hearing for August 12, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
 
2 
 
Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary evidence. The record was 
held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted a document that 
was marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and admitted without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 19, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since July 2013. He is applying for a security clearance for the first 
time. He attended college for a period but did not earn a degree. He has never married, 
and he has no children.1 
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana periodically from 2008 through April 2013. He used 
cocaine on one occasion in 2008. He used the prescription drug Xanax without a 
prescription for several months in 2010.2 
 
 Applicant was charged in 2008 with a number of traffic-related offenses and 
possession of drug paraphernalia. He failed to appear and did not address the charges 
until 2011 when he turned himself into the jail. He served about two weeks in jail. The 
charges were adjudicated as time served.3   
 
 Applicant was arrested in April 2013 for the misdemeanor offense of possession 
of less than two ounces of marijuana. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to pay a 
fine.4  
 
 Applicant listed his illegal drug use on his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in August 2013, and he fully discussed it during 
his background interview in December 2013. He has not used any illegal drugs since his 
arrest in April 2013. He has a good job working overseas. He no longer associates with 
his friends who used drugs. He is aware that he could lose his job and his security 
clearance if he uses illegal drugs again. He credibly testified that he will not do so.5 
 
 Applicant submitted a letter from the project manager at his overseas location. 
The project manager praised Applicant’s excellent job performance, work ethic, 
trustworthiness, and dependability. The project manager stated that Applicant’s 
strengths include accepting responsibility.6 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 29-30; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 17-20; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3, 4. 
 
3 Tr. at 20-24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4. 
 
4 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 4. 
 
5 Tr. at 25-29, 40-41; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 4. 
 
6 AE A. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 25. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
 (a) any drug abuse;7 and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana, cocaine, and the prescription drug Xanax without a 
prescription. He was twice charged with drug-related offenses. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) 
are applicable. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
  (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 Applicant has not used any illegal drugs since April 2013. He fully disclosed his 
drug use on his SF 86 and during his background interview. He realizes that such 
behavior is wrong and inconsistent with holding a security clearance. He has a good job 
working overseas. He clearly, unequivocally, and credibly committed to remaining drug-
                                                          
7 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
5 
 
free. I find that he demonstrated an appropriate period of abstinence and that illegal 
drug use is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) are applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant’s drug use, criminal offenses, and his failure to address his charges for 
three years showed questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. It also created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. 
AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) are applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Under the same rationale discussed above for drug involvement, I find that the 
conduct is unlikely to recur; it does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment; and it no longer serves as a basis for coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) are applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and H in this whole-person analysis. Applicant was a credible 
witness. I am satisfied that his illegal drug use is in the past. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
