 
 
 
 
1 
                     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
           
         
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 14-02373 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Between November 2009 and February 2013, Applicant committed nine security 
infractions, all of which he self-reported to his employer. Since taking corrective steps, 
he has not had another incident. Although he failed to disclose all of the infractions on 
his most recent security clearance application, his innocent explanation for the non-
disclosure was credible. Resulting security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
  
In April 2013 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) for re-
investigation. On January 8, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline K (Handling Protected Information) and 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
 
 
 
2 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines the came into effect in the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On February 24, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge (Answer). On April 27, 2015, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me. On June 5, 2015, DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing. The case was heard on June 30, 2015, as scheduled.  
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C 
into evidence without objection. The record remained open until July 20, 2015. Applicant 
subsequently requested an extension of said date, and it was extended to July 24, 
2015, without objection from Department Counsel. Applicant timely submitted a 
memorandum with seven attachments, which I marked as AE D and admitted into 
evidence without objection from Department Counsel. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript on July 9, 2015.    
                                                       
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in SOR ¶ 1 and 
denied the allegations contained in SOR ¶ 2. His admissions are included in the findings 
of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 58 years old and married for 32 years. They have two adult children. 
He has a bachelor’s and master’s degree in engineering. He began working for his 
current employer, a defense contractor, in 1980. He has held a security clearance 
continuously since then. He is a manager and supervisor for 14 employees. (Tr. 23-27, 
31.) He currently holds a Top Secret clearance and has access to the special access 
program (SAP), and the sensitive compartmented information (SCI) channel. (Tr. 9, 86.)   
 
 Applicant works in secured areas of his employer’s office. According to security 
regulations, he is prohibited from bringing a cell phone or an unclassified work computer 
into the secured areas. (Tr. 32-34.)  
 
 Between November 2009 and early February 2013, Applicant failed to comply 
with security regulations pertaining to introducing prohibited items in a secured area 
eight times. In December 2009, October 2010, May 2012, August 2012, and February 
2013, he forgot to take his cell phone out of his jacket before entering the secured 
space. In November 2009, November 2011, and December 2012, he forgot to take an 
unclassified laptop out of his backpack before entering the secured space. He promptly 
reported every incident, except the December 2012 incident, to the company’s security 
officials as required by its policies and procedures. The December 2012 incident 
occurred during a Christmas luncheon on December 14, 2012, and he reported it on 
January 3, 2013. After ruminating in the two interim weeks about having committed a 
potential security infraction, he recalled that he must have left his laptop in his backpack 
 
 
 
 
3 
on that day when he walked into the secured area. (Tr. 51-53.) He said no one would 
have known of any of the infractions, if he had not self-reported.1 (Answer.)  
 
 In mid-February 2013 Applicant used a piece of paper from an unclassified stack 
of paper located in the secured area to write some unclassified notes. He subsequently 
put the paper in his pocket and took it home. When he looked at it while home, he 
turned the paper over and discovered that it had “programmatic security markings 
associated with our proprietary program printed top and bottom of the unused side.” 
(Answer.) He immediately telephoned the security official and reported the incident. He 
then secured it, and drove back to his office where he placed the paper in a secure 
safe. A subsequent investigation determined that the information on the paper was 
unclassified. (AD D: Enc. 4.)  This was the ninth and last security infraction. (Tr. 60-63.)  
 
 Applicant received a verbal warning after the November 2009 incident. (Tr. 41.) 
After the December 2009, February 2010, and October 2010 incidents, he received 
written warnings. (Tr. 43-45.) He received verbal warnings after the November 2011 and 
May 2012 incidents. (Tr. 46.) He received a written warning after the August 2012 
incident. (Tr. 48.) He received a verbal warning after the December 2012 incident. He 
received a written reprimand after the mid-February 2013 incident involving the removal 
of a piece of paper. (Tr. 61.) In April 2013 he received a corrective action memorandum 
and lost a day’s pay as a result of the two February 2013 security incidents. (Tr. 57, 63; 
GE 4.) 
 
 Applicant explained that the incidents occurred because he was normally in a 
hurry in the morning when he arrived at work and did not remove his coat (containing 
his cell phone) or backpack (containing an unclassified laptop) before entering the 
secured area, which was about 10 feet from the building entrance door. In addition to 
rushing into work, he was not sleeping well because of painful wrist problem. He 
believed these factors and other stress contributed to the incidents.  (Tr. 67-71.)  
 
 Applicant said that he was not required to take additional training in security 
procedures after the incidents, but he did meet with the security and program 
managers, who told him to figure out a way to change his morning behavior in order to 
stop the security incidents. (Tr. 64.) He subsequently established a strict behavioral 
pattern to avoid similar mistakes. He no longer puts the laptop in his backpack and he 
leaves his cellphone in his car and not in his coat. (Tr. 36-37.) 
 
 When Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in April 2013, 
he disclosed two of the nine work-related security infractions, which resulted in 
discipline or a warning: the one occurring in December 2012, and the one occurring in 
                                            
1 Applicant noted that his mistakes are considered security infractions and not security violations. A 
security violation involves the loss or potential compromise of classified information. A security infraction 
is any incident that is “not in the best interest of security that does not involve the loss, compromise, or 
suspected compromise of classified information.” (AE D at 2.) 
 
 
 
 
4 
early February 2013.2 Applicant explained that he assumed that his employer had 
reported the infractions to the Government or Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
after he reported them to his employer. He thought that his employer’s security 
database was interconnected with the Government’s security database. However, when 
he completed the SCA in April 2013, he was not certain that the Government had 
received information about the December 2012 or February 2013 infractions, so he 
disclosed them. (Tr. 74-76, 83-84; Answer.) He acknowledged that he mistakenly did 
not disclose the February 2013 piece of paper incident in the SCA. (Tr. 76.) 
 
 During an investigative interview, Applicant assumed that the investigator had all 
of the information from his employer’s database and the disclosures in his April 2013 
SCA. When the investigator asked, toward the end of the interview, if Applicant had any 
other infraction to report, Applicant said “nothing beyond the paper.” The investigator 
appeared surprised by his answer and Applicant then showed the investigator the 
corrective action memo he had received in April 2013. (Tr. 77.) Applicant said that in 
response to the investigator’s surprise he should have asked the investigator what 
information he had in his file pertinent to the security infractions. “But in that case, I 
made the assumption it was merely a timing issue relative to when the investigator 
asked for and received information” from his employer’s database. (Tr. 80-82; AE D.)  
 
Applicant denied that he intentionally attempted to deceive the Government. (Tr. 
85.) He clearly understood the potential consequences for committing security 
infractions when he reported them, including the possibility that he could be terminated. 
He knew that it was his responsibility to report the incidents regardless of the outcome. 
(Tr. 86; AE D.) He stated that “there was never a data spill or compromise for our 
national security . . . The Government customer in this case is aware of all of the 
infractions and has accepted the risk for all of these occurrences.” (AE D.) He wrote: 
 
At no time did I attempt to deceive, mislead or preclude from being 
forthright when questioned by any investigator in regard to any security 
incidents. I made a human error in regard to failing to report security 
incidents in my [SCA] that I previously thought had been reported through 
program channels to the U.S. Government. (AE D.)  
 
Applicant submitted four letters of recommendation. The Director of Proprietary 
Programs, who has known Applicant for 24 years, wrote that he strongly supports 
Applicant. He said that Applicant has always taken security issues seriously. Applicant’s 
security professional, who has known Applicant for over 30 years, stated that Applicant 
is ethical, forthcoming, and a technical leader in the company. He noted that Applicant’s 
self-reporting of the incidents attests to Applicant’s character and commitment to 
security. He stated that Applicant demonstrated for the past two years that the 
corrective steps he instituted have worked, and that there have not been any additional 
                                            
2 In his SCA, Applicant wrongly listed a February 2013 infraction as having occurred in March 2013. (Tr. 
74.)  
 
 
 
 
5 
incidents since February 2013. He also stated that he never considered Applicant a 
security risk, irrespective of the security infractions. (AE D.) 
 
An associate, who has known Applicant for 12 years, strongly recommends that 
Applicant maintain his security clearance. He said that Applicant takes security 
responsibilities seriously, as indicated by his self-reporting and exhibited by the 
corrective actions he has taken over the past couple years. A human resources 
employee, who has served as Applicant’s resource person from 2004 to 2014, noted 
that Applicant demonstrated integrity by immediately coming forth with his infractions. 
He said that Applicant is careful to check that he does not take prohibited items into the 
secured area after arriving at work. (AE D.) 
 
 Applicant testified candidly and credibly. He takes full responsibility for failing to 
comply with security procedures. Since the last incident in February 2013, he has tried 
to “slow down.” (Tr. 47.) He emphasized that he did not attempt to hide the infractions 
from the Government. (Tr. 86.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an  
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
 
 
 
 
6 
decision.”  Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be 
“in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  
 
A person applying for  access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for handling protected information 
is set out in AG & 33:       
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
AG ¶ 34 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying based on the facts of this case: 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; and 
(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management. 
Applicant admitted that on nine occasions he failed to comply with security 
procedures, eight of which occurred after he had received either a verbal or written 
warning for the earlier infractions. Those nine instances indicated lax security habits. 
The foregoing disqualifications have been raised. 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation. 
AG ¶ 35 provides two conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this case: 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities. 
 
Applicant’s last security infraction occurred in February 2013, about two and a 
half years ago. Given the steps he has taken to prevent similar incidents and evidence 
that his newly established steps are effective, it is unlikely that similar behavior will 
recur, such that his prior behaviors do not cast doubt on his current reliability or 
trustworthiness. According to Applicant’s security manager, Applicant has responded 
favorably to the corrective steps he implemented to guard against bringing his cell 
phone or laptop into secured areas. These facts coupled with Applicant’s committed 
attitude in executing his security responsibilities establish mitigation under AG ¶ 35(a) 
and AG ¶ 35(b).   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2(a) and 2 (b) that Applicant deliberately 
falsified answers to questions on his April 2013 SCA, by failing to disclose information 
regarding past security infractions, and during a May 2013 investigative interview. The 
Government contended that those falsifications constituted potential disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Applicant acknowledged that he did not disclose all of his security infractions on 
the April 2013 SCA, but denied that he intentionally attempted to deceive the 
Government. When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, as in this case, 
the Government has the burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, 
does not establish or prove an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine 
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of 
mind at the time the omission occurred. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 
2004)). 
 
Applicant’s explanation for not disclosing all of his security infractions in the April 
2013 SCA is credible. He assumed that the Government gained knowledge of his 
security infractions after they were entered into his employer’s database, which he 
believed was interconnected to the Government’s security clearance database. While 
his assumption was incorrect, it was not unreasonable. Because he was uncertain if the 
two infractions occurring in December 2012 and February 2013, had reached the 
Government’s database, he disclosed them in his April 2013 SCA. Based on his 
assumption, he acknowledged that he should have disclosed both February 2013 
infractions, including the piece of paper issue. He now also clearly understands that in 
the future he must disclose all adverse information, as his employer’s database does 
not connect to the Government’s database.  
 
The fact that Appellant disclosed all nine infractions to his employer lends 
sufficient credence to his explanation and state of mind that he did not intentionally 
falsify his security clearance application or attempt to deceive an investigator during an 
interview. After listening to Applicant testimony and observing his demeanor, I find that 
his explanations for failing to disclose specific information, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2, are 
persuasive and credible. SOR ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(b) are found in his favor. As a 
consequence, a discussion of the applicability of mitigating conditions is not warranted.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
 
 
9 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including the fact that classified 
information and the national security were never compromised. Applicant is an 
educated 58-year-old man, who has dedicatedly worked for a defense contractor since 
1980 and held a security clearance during that time. He also has had access to 
classified networks for many years. Between November 2009 and February 2013, he 
committed security infractions nine times, eight of which involved accidentally taking his 
cell phone or laptop into a secured workspace. The ninth incident involved writing 
unclassified notes on a piece of paper that was located in the secured area, which he 
took home and promptly returned when he realized his mistake. He received warnings 
after each incident, and also a corrective action memo and lost a day’s pay.  
 
Despite these incidents, Applicant’s employer has complete confidence in his 
ability to comply with security procedures and strongly recommends that he retain his 
security clearance. His security manager confirmed that the corrective steps Applicant 
has taken to prevent similar infractions are effective and have eliminated similar 
incidents. All character references attest to his honesty, ethics, and commitment to 
security protocols, as evidenced by his self-reporting after each incident. Given 
Applicant’s awareness that a future infraction could result in adverse action, it is unlikely 
that similar incidents will recur or that Applicant will pose a security risk. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under Guideline K and Guideline E.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                   
   
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
