 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05740 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted insufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On February 6, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
In responses to the SOR, dated March 25, 2015, and March 26, 2015, Applicant 
admitted five of the six allegations raised. Together, the six SOR allegations represent 
approximately $16,500 in delinquent debt. The sole SOR allegation denied reflects a 
debt of $98 (SOR allegation 1.f). She also requested a determination based on the 
written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 1, 2015, the Government issued a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) that contained nine attachments (“Items”). Applicant received 
the FORM on July 31, 2015, but did not respond within the 30 days provided. Based on 
 
 
 
 
2 
my review of the case file and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old civilian working for a defense contractor. She has over 
a decade of experience as a video-teleconference technician. She served on active duty 
in the United States military from 1981 through 1989. Applicant is divorced and receives 
approximately $500 a month in spousal support. She admits all but one of the debts 
noted in the SOR, reflected at allegations 1.a-1.e and 1.f, respectively. In denying 1.f, a 
$98 telecommunications balance, Applicant wrote that despite the denial, she would pay 
the debt. No evidence of payment or dispute was presented. 
 
Applicant wrote that she first acquired delinquent debt in 2008 due to personal 
medical issues. That summer, a former boyfriend loaned her $10,000 to address her 
medical debts. She made one payment of $500. She then ceased using his money for 
debts because she believed he was holding this obligation over her head. (FORM, Item 
9, at 4) He received a judgment against her in 2010 (SOR allegation 1.c). 
 
Although the timeframe is not defined, Applicant also wrote that “during this time 
of accumulation of debt,” she was dealing with the passing of several family members 
(two grandparents, both parents, mother-in-law, two aunts, an uncle, and a brother), the 
death of a close friend’s husband in 2001, and her 2004 divorce.1 She conveyed that 
these facts left her alone and overwhelmed, leading her to making bad decisions. 
(FORM, Item 4 at 4) In retrospect, she noted that she “would have dealt with [the debts] 
immediately, but didn’t. It felt easier not to deal with it at the time.” (FORM, Item 4 at 4) 
 
Once Applicant felt she could address her debt situation, she found working with 
collection companies to be “harsh.” (FORM, Item 4 at 4) She also attended more than 
one court hearing concerning her obligations. A legal firm advised her that filing for 
bankruptcy would be “damagingly costly.” (FORM, Item 4 at 4) In 2014, she hired a debt 
consolidator to help her resolve her debts. 
 
In 2013, Applicant was adversely affected by the government-wide shutdown. In 
September 2014, she was laid off from work until she found a new job in November 
2014. During this time she abandoned her plans with the debt consolidator. (FORM, 
Item 4 at 4) It is her present intent to hire another debt consolidator. She provided no 
documentary evidence, however, reflecting any efforts to work with her creditors or with 
a consolidator. There is no documentary evidence showing she has devised a 
reasonable plan for approaching her delinquent debts aside from her intent to again try 
a debt consolidation service. There is no evidence she has received financial 
counseling.     
 
                                                          
     1 The 2014 security clearance application reflects Applicant’s parents and a brother, but only her 
parents are noted as deceased. Her other kin are not noted. Inasmuch as the application does not ask for 
the dates of death, this information provides little help indicating the timeframe at issue.  
 
 
 
 
3 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing, and Applicant 
admitted, about $16,500 in delinquent debts. This is sufficient to invoke two of the 
financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
Applicant’s delinquent debts are multiple in number and remain unaddressed. 
There is insufficient information about her current financial situation, her methodology 
for handling her debts, and related issues to gauge whether the behavior demonstrated 
 
 
 
 
5 
here will be limited to this timeframe and not recur. Therefore, I cannot find that AG ¶ 
20(a) applies. 
 
Applicant attributes her accumulation of delinquent debt to a 2008 medical scare, 
a 2004 divorce, and the undated deaths of various family members. She does not, 
however, explain how any of these events contributed to that acquisition or to what 
extent. These facts also fail to indicate that she behaved responsibly during that time. 
Indeed, her comment that she felt alone, overwhelmed, and had made some bad 
financial decisions, along with her concession that she should have dealt with her 
financial situation sooner, indicate that her behavior was less than responsible. 
Consequently, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
There is no documentary evidence showing Applicant received actual financial 
counseling, formally disputed any of her debts with her creditors or any of the leading 
credit reporting bureaus, or made any efforts to address the delinquent debts at issue. 
At best, there is her narrative that she consulted a law firm for advice and briefly 
engaged a debt consolidator she soon thereafter abandoned. Moreover, there is no 
evidence her debts are currently being brought under control. Furthermore, Applicant 
has not presented a plan or strategy for addressing her debts, other than expressing her 
intent to reengage a debt consolidator sometime in the future. Under these facts, I 
conclude that none of the available financial considerations mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based on consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has 
considerable experience as a video-teleconference technician. She served on active 
duty in the United States military from 1981 through 1989. She is divorced, receiving 
approximately $500 a month in spousal support. She admits SOR allegations 1.a-1.e. 
She denies, but assumes responsibility for allegation 1.f, which represents $98. 
Together, approximately $16,500 in delinquent debt is at issue. 
 
Applicant cited to multiple facts that, had she documented a sufficient nexus to 
the debts at issue, could have potentially mitigated financial considerations security 
concerns. Without such a nexus shown, however, the most they can do is help explain 
 
 
 
 
6 
the circumstances in her life at the time she acquired such debt. Moreover, they do not 
demonstrate responsible behavior on her part at that time, demonstrate progress or 
more than negligible efforts to address her delinquent debts, or reflect a reasonable 
strategy for ameliorating her financial situation.  
 
While this process does not require an Applicant to satisfy all one’s delinquent 
debts, it does demand that an Applicant set forth a reasonable plan for addressing one’s 
debts and present documentary evidence reflecting that such efforts have been 
successfully implemented. Applicant has not met that standard. Consequently, financial 
considerations security concerns remain unmitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
