 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-01702   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies. He filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in 2004, but continued to accumulate delinquent debts beginning in 2007. 
He provided sufficient proof that he resolved 2 of the 11 delinquent debts, but not the 
others. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 12,  2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86) for an investigation. On June 16, 2014, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective in the DOD 
after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on August 7 and 14, 2014, and requested 
that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a 
hearing. (Items 2 and 3.) On June 4, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing nine Items, was provided to Applicant on June 10, 2015, and he was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on June 19, 2015, and timely returned the receipt to the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). He provided one document in response to the FORM within the 30-
day period. I marked that document, which he had previously submitted with his 
Answer, as Appellant Exhibit (AE) A and admitted it into the record. (Item 3 at 8.) DOHA 
assigned the case to me on August 10, 2015.  
 
Ruling on Evidence  
 
Item 5 is a Report of Investigation (ROI) from the background investigation of 
Applicant. The six-page document is a summary of an interview of Applicant the 
Government conducted on February 5, 2014. An ROI may be received and considered 
as evidence when it is authenticated by a witness.1 Although Applicant, who is 
representing himself, has not raised the issue via an objection, I am raising it sua 
sponte. While it is clear that Department Counsel is acting in good faith, having 
highlighted the issue in the FORM,2 Item 5 is not authenticated. Applicant’s failure to 
authenticate it is not a knowing waiver of the rule.3 Accordingly, Item 5 is not admissible 
and is not considered in this Decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted responsibility for the SOR 
allegations contained in Paragraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.e. He denied the remaining nine 
debts and offered explanations. (Item 3.) Those admissions are incorporated into these 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. He is married and has three children. He has worked 
for a defense contractor for about five years. Prior to this job, he attended school 
                                                 
1Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20; see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd. Feb. 3, 2014) (the Appeal 
Board restated existing case law that a properly authenticated report of investigation is admissible).  
2 Department Counsel Brief at 2, n 1. 
 
3 Wavier means “[t]he voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage; the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of the existing right 
and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9th ed., West 2009). 
 
 
3 
 
 
fulltime from 2008 to 2009 to become certified in information technology. After obtaining 
the certification, he worked for a private company before starting his current position. 
(Item 3 at 3.)  
  
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a decrease in the family income 
while he was in school. During that time the family lived solely on his wife’s income. He 
said that his current position provides him enough money to pay delinquent debts. He is 
making “better financial decisions.” (Item 3 at 3.) His student loans totaling $13,238 are 
in good standing. (Item 3 at 38.) In August 2013 he hired a law firm to help resolve his 
debts and credit rating. He did not submit any documentation from the law firm 
confirming the resolution of debts since it began assisting Applicant. He did not provide 
a budget documenting his income, expenses, and discretionary income.  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated May 2010, December 2013, and 
February 2015, the SOR alleged a bankruptcy, and 11 delinquent debts totaling 
$21,265, which accumulated between 2007 through 2013. The status of each SOR debt 
is as follows: 
 
1. (¶ 1.a) This $580 debt is a credit card debt. Applicant said he agreed to make 
two payments of $159.23, one in July and one in August 2014. At the time of 
his Answer, he said he made the July payment, but did not supply proof of 
payment. The debt does not appear on the February 2015 CBR. (Item 9.) 
There is insufficient proof verifying that the debt is paid and resolved. 
 
2. (¶ 1.b) The $8,373 debt relates to an automobile repossession. Applicant 
stated that the debt was in good standing and cited his July 2014 CBR. That 
CBR does not show that the debt is in good standing. It states that the 
account is closed and the current status is “repossession”. (Item 3 at 35.) It is 
unresolved. 
 
3. (¶ 1.c) Applicant denied owing this $2,592 debt to a former landlord. In 
August 2014 he said he was working with the law firm he hired and was 
disputing it. There is no evidence verifying a dispute or any indication that the 
debt is resolved. (Item 3.) It is unresolved. 
 
4. (¶ 1.d) The $2,362 debt was paid and resolved. The July 2014 CBR states 
that debt was settled for less than the full amount. (Item 3 at 35.) 
 
5. (¶ 1.e) Applicant stated that he agreed to resolve the $1,555 debt owed to a 
former landlord with three payments of $244.84, the first payment starting in 
September 2014. (Item 3 at 15.) Applicant did not submit proof of any 
payments. The debt is unresolved. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
6. (¶ 1.f) In 2004 Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy. He denied filing it and 
noted that it is not on his July 2014 credit report. (Item 3.) It was listed on his 
May 2010 CBR. (Item 7.) 
 
7. (¶ 1.g) Applicant denied owing a $524 debt a to a creditor and noted that it is 
not on his July 2014 credit report. (Item 3.) It was listed on his May 2010 
CBR. (Item 7.) It is unresolved. 
 
8. (¶ 1.h) Applicant denied owing a cable company debt of $221. He noted that it 
is not on his July 2014 credit report. (Item 3.) It was listed on his May 2010 
CBR. He did not supply proof of payment or other evidence to document its 
resolution. It is unresolved. 
 
9. (¶ 1.i) Applicant denied the $701 debt owed to a creditor because he said he 
settled the account. The July 2014 CBR states that  the account was disputed 
and is resolved. (Item 3 at 33.) 
 
10.  (¶ 1.j) Applicant said he resolved the $701 debt owed to a creditor with four 
payments he made in 2013, and noted that it is not on his July 2014 CBR. 
(Item 3.) He did not supply proof of the payments. It was listed on the May 
2010 CBR. It is unresolved. 
 
11.  (¶ 1.k) Applicant said he paid the $3,396 debt with the proceeds from the 
sale of his home in October 2013. He noted that it was not on his July 2014 
CBR, indicating the debt is resolved. He did not supply proof of said payment 
or evidence to document its resolution. It is unresolved. 
 
12.  (¶ 1.l) Applicant said he was resolving the $280 debt through a payment 
plan, and that the final payment was to be made in August 2014, at which 
time it would be removed from his credit report. (Item 3 at 6.) It does not 
appear on the February 2015 CBR. He did not supply proof of any payments 
or evidence to document its resolution. It is unresolved. 
 
In June 2015 Applicant received the FORM, which informed him that the 
evidence he previously submitted with his August 2014 Answer was not sufficient to 
document the resolution of the delinquent SOR debts. Department Counsel also stated 
in the FORM that a debt “dropping off” a credit report due to age was not proof of 
resolution. (FORM at 2.) Applicant did not submit any additional documentation 
subsequent to receipt of the FORM. 
 
 Applicant stated he obtained credit counseling through the law firm assisting in 
the resolution of his debts. (Item 3 at 3.) He submitted no evidence concerning the 
quality of his performance, or the level of responsibility his duties entail. He provided no 
character references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. The 
protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires 
that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of delinquent debts, which began in in 2004 when he filed 
a bankruptcy. Since then he accumulated delinquent debts between 2007 and 2013. He 
has been unable or unwilling to satisfy or resolve them. The evidence raises both 
security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
7 
 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts continue to date. Because he failed to provide 
sufficient information that 9 of the 11 SOR-listed debts are resolved, he did not 
demonstrate that such problems are unlikely to continue or recur. His reliability and 
trustworthiness in managing delinquent debts remain of concern. The evidence does 
not support the application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant provided evidence that his financial problems arose because he 
attended school between 2008 and 2009, which placed a strain on the family budget.  
He did not explain the circumstances underlying the 2004 bankruptcy. While his 
decision to attend school and obtain a better position, is reasonable, that decision is not 
a circumstance that was beyond his control, as contemplated under this guideline. 
Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant stated that he participated in credit counseling with the law firm helping 
him resolve debts. Although he addressed each debt in his Answer, he failed to provide 
sufficient documentation to support his assertions that many of the debts are resolved, 
other than stating that they are no longer on his credit report. There are minimal 
indications that his delinquent debts are under control. Thus, AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
He provided documentation that he made a good-faith effort to resolve 2 of the 11 SOR-
listed debts. Hence, AG ¶ 20(d) has application to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶1.d and 
1.i. Although Applicant said he was disputing debts, he did not provide sufficient 
evidence that he had a reasonable basis to dispute them. AG ¶ 20(e) has no 
application.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
 
8 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 44 years old. He 
has a history of financial problems, dating back to 2004, when he filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy. He has been employed with a defense contractor for over five years, and 
began resolving debts in 2013 with the assistance of a law firm. He provided credible 
evidence that he resolved 2 of the 11 SOR-listed debts, but did not provide credible 
evidence that he paid or resolved the remaining nine debts. Although he has taken 
steps to address his financial obligations by hiring a company to assist in the resolution 
of debts, he did not present evidence documenting their work or a budget that 
demonstrates his ability to address unresolved debts. In June 2015 he had an 
opportunity to submit additional documentation to verify his assertions that many of the 
debts were resolved. He failed to do so, and seemingly relied on the fact that many 
debts are no longer on his credit report, which is not credible evidence for this 
proceeding. At this time he has not presented sufficient evidence to establish a track 
record of managing and resolving debts. The likelihood that similar problems will 
continue is significant, and the potential for pressure, coercion, or duress is 
undiminished.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.j through 1.l:  Against Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
