 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 14-04957 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 19, 2014, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF-86). On January 8, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on September 1, 2006. On April 7, 2015, Department Counsel issued an 
amendment to the SOR. 
 
The SOR, as amended, alleged security concerns under Guidelines H and E.  
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge 
for a determination whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
2 
 
 
On February 12, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On April 8, 2015, Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed. On April 20, 2015, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to 
me. On April 22, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
hearing notice, setting the hearing for May 26, 2015. Applicant’s hearing was held as 
scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and 
offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were received into evidence without 
objection.  
 
 I held the record open until June 5, 2015 to afford Applicant the opportunity to 
submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted AE C through AE F, which 
were received into evidence without objection. On June 2, 2015, DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.).  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant constructively admitted all of the allegations with 
explanations. Applicant’s answers and explanations are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old systems software engineer employed by a defense 
contractor since August 2001. He seeks to retain his top secret security clearance as 
a requirement of his continued employment. Applicant has held a security clearance at 
some level since 1998. (GE 1; Tr. 20, 24-27, 28)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1989. He was awarded an 
associate’s degree in December 1993, a bachelor of science degree in mathematics 
and computer science in June 1997, and a master’s degree in software engineering in 
June 2011. (GE1, GE 2; Tr. 20-25) He is not married, but advised that he has a 
fiancée.  Applicant has not served in the U.S. armed forces. (GE 1, Tr. 27-28) 
 
Drug Involvement/Personal Conduct 
 
 The underlying basis of Applicant’s past drug involvement is derived from his 
self-disclosure and is not disputed. His past drug use consists of using marijuana 
approximately four times under medical supervision while holding a valid medical 
marijuana card in a state where such use was legal and authorized. This use occurred 
during the time period of September 2013 to December 2013, after having been 
granted a security clearance in March 2009.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.b, 2.a)  
 
Applicant reported his marijuana use when he submitted his October 19, 2014 
SF-86 and discussed in detail the circumstances of his past marijuana use during his 
 
3 
 
 
March 24, 2014, Office of Personnel Management Personal Subject Interview (OPM 
PSI) and during his testimony. (GE 1, GE 2; Tr. 29-58)  
 
Applicant had back surgery in early 2013 in his resident state and conventional 
medicine was unable to adequately address his subsequent pain and discomfort. 
During a visit to his home state in August 2013 where medical marijuana use is legal, 
Applicant consulted with a physician and was approved for medical marijuana use. 
Applicant was issued a medical marijuana card on September 17, 2013 with an 
expiration date of December 17, 2013. On two subsequent visits to his home state in 
October and December 2013, Applicant legally purchased marijuana from a state-
sponsored dispensary and used marijuana approximately four times during those two 
home visits. (SOR answer; Tr. 29-58; AE A, AE B) 
 
After trying medical marijuana on those occasions, Applicant did not find the 
side effects to be worth the pain relief rendered. He has not used medical marijuana 
since his December 2013 home visit, and has not renewed his medical marijuana 
card. To manage back pain, he uses over the counter Naproxen, as needed. (SOR 
answer; Tr. 29-58) 
 
Applicant credibly testified that he did not know it was illegal to use marijuana, 
regardless of location, while holding a security clearance. He mistakenly believed that 
if he used medical marijuana under the supervision of a physician in a state where its 
use was legal, he was not violating any laws or regulations. Applicant stated that he 
has no intent to ever use marijuana in the future and that his use was due to a lack of 
understanding. (Tr. 32-38, 45-48, 58) He submitted a signed statement of intent dated 
June 3, 2015, with automatic revocation of clearance for any drug violation. (AE C) 
  
Character Evidence 
 
  Applicant submitted three years of work performance reviews for the years 
2012 to 2014. They document above average performance and clearly show that 
Applicant is an employee who is making a significant contribution to his company and 
the national defense. (AE D – AE F) 
 
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
 
4 
 
 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant 
concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 
1995), Section 3. Thus, nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination 
as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the 
Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The Government established its case under Guideline H through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence presented. He fully disclosed the circumstances 
surrounding his marijuana use in his SOR response, in his OPM PSI, and during his 
hearing.  
 
 A review of the evidence supports application of three drug involvement 
disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 25(a): “any drug abuse (see above definition);”1 AG ¶ 
25(c) “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia;” and AG ¶ 25(g) 
“any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.” 
 
 Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of 
drug involvement mitigating conditions AG ¶ 26(a) “the behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;” and AG ¶ 26(b): “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the 
future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.”  
 
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in 
ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of 
marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the 
evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
                                                          
1
 AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medication direction. 
 
 
6 
 
 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”2 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies. Applicant’s last drug use was in December 2013, 
approximately 29 months before his hearing. His drug use ended when his medical 
marijuana card expired, and he realized that its use was prohibited while holding a 
security clearance, regardless of whether marijuana use was legal in a particular state 
or location. The absence of evidence of more recent or extensive drug use and his 
promise not to use illegal drugs in the future eliminates doubts about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment with respect to abstaining from illegal 
drug use.3   
   
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. He has submitted a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance of any violation. Applicant has abstained from drug 
use for about 29 months and has had no difficulties in doing so. AG ¶ 26(b) applies.  
 
Applicant’s work performance evaluations show his work behavior has not been 
indicative of his having a drug problem. He is viewed as a valuable employee, who is 
reliable, dependable, and professional. His value to the defense industry is supported 
                                                          
2
 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on 
the absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, 
compel the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a 
matter of law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided 
not to apply that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the 
case) with ISCR Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative 
judge articulated a rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of 
Applicant's efforts at alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history 
of improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the 
security clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three 
times a year from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also 
included the illegal purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a 
security clearance. 
 
3
In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
7 
 
 
by senior company officials, who know him personally and professionally, and by his 
own credible testimony and evidence presented. At his hearing, Applicant 
acknowledged that drug abuse is incompatible with his future career. He expressed a 
steadfast commitment to continue lifestyle changes consistent with total abstinence of 
marijuana or any other illegal drugs. I find for Applicant under this concern. 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
           This concern was cross-alleged under drug involvement concerns. No new 
facts other than those discussed under drug involvement were brought to light during 
the hearing. Accordingly, the facts and analysis under drug involvement are 
incorporated under this section. Utilizing the rationale under the drug involvement 
section, I find for Applicant under this concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
section under Guidelines H and E is incorporated in this whole-person section. 
However, additional comments are warranted. 
Applicant has been and is willing to maintain conduct expected of one entrusted 
with a security clearance. His employment history to date is indicative of stability and a 
strong work ethic. This support and self-introspection should ensure his continued 
success. Applicant demonstrated the correct attitude and commitment to remaining 
drug free. Considering his demeanor and testimony, I believe Applicant has learned 
from his mistakes, and his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. I find Applicant 
has presented sufficient evidence of rehabilitation. 
  
 
8 
 
 
In sum, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set 
forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration 
of the whole-person factors”4 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent 
factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to 
classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  For Applicant 
 
         Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
                                                          
4
See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
