                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-----------------------------------                  )       ISCR Case No. 14-03722
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On October 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators could not make the the preliminary affirmative determination of
eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AGs) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 16, 2014, and elected to have his
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on August 1, 2015, and responded to the FORM with
a claimed removal of all of the debts listed in the SOR from his credit reports.
Applicant’s posted submission is accepted as marked as Item 5. The case was
assigned to me on September 10, 2015.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 18 debts (inclusive of one
judgment entered in March 2011 for $4,837) exceeding $25,000. These debts remain
outstanding. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations. He
claimed he engaged a credit repair service firm to send out letters to creditors. He
claimed the credit repair firm has been successful in settling many of the accounts and
will document their efforts. He attached a garnishment order secured by the creditor of
a debt covered by subparagraph 1.o with a notation that this debt was satisfied. (Item 5)
He provided no proof, though, that the judgment debt covered by the garnishment order
was fully satisfied or how the debt arose.
In Appellant’s post-appearance submission, he confirmed his posted delinquent
debts were removed from his credit report. However, he provided no explanations of the
circumstances of how the debts arose, or how and why they were removed.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 51-year-old security control order operator for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings
follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in September 2010. (Item 4) He has no children from this
marriage. (Item 2) Applicant claims no college attendance within the past 10 years. He
enlisted in the Marine Corps in December 1981 and received an honorable discharge in
December 1987. (Item 2) Applicant has worked for his current employer since August
1995 and reported no periods of unemployment in his Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (item 2)
Finances
Between 2008 and 2012, Applicant accumulated 18 delinquent accounts
exceeding $25,000. (Items 3-4) Applicant assured that all of his listed debts were either
paid or removed from his credit reports. One of the debts (creditor 1.o) was reduced to
judgment in March 2011 for $4,837, and satisfied through garnishment in October 2014.
3
(Item 1) The remaining debts were turned over to a credit repair firm for dispute
processing and removal from Applicant’s credit reports. Applicant claims that the repair
firm was successful in removing the listed debts from his credit reports, but provided no
documentation or explanations for when and why they were removed. Without
documentation and explanations, no inferences can be drawn as to whether the debts
were removed from his credit reports, or if they were removed, for what reasons they
were removed (i.e., due to payment or other form of resolution or because of age or
unknown reasons).
Documentation of extenuating circumstances are lacking as well. Applicant has
been fully employed with his security company since August 1995 and reported no prior
periods of unemployment or other extenuating circumstances that could adversely
affect his income and ability to pay his listed creditors and manage his finances. (Items
1 and 2) 
Endorsements
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on his behalf.
Nor did he provide any proof of community and civic contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
4
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
5
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a fully employed security control order operator who accumulated
delinquent debts that he has failed to resolve. He cited no extenuating circumstances
that could adversely affect his ability to address his debts.
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts warrants the application of two of
the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligation,” apply to Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to his debts covered in the SOR
negate the need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th
ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in his credit reports.
Some judgment problems persist over Applicant’s insufficiently resolved listed debts. 
                                         
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
Based on the documented materials in the FORM, no extenuating
circumstances are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay or otherwise resolve his
debts. Whether he acted responsibly in addressing his debts is directly contingent
upon his providing documented evidence of how he has addressed his finances.  To
date, only the judgment debt covered by subparagraph 1.o has been satisfied, and
this judgment was discharged through involuntary garnishment. Without
documentation of financial counseling and specific voluntary steps he has taken to
address his past-due debts, mitigation credit is very limited.  
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his insufficient efforts to resolve his listed delinquent
debts. Resolution of his listed delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite to his
regaining control of his finances. In Applicant’s case, neither his debt accruals nor his
6
overall contributions to his employer and community reflected enough strength and
improvement to overcome security concerns about the state of his finances
Overall, clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited
amount of information available for consideration in this record does not enable him to
establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising
out of his lapses in judgment associated with his accumulation of delinquent debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, it is still too soon to make safe predictive judgments
about Applicant’s ability to satisfactorily resolve his outstanding debts. More time is
needed to facilitate Applicant’s making the necessary progress with resolving his
debts to warrant conclusions that his finances are sufficiently stabilized to permit him
access to classified information. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.n and 1.p through 1.r.  Favorable
conclusions are justified with respect to subparagraph 1.o.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.n and subparas.
:          and subparas 1.p through 1.r:     Against Applicant
Subpara. 1.o:     For Applicant 
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
