 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-04909 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 17, 2013. On 
January 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 18, 2015, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on April 21, 2015. On June 22, 2015, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
 
 2
received the FORM on June 25, 2015. He requested an extension of time until August 
25, 2015 to respond, which was granted. He timely submitted additional materials in his 
response to the FORM, which were received without objection. The case was assigned 
to me on October 1, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
However, in his response to the FORM, he admitted it and submitted evidence that the 
debt had been resolved. His admission in his response to the FORM is incorporated in 
my findings of fact.1  
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old systems analyst employed by a federal contractor 
since August 2003. He married in May 1999. He and his wife have two sons, ages 15 
and 13. He has held a security clearance since September 2003. 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he disclosed a defaulted mortgage loan, a 
short sale, and a deficiency of $87,611 after the short sale. (Item 2 at 35.) The debt 
occurred as a result of Applicant’s purchase of a two-family rental property in 2007. He 
purchased the property for $465,000 and financed the purchase with first and second 
mortgages. He was unable to rent the property and fell behind on his mortgage loan 
payments. He completed a short sale of the property, but the proceeds of the sale were 
insufficient to satisfy the second mortgage. The delinquent second mortgage account 
was sold to another lender. When Applicant received a notice of foreclosure on the 
second mortgage, he notified the holder of the mortgage that there was no property to 
foreclose, because it had been sold at a short sale. His attorney advised him not to pay 
the deficiency.  
 
 After receiving the SOR and the FORM, Applicant obtained further advice and 
conducted additional research, and he determined that the deficiency balance on the 
second mortgage had been converted to an unsecured loan and sold, and that the debt 
on the unsecured loan was a valid debt. (Response to FORM, Exhibit B.) The short sale 
and unsecured loan were reflected on his credit bureau report (CBR) dated May 23, 
2013. (Item 3 at 11.) In July 2015, the holder of the unsecured loan offered a settlement 
of $21,152, and Applicant accepted the offer. (Response to FORM, Exhibit C.) He paid 
the agreed amount, and received written confirmation from the successor creditor that 
the debt was “settled in full.” (Response to FORM, Exhibits D and E.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
                                                          
1 The FORM included a summary of a personal subject interview conducted in June 2013 (Item 4). The 
summary was not authenticated as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.20. There is nothing in the record 
indicating that Applicant was aware of the authentication requirement or that he waived it. Therefore, Item 
4 was not admissible, and I have not considered it in my decision. 
 
 3
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 
 4
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions in his SCA and response to the FORM, corroborated by 
his CBR, establish one disqualifying condition under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts”). No other disqualifying conditions are established. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
 5
 AG ¶ 20(a) is established. Although Applicant’s delinquent debt is recent and 
was not incurred under circumstances making recurrence unlikely, it was a single, 
isolated incident, and it does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. The downturn in the rental market and the decline in 
real estate values were conditions beyond Applicant’s control. When he was unable to 
make his payments on the mortgage loans, he obtained approval for a short sale. When 
he realized that the proceeds of the short sale did not completely resolve the problem, 
he contacted the holder of the debt and resolved it.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant made a good-faith effort to resolve his debts 
through a short sale, and when he learned that the short sale did not satisfy the second 
mortgage loan, he resolved it. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has worked for the same federal contractor and held a security 
clearance for many years. Because Applicant requested a determination on the record 
without a hearing, I had no opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on 
demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). However, his 
prompt resolution of the debt, once he determined that it was valid, has resolved any 
doubts about his good judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. 
 
 
 6
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue his  eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
