1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 14-05920
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Although Applicant’s delinquencies were caused largely by circumstances
beyond his control, he failed to provide enough evidence that he is taking steps to
resolve them. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On January 22, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on
September 1, 2006.
 On February 24, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the
allegations except subparagraph 1.e. He requested  a decision on the record rather
than a hearing. On May 7, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant
2
 
Material (FORM) consisting of documents supporting the government’s allegations.
Applicant received the file on May 20, 2015, and was informed that he had until June
28, 2015, to submit a response. Applicant did not submit a response, and the case was
subsequently assigned to me on July 28, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 43-year-old man with two adult children. He and his wife recently
divorced. He is a veteran of the U.S. Army, serving from 1996 to 2004. He was
honorably discharged. (Item 2 at 16) While in the military, he held a security clearance.
Applicant earned an associate’s degree in 2010 and a bachelor’s degree in 2011.
Since 2011, he has worked for a defense contractor as a systems software manager.
(Item 2 at 10)
In 2005, Applicant and his then-wife purchased a home for $440,000. They
financed the home through a mortgage, as listed in subparagraph 1.a. Later, they
opened a home equity line of credit, as listed in subparagraph 1.g. In April 2011,
Applicant lost his job, and was subsequently unemployed for seven months. (Item 2 at
13) At or about this time, he and his wife initiated divorce proceedings. (Item 1 at 4) By
September 2011, Applicant began to fall behind on the mortgage accounts, together
with several other debts, totalling $17,740, as listed in SOR subparagraphs 1.b through
1.f, and 1.h.
Applicant considered selling his home, but discovered that it had depreciated
$200,000 since he purchased it. In January 2012, Applicant retained a law firm to help
him explore other options. (Item 3 at 1) With the attorney’s help, Applicant executed a
voluntary foreclosure in May 2013. (Item 1 at 7-9) The bank resold the home in June
2014 for $279,900. (Item 1 at 10) A $160,000 deficiency remains. This amount equals
the difference between the loan balance at foreclosure ($422,750, as alleged in the
SOR) and the sale price.
The home equity line of credit account was not included in the foreclosure
proceedings. Its delinquent balance totals $36,688. Applicant negotiated an agreement
with the collection company under which he will pay the debt in $200 monthly
increments. As of the date of his answer to the SOR, he had not received a copy of the
settlement agreement. (Item 1 at 4) He provided no evidence that he has been making
any payments. 
Applicant denies subparagraph 1.e and contends that he has made payment
arrangements to satisfy the remainder. He provided no evidence substantiating the
basis of his dispute of subparagraph 1.e and no evidence corroborating his contention
that he paid the remainder of the SOR debts.
3
 
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”
(AG ¶ 18) Since 2011, Applicant has incurred approximately $220,000 of delinquent
debt. AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history
of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
4
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of action to resolve the issue. 
Applicant’s lengthy unemployment, his divorce, and his inability to sell his home
contributed to his financial difficulties. Applicant consulted an attorney who helped him
negotiate a voluntary foreclosure of his home. He provided no additional documentary
evidence supporting his contention that he has been addressing his delinquent debts.
Under these circumstances, AG ¶ 20(b) only applies partially, and AG ¶¶ 20(b) and
20(c) are inapplicable.
Applicant disputed subparagraph 1.e, but provided no evidence substantiating
the basis of the dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant’s financial delinquencies did not occur because of profligate spending
or irresponsible money management. Instead, they occurred largely because of a
divorce that corresponded with a lengthy period of unemployment. Evaluating the cause
of the delinquencies is only part of the analysis. Applicant still must demonstrate what
he has done to either pay or resolve his indebtedness, and has the burden of proof to
establish that his financial problems are not likely to recur. Applicant asserted that this
was the case, but his assertions were not supported by adequate documentary
evidence. Under these circumstances, Applicant has failed to mitigate the security
concerns.
5
 
Formal Findings
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
