1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 14-05254
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Over the years, Applicant incurred ten delinquent debts totalling more than
$30,000. He did not provide proof of any efforts to satisfy them, and he intentionally
failed to disclose them, as required, on his security clearance application. Clearance is
denied.
Statement of the Case
On December 12, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
 
 On February 24, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the
allegations except subparagraph 1.k. He requested  a decision on the record rather than
a hearing. On April 17, 2015, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material
(FORM) consisting of documents supporting the Government’s allegations. Applicant
received the file on May 20, 2015, and was informed that he had until June 19, 2015 to
submit a response. Applicant did not submit a response, and the case was
subsequently assigned to me on July 30, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 38-year-old married man. He earned a GED in 1998, then joined
the U.S. Navy in 1999, where he served until 2008. He was discharged honorably.(Item
2 at 14) 
After leaving the military, Applicant had difficulty finding employment, and was
unemployed for five months. (Item 1 at 6) In March 2009, he found employment as an
aircraft mechanic. He worked for this employer before leaving to work for his current
employer, a defense contractor, in November 2010. (Item 2 at 10-11) 
Since 2009 Applicant has approximately $36,000 of delinquent debt. (Item 1 at 3)
His financial problems stemmed from his five-month period of unemployment after
leaving the military. (Item 1 at 6) 
The SOR does not identify the creditor listed in subparagraph 1.k. Applicant
denies it. The remaining debts range from $7 to $16,182. Applicant provided no
evidence of efforts to begin satisfying these creditors. 
Applicant did not disclose any of his delinquent debts on his security clearance
application, as required, in response to Section 26. (Item 2 at 27-28) In response to the
allegation that his omission was intentional, as listed in subparagraph 2.a, Applicant
responded that he “had just recently pulled [his] credit report.” (Item 1 at 6)
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
3
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.”
(AG ¶ 18) Since 2009, Applicant has incurred approximately $36,000 of delinquent debt.
AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” apply.
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable.
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
4
 
The SOR does not identify the creditor to whom Applicant allegedly owes $5,387,
as listed in subaragraph 1.k. In light of Applicant’s denial, I resolve this subparagraph in
his favor.
Applicant’s financial problems stemmed, in part, from difficulty finding
employment after leaving the U.S. Navy. However, he provided no evidence of any
actions taken to organize his finances, satisfy them, or arrange payment plans. Under
these circumstances, none of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has failed
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.
Personal Conduct
The security concern under this guideline is as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness,
and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is
any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the
security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with
the security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15)
Applicant admits intentionally omitting derogatory financial information from his
security clearance application. His explanation failed to mitigate the security concern
that the falsification generated under AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.”
Formal Findings
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
PARAGRAPH 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
PARAGRAPH 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
5
 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
