 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04622 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 30, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She discharged a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing in March 2012, and then subsequently filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy relief in June 2012, which was dismissed in July 2013. She has participated 
in financial counseling and there are clear indications that her financial problems are 
under control. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 15, 2014, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 13, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on April 27, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 24, 2015, scheduling the hearing for 
September 10, 2015. The case was reassigned to me on August 28, 2015. The hearing 
was convened as previously scheduled. The Government offered hearing exhibit (HE) I 
and Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered 
Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on 
her own behalf. The record then closed. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on September 21, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her employer for the past 15 years. Applicant is married and has two children, ages four 
and eight. She is currently enrolled in a master’s degree program. (GE 1; Tr. 23.) 
 
 As alleged in the SOR, Applicant discharged a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filing in 
March 2012, and then subsequently filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief in June 2012, 
which was dismissed in July 2013. Applicant admitted both of the allegations listed in 
the SOR subparagraphs. Her bankruptcies are found in the credit reports and case 
summaries entered into evidence. (Answer; GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 
7.) 
 
  Applicant testified she and her husband found themselves with $50,000 to 
$60,000 in consumer debt as a result of several events including: overspending; 
problems with tenants in a rental property; her time off of work for maternity leave; and 
her husband being laid off from his job three times including January 2010 to June 
2010, February 2013 to June 2013, and February 2014 to September 2014. She 
acknowledged her responsibility in incurring the debts. At first, she tried to negotiate 
with her creditors, but her attempts were unsuccessful. She also hired a debt settlement 
company to manage their debt, but that company went out of business and “basically 
just took [their] money.” (AE A; Tr. 25-26, 29, 36.) 
 
Applicant hired a bankruptcy attorney and filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
November 2011. She listed liabilities of $1,005,579. The majority of that debt, $949,898, 
was in secured claims and not discharged through the bankruptcy. On March 15, 2012, 
Applicant and her husband discharged $55,673 in unsecured consumer debt. After the 
bankruptcy, they still had two loans, that were secured with mortgages on their home, 
totaling $553,753; a $309,871 rental property loan that was secured with a mortgage; a 
timeshare; and two loans secured by luxury vehicles. Applicant knew she needed to 
make changes to rehabilitate their financial situation. She and her husband relinquished 
their two cars to the lenders through voluntary repossessions. They short sold the rental 
property. The timeshare company accepted a deed in lieu of foreclosure. However, she 
still needed to resolve her home mortgage debt. Her attorney advised her that she 
should file Chapter 13 bankruptcy to force the mortgage company holding the first and 
second mortgages on her home to negotiate a modification. She followed that advice, 
 
3 
 
and filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on June 21, 2012. Applicant was able to 
negotiate a mortgage modification, and on September 16, 2013, the Chapter 13 
bankruptcy was dismissed. She is now current on her mortgage obligations. (GE 1; GE 
2; GE 3; GE 6; GE 7; AE B; AE C; Tr. 25-26, 29, 36.) 
 
Applicant testified that going through bankruptcy was a “humiliating process.” 
She explained: 
 
You realize that maybe you weren’t as responsible as you think you were 
because, you know, on the outside people see you as responsible. But we 
overspent. We did have a period of what I would call materialism, acting 
like the money train was never going to end, you know, because we did 
have good times and we were young. (Tr. 28.) 
 
 Applicant participated in ten weeks of financial counseling through her church. 
She also documented that she participated in the financial counseling required by the 
bankruptcy court. Her husband has been fully employed for the past year. She currently 
has no credit card debt. She does not participate in activities that she cannot pay cash 
for “because I don’t want any more debt.” She is aggressively paying off her and her 
husband’s current car loans by paying more than the monthly bill. Their family has a 
budget and is able to stick to it. At the end of the month, after all her bills have been 
paid, she has a monthly surplus of $1,500 which they put in savings or use to make 
extra car payments. (Tr. 26, 29-31, 38-39.) 
 
 Applicant is a volunteer with her church and is an assistant unit leader for a troop 
of girls. She has always received “outstanding” performance evaluations at work. (Tr. 
47-48.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
4 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in approximately 2010, during 
her husband’s first layoff. She had a history of debt from at least 2010 to 2013. During 
that time, she was unable to satisfy her financial obligations. The evidence raises both 
security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns. 
 
The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debt occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. She has 
matured and is now financially responsible. She has educated herself on financial 
management and only spends what she can afford. She and her family follow a strict 
budget. She discharged her consumer debt through Chapter 7 and satisfied her secured 
creditors. Her current credit report reflects no past-due debts. While Applicant had 
financial problems in the past, her problems do not cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. She established substantial mitigation under MC 
20(a).  
 
 Applicant took many steps to resolve her debt. First, she tried to negotiate with 
her creditors herself. Second, she hired a debt management company to help her with 
the creditors. When that failed she sought counseling with an attorney. The attorney 
recommended bankruptcy and guided Applicant through both the Chapter 7 and 
Chapter 13 filings. Her current credit report shows no delinquencies. Applicant received 
ten weeks of financial counseling through her church. She also completed financial 
counseling as required during her bankruptcy proceedings. She has utilized the tools 
she learned in those classes and is resolved to remain financially solvent. There are 
clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are resolved. She established 
substantial mitigation under MC 20(c) and MC 20(d).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has 
served as a government contractor for 15 years and her performance is “outstanding.” 
Her financial difficulties have been resolved. Applicant established sufficient evidence to 
show that the likelihood of continuation or recurrence is low. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
