 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05024 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted insufficient documentary evidence to mitigate Guideline F 
security concerns. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On December 17, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. Applicant 
received the SOR on January 8, 2015. 
 
In a response to the SOR, dated January 18, 2015, Applicant admitted nine of 
the 11 allegations raised. Those 11 allegations represent approximately $150,500 in 
delinquent debt, with Applicant denying debts amounting to about $46,300. He also 
requested a determination based on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On March 
 
 
 
 
2 
30, 2015, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained 
seven attachments (“Items”). In the FORM, the Government noted that Applicant could 
comment on whether the attached summary of Applicant’s personal subject interview 
(FORM, Item 7) accurately reflected his statements, and whether he objected to the 
inclusion of this unverified document. Applicant received the FORM on July 2, 2015, 
and did not respond within the 30 days provided. The case was assigned to me on 
September 22, 2015. Based on my review of the case file and submissions, I find 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a self-
employed painter for 35 years. His marriage of over 20 years ended in divorce. He has 
a grown daughter, for whom he voluntarily paid one-third of her college tuition. It is his 
intent to continue making a similar contribution toward her graduate work.   
 
Applicant admitted nine of the 11 allegations raised in the December 2014 SOR, 
representing approximately $150,000 in delinquent debt. He denied two of the 
allegations, writing that the amount alleged was incorrect. (FORM, Item 4 at 4) If his 
assertions are shown as true, that could reduce the total delinquent debt at issue to 
about $104,000.  
 
By way of explanation, Applicant summarized his debt situation in this way: “My 
business is down about 80% the last few years. [I am w]orking hard to get things back 
on track. Last five years I had a divorce [and] a daughter in college. Now I’m just 
working on getting out of debt.” (FORM, Item 4 at 4) He attributed his business 
downturn to a decline in the economy. (FORM, Item 7 at 6, 8)  
 
With regard to past-due Federal taxes from 2011 in the approximate amount of 
$20,000 (SOR allegation 1.j), Applicant wrote that he is in repayment on this obligation. 
This is consistent with comments he purportedly made to investigators between May 
2014 and June 2014, but no evidence of such repayments was introduced. (FORM, 
Item 7 at 6-71)  He similarly provided no evidence of payment or formal dispute with 
regard to the default judgment he received in 2011 for about $6,258, which he maintains 
as being an incorrect balance (SOR allegation 1.c), and a state treasury sales tax 
obligation of approximately $40,000 (SOR allegation 1.k), on which he told investigators 
he was making payments while his agent investigated the matter. (FORM, Item 7 at 6-8; 
Form 4 at 3) The results of any investigation on the latter debt are unknown.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
     1 Item 7 is a personal subject interview comprised of an investigator’s notes. It was not previously 
reviewed or verified by Applicant. He was given the opportunity to make corrections, additions, or 
deletions with regard to the notes in a response to the FORM. Lacking a response from Applicant to the 
FORM, this unverified evidence will be given appropriate weight.  
 
 
 
 
3 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant incurred 
approximately $150,000 in delinquent debt. This is sufficient to raise two financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
  
Applicant attributed his delinquent debts to adverse and unforeseeable events 
which occurred in the past few years, including a divorce and a drastic reduction in work 
caused by a downturn in the economy. There is, however, no documentary evidence 
 
 
 
 
5 
indicating his efforts to address his debts or survive financially in the face of these 
circumstances. Therefore, without some documented evidence indicating his behavior 
under the adverse circumstances he faced, AG ¶ 20(b) only applies in part.   
 
The debts at issue remain unaddressed and are multiple in number. There is no 
documented evidence showing Applicant has received appropriate financial counseling, 
initiated payment on any of the debts at issue, or formally disputed any of these debts 
with either a creditor or one of the leading credit reporting bureaus. Little is known about 
Applicant and his current finances. He provided no additional information in response to 
the case raised against him in the FORM. Without documentation corroborating his 
assertions, financial considerations remain unmitigagted. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the determination of 
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based on consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old man who has been a painter for 35 years. He divorced 
about five years ago. He has a grown daughter, for whom he has voluntarily been 
paying one-third of her collegiate expenses. Applicant attributes his delinquent debt to 
his divorce and the recent economic downturn that severely reduced his work 
opportunities by 80%. He admits the vast majority of the delinquent debts at issue. 
Regarding the two allegations he denies and one he admits with explanation, however, 
he provided no documentary evidence refuting his liability for them or reducing the 
amount at issue.   
 
The burden in these proceedings is on the applicant to provide evidence 
rebutting, refuting, or otherwise challenging documented evidence of delinquent debt. 
Applicant provided little more than a long string of admissions, two denials, and a brief 
commentary in response to the SOR. He did not respond to the FORM. The 
attachments to the FORM include no documentary evidence from Applicant, although 
an unverified copy of an investigator’s notes is included. Lacking documented progress 
on the delinquent debts at issue or evidence that a reasonable plan for addressing 
these debts has been successfully implemented, financial considerations security 
concerns remain unmitigated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
