 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06041 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concern. The 
Government did not prove deliberate falsification by Applicant, therefore personal 
conduct disqualifying conditions were not established. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 10, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E (personal 
conduct). DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 20, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on June 10, 2015. The evidence included in the FORM is 
identified as Items 1-6 and is admitted into the record. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant who received it on July 1, 2015. Applicant was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He chose not to 
submit any further information. The case was assigned to me on October 13, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted ¶¶ 1.a - 1.d. He denied ¶ 2.a. The 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a careful review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 63 years old. He is twice divorced and has one adult child. He has 
worked for a federal contractor since March 2014. He served in the Navy for 21 years 
and retired honorably in the pay grade of E-7.1  
  
 The SOR lists four delinquent debts totaling approximately $19,939. The SOR 
also alleged that he falsified his security clearance application by failing to affirmatively 
disclose his debts turned over to collection agencies, charged-off accounts, and debts 
which have been or are currently 120 days delinquent. He did not list the debts in his 
application because he believed they were all over seven years old and listing them was 
not required. 
 
 Applicant stated that most of the debts were the result of his unemployment in 
2007. He regained employment in approximately 2009 or 2010 and claims he contacted 
the original creditors about the debts, but was told all the debts were sold to collection 
agencies. He was unable to determine what collection agencies held the debt. He 
pointed out that he has “refinanced his personal property” and is in good standing with 
his mortgage holder.2  
 
 The four debts are all credit card or consumer debt accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.d). 
The debts are supported by credit reports from April 2014 and June 2015, and by 
Applicant’s admissions.3 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 1-2. 
 
3 Items 2, 4-6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The status of the debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.d: 
 
 Applicant acknowledged these credit card accounts in his personal subject 
interview and his answer to the SOR. He claims to have contacted the original creditors 
trying to work out payment arrangements, but he provided no documentation showing 
that he entered into any payment plans. All four accounts appear on his most recent 
credit report as either charged-off accounts or collection accounts. These debts are 
unresolved.4 
 
 Applicant did not provide any information about his current financial status or a 
budget. There is no evidence that he sought financial counseling.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
                                                          
4 Items 2, 4-6. 
 
5 Items 2, 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both the 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
 
 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are recent and remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient 
evidence to show that financial problems are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. Applicant presented evidence that he was unemployed for a period of time 
between 2007 and 2010, which is a circumstance beyond his control. However, he 
failed to show that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He is a military retiree 
and had income during his unemployment. He has now been employed for five years 
and no information was provided about what actions he has taken to resolve his debts 
since 2010. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. He provided no documentation the debts 
were paid or that he set up payment plans. I find AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d) do not 
apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the trustworthiness process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the trustworthiness process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire. . . . 
 
 Applicant stated during his personal subject interview and in his SOR answer he 
believed that all the debts were older than seven years and therefore he was not 
required to list them on his application. This information is sufficient to establish lack of 
 
6 
 
 
intent to deceive when he incorrectly answered the financial-related questions. The 
Government failed to produce sufficient evidence of such intent. AG ¶ 16(a) does not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I also considered Applicant’s 21 
years of military service. He has not shown a track record of financial stability, and has 
made no progress in resolving his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F. I 
find that Guideline E has not been established. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph   2.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
