 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-02391 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 31, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 
1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 28, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 25, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 2, 
2015, scheduling the hearing for July 23, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
 
2 
admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. She did not submit any additional material. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on July 31, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since March 2013. She is applying for eligibility to hold a public 
trust position. She attended college for a period, but she did not earn a degree. She has 
never married, but she has cohabitated with her boyfriend since 1999. She has three 
children, ages 20, 14, and 10.1 
 
 Applicant was unemployed from 2008 to April 2012. She had a seasonal job and 
then was unemployed again from October 2012 until she was hired by her current 
employer. She was a stay-at-home mother for most of the time she was unemployed. 
She did not have medical insurance for several years, which resulted in medical debts. 
She was also unable to pay all her other bills, and other debts became delinquent.2 
 
 The SOR alleges 27 delinquent debts totaling about $17,000. Medical debts 
totaling about $3,270 comprise at least 13 SOR allegations. There may be additional 
medical debts that are unidentified as such. Applicant admitted owing all the debts with 
the exception of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($35), 1.e ($557), 1.s ($3,646), and 1.y 
($613). Each debt is also listed on at least one credit report.  
 
 Applicant denied owing the $35 debt to an elementary school for a returned 
check (SOR ¶ 1.b). The debt is listed on both credit reports in evidence. Applicant 
stated the debt was for school pictures that were returned. Several of the debts on the 
credit reports include the note: “consumer disputes this account.” That language is not 
included for this debt. There is no evidence that Applicant ever disputed this account.3  
 
 Applicant denied owing the $557 debt to a bank that is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. The 
debt is listed on the March 2013 credit report, but not the April 2014 credit report.4 
 
 Applicant stated that she was charged by a university for a course she did not 
take. The charged-off student loan (SOR ¶ 1.b - $3,646) is listed on both credit reports. 
There is no evidence that Applicant ever disputed this account.5  
 
 Applicant wrote in her SOR response that she denied owing the $613 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.y because she was unaware of the debt and she wanted to 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 34, 48; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 16-17, 28-30; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
4 Tr. at 44-46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
5 Tr. at 31-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
3 
investigate whether it was a valid debt. The debt is listed on the April 2014 credit report. 
There is no evidence that Applicant ever disputed this account.6  
 
 All of the medical debts are listed on the March 2013 credit report, but only four 
of them are listed on the April 2014 credit report. There are an additional ten debts 
totaling about $9,000 that are not identified as medical debts. Two of the debts (SOR ¶ 
1.w - $638 and SOR ¶ 1.x - $578) are for unpaid traffic citations. Applicant stated that 
the citations were issued on two occasions in about 2006. The first citation was for 
driving with a suspended registration; the second citation was for driving on a 
suspended license.7 
 
 On July 7, 2015, Applicant entered into a payment contract with the city where 
she owes her citations to pay $466 through five monthly payments of $78 and a final 
payment of $76. She stated that the contract was for the driving-on-a-suspended-
license citation identified in SOR ¶ 1.x. She stated that she made the first payment, 
which was due on July 17, 2015. She did not submit any documented proof. It is unclear 
if the contract is for one of the debts identified in the SOR, both of the debts identified in 
the SOR, or neither. The contract indicated that failure to pay the fine could result in 
further action, including suspending her license, issuing a warrant for her arrest, 
forwarding the account to a collection agency, preventing the re-registration of her 
vehicle, notifying a credit bureau, and attaching her tax refund. The two debts alleged in 
the SOR have already been sent to a collection agency and placed on Applicant’s credit 
report.8 
 
 Applicant listed a number of delinquent debts on her Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86), which she submitted in March 2013. She indicated that her 
debts were caused by her unemployment, but that she “was starting to make monthly 
payments again.” She discussed her finances during her background interview in May 
2013. She indicated that she was on an $80-per-month payment plan for her traffic 
citations, and she planned to pay her other debts.9 
 
 Applicant’s boyfriend lost his job in 2013 and did not return to full-time 
employment until February 2015. Applicant was unable to pay any of her delinquent 
debts while he was unemployed. She stated that they received loans from family 
members while he was unemployed, and they have been repaying those loans. Other 
than the traffic citation addressed above, Applicant has not made any payments toward 
any of the debts alleged in the SOR. She stated that she has payment arrangements 
with one of her medical creditors and was about to start $50 per month payments. She 
stated that she intends to pay her debts, but it will take time.10 
                                                          
6 Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
7 Tr. at 15-16; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 15-16, 25-27, 40-41; GE 2-4; AE A. 
 
9 GE 1, 2. 
 
10 Tr. at 17-19, 24-30, 39-40, 47, 50-51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay her 
financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
6 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant’s and her boyfriend’s unemployment were beyond her control. To be 
fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
 The 13 medical debts alleged in the SOR are mitigated. Those allegations are 
concluded for Applicant. She denied owing four debts. The $557 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.e is not listed on the April 2014 credit report, which is the most recent credit report in 
evidence. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to that debt. There is no evidence that she disputed 
the remaining three debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable to those debts. 
 
  Applicant still owes more than $12,000 in delinquent debts. Her traffic tickets 
have been owed since about 2006. She has not paid the $35 debt to an elementary 
school for a returned check. Her boyfriend has been back to work since February 2015, 
but she has made almost no progress in addressing her debts. 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that she made a good-faith effort to pay her 
debts. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) 
are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. I find that financial considerations 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
7 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.m:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n-1.o:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.p-1.q:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.r-1.aa:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
   
 
 
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
