 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-06629 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mercedes Culpepper, Esq. 
  Richard Morris, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns raised by her past financial trouble. She 
lost her job and her home during the recent recession. She responsibly addressed her 
past-due debts and her financial situation is under control. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), alleging that her circumstances raised security concerns 
under the financial considerations guideline.1 Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a hearing to establish her eligibility for access to classified information 
(Answer). With her Answer, Applicant submitted eight exhibits (Ax. 1 – 8).  
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
On May 2, 2015, Department Counsel notified the Hearing Office that the 
Government was ready to proceed. Applicant’s hearing was scheduled, with the 
agreement of the parties, for July 30, 2015. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered six exhibits (Gx. 1 – 6). Applicant 
testified, called witnesses, and offered additional exhibits beyond those attached to her 
Answer (Ax. A – T). She requested additional time post-hearing to submit further 
documentary evidence. I granted her request, and she timely submitted Ax. U. All 
exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was 
received on August 13, 2015, and the record closed on August 14, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, a first generation American, is married with an infant child. She started 
working at 15, when she was eligible for a work permit. She continued working while 
going to college and earned a bachelor’s degree in psychology. She is currently 
pursuing a master’s degree and her husband is completing a certification in information 
technology (IT). Their 2013 tax return reflects a combined annual income of $52,000. 
According to their 2014 tax return, their combined income increased to $84,000. 
Applicant started working for her current employer in June 2014, and anticipates her 
husband will be able to secure a better paying job once he receives his IT certification.2  
 
 In 2007, Applicant purchased a second home as an investment property. At the 
time, Applicant was working as a loan officer for a large realty company and was 
earning substantial compensation for her work. Applicant’s second home appraised for 
over $70,000 more than the purchase price. Applicant was able to rent the home and 
the rental income was more than sufficient to cover the mortgage, as well as related 
expenses. Real estate professionals provided their opinion that, at the time, Applicant’s 
purchase of the property was financially sound.3  
 
A few months after Applicant closed on the property, the U.S. housing market 
collapsed and the economy went into recession. Applicant and her tenants lost their 
jobs due to the recession. Applicant’s tenants stopped paying their rent. Applicant paid 
the mortgages on both her homes and her customary living expenses for nearly a year 
by using her savings, working part-time jobs, and securing a home equity loan on her 
primary residence. She attempted to negotiate with the lender on her second home to 
resolve the mortgage, but those efforts failed. She then tried to sell the home, but her 
lender refused a short sale offer of $200,000. The lender eventually sold the property 
after foreclosure for approximately $130,000. Applicant’s financial troubles were further 
exacerbated by a former close friend’s fraudulent use of her credit card.4  
 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 44-49, 60-63; Gx. 1, Ax. J – K. 
 
3 Tr. at 37-39, 65-72; Gx. 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 27-30, 40-43, 49-57; Ax. 3 – 5; Ax. T. 
 
3 
 
Applicant regained her financial footing when she secured full-time employment 
as a middle school teacher in about August or September 2010. She started resolving 
the past-due debts that she had incurred after losing her job as a loan officer. She 
submitted documentary proof that SOR debts 1.a – 1.c, which total over $110,000, have 
been resolved. The only potential remaining debt is the supposed deficiency balance 
owed following the foreclosure sale of her second home in 2009. This purported debt is 
listed at SOR 1.d. Applicant’s former lender sold the debt to a collection company. The 
original lender and other creditors in interest did not seek or secure a judgment or lien 
regarding the purported debt. Applicant was advised by a bankruptcy attorney that the 
state’s five-year statute of limitations has passed and any potential liability following the 
foreclosure sale is unenforceable. Applicant disputed the debt with the credit reporting 
agencies and it is no longer listed on her current credit report. Notwithstanding the 
likelihood that the purported deficiency balance debt is unenforceable, Applicant has 
contacted the creditor to negotiate a payment plan to resolve the matter.5 
 
Applicant has not accrued other delinquent debt since regaining full-time 
employment. She disclosed her past financial problems on her security clearance 
application. She timely pays the mortgage on the home she purchased ten years ago. 
She has received informal financial counseling through her work, friends, and 
consultation with a bankruptcy firm. Her recent credit report reflects favorably on her 
current financial situation. She testified and provided corroboration that she frugally 
manages her family’s finances with the aid of a written monthly budget. Applicant’s 
budget reflects that, after paying monthly expenses, she has about $980 a month in 
discretionary income to pay unexpected expenses and other debts.6 Numerous 
individuals, some of who have known Applicant since high school, testified or submitted 
character letters attesting to her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.7 One of 
Applicant’s current co-workers testified that Applicant has a good reputation at work and 
with the Government regarding the manner in which she handles sensitive information.8  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865, § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 84-90; Gx. 3; Ax. 6; Ax. A – E; Ax. U. 
 
6 Tr. at 58-60, 63-65, 90-93; Gx. 1; Ax. 1 (as of September 2014 credit score in mid 600s); Ax. H (budget), 
Ax. I (as of the hearing, credit score had increased to over 700). 
 
7 Tr. at 26-43, 58-60; Ax. L – S. 
 
8 Tr. at 26-31. 
 
4 
 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all 
available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, recognizing the paramount importance of protecting national security in all 
suitability determinations, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
See also ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern 
arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong 
presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.”). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The potential security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. . . .  
 
 
5 
 
Applicant’s past financial problems raise the financial considerations concern. 
The record evidence also raises the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The following mitigating conditions were potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s past financial problems were due to the recession, which resulted in 
the loss of her well-paying job and eventually the foreclosure of her second home. Her 
financial situation was exacerbated by a former close friend’s fraudulent use of her 
credit card. Applicant did not ignore her financial obligations. Instead, she attempted to 
negotiate with her lender to modify the mortgage on her second home and, once those 
efforts failed, tried to sale the home to resolve her debts. After regaining her financial 
footing, Applicant contacted her creditors and made a concerted effort to resolve her 
debts. She submitted documentary proof that SOR debts 1.a – 1.c, which total over 
$110,000, have been resolved. Notwithstanding that any potential liability owed after the 
foreclosure sale of her second home is likely unenforceable, Applicant contacted the 
creditor to resolve the matter. Applicant lives within her means, and her financial 
situation is under control and continues to improve. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d) apply. 
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of clearance 
holders.9 Applicant met her burden.  
 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my 
comments under Guideline F, and note some additional whole-person factors. Applicant 
has been upfront and candid about her financial situation since the start of the security 
clearance process. Furthermore, she has properly handled and safeguarded sensitive 
information at her current job for over a year. This favorable record evidence, when 
coupled with Applicant’s responsible action in addressing her financial situation, 
mitigates the security concerns raised by her past financial problems.  
 
 A security clearance determination is not intended to punish an individual for past 
conduct or circumstances. Instead, these decisions serve as predictive judgments 
regarding an individual’s security suitability, where the individual’s past conduct is the 
best indicator of future behavior.10 Here, Applicant has demonstrated through the 
manner in which she responsibly addressed her past financial problems that she 
possesses the requisite good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to be entrusted 
with classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013). See also, ISCR Case No. 01-25941 at 5 
(App. Bd. May 7, 2004) (“Security clearance determinations are not an exact science, but rather 
predicative judgments about a person’s security suitability in light of that person's past conduct and 
present circumstances.”) (citing, Egan, 484 U.S. at 528-529).  
