 Government Exhibit 3 (this document is commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 14-02987
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Daniel H. Funk, Esq.  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her a security
clearance to work in the defense industry. She has a history of financial problems or
difficulties consisting of past-due first and second mortgage loans for a residential
property. Applicant provided extensive documentation that is sufficient to explain and
mitigate her unfavorable financial history. Accordingly, this case is decided for
Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on November 27, 2013.  After reviewing the application and1
information gathered during a background investigation, the Department of Defense
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 4
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some5
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 Applicant’s Exhibit 7. 6
2
(DOD),  on August 19, 2014, sent Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it2
was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her
eligibility for access to classified information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It3
detailed the reasons for the action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for
financial considerations. Applicant answered the SOR in a September 13, 2014
response wherein she admitted the SOR allegations and provided a two-page
memorandum explaining her situation. Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel
requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the written record.4
On March 18, 2015, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material
information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of relevant material5
(FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on May 22, 2015. With the assistance
of counsel, on June 18, 2015, Applicant submitted an extensive reply (more than 100
pages) consisting of a brief and seven attached exhibits, to which Department Counsel
had no objections. The case was assigned to me on August 4, 2015. Thereafter, I
tasked Applicant’s counsel with providing an index or table of contents to assist me in
identifying Applicant’s exhibits, and that index was received. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee who is seeking to retain a security
clearance. She is employed as a program analyst for a federal contractor. She has
worked for this company since 2012. According to her functional manager, Applicant
has a good record of employment with demonstrated attention to detail and
organizational skills, she follows rules and regulations, she has good judgment, and he
believes she is reliable and trustworthy.  Applicant married in April 2006, and she and6
her husband had a child in October 2013. 
 Government Exhibits 5 and 6. 7
 Government Exhibit 7 and Applicant’s Exhibit 1. 8
 Applicant’s Exhibit 2. 9
 Applicant’s Exhibit 3. 10
 Applicant’s Exhibit 6. 11
 One would think that a lawsuit based on fraud in the inducement could be brought, but that question is12
beyond the scope of this decision. 
3
Applicant has a history of financial problems consisting of two delinquent
mortgage loans. Those two loans form the basis for the SOR allegations. The SOR
does not allege other delinquent debts, and credit reports from 2015 and 2013 do not
reflect additional delinquent accounts.  As alleged in the SOR, the 2013 credit report7
shows that the first mortgage loan was past due in the amount of $10,568, had an
outstanding balance of $144,010, and was in foreclosure. It also shows that the second
mortgage loan was past due in the amount of $1,719 with an outstanding balance of
$37,287. Applicant provided details about the mortgage loans during the course of her
background investigation in January 2014.8
In 2006, during the then real estate boom, Applicant and her husband bought a
residential property subject to first and second mortgage loans for $158,040 and
$39,510, respectively. The purchase was made based on documentation showing the
house was built in 1986.  The property also passed an inspection before the purchase.  9
After living in the house for about six months, Applicant and her husband
experienced problems requiring substantial repairs (e.g., a leaky roof that was
previously inadequately repaired resulting in mold, copper pipes rotting under the
house, and poor duct work in the crawl space).  Applicant and her husband consulted10
service professionals who opined that the house was not built in the 1980s and that the
house should not have passed an inspection. An energy audit was also conducted due
to abnormally high utility bills. Further research led to the discovery that the home was
actually built 50 years earlier in 1938.    11
Applicant and her husband consulted a real estate attorney who advised them
that they were without recourse.  They continued to make the payments on the12
mortgage loans and made small repairs on the house as they could afford to until
Applicant learned she was pregnant in early 2013. After consulting legal counsel, they
decided to pursue a short sale of the property because they believed the house was
unsafe for an infant. Unable to refinance the mortgage loans and lacking the financial
means to make the major repairs, they stopped making the loan payments and moved
into Applicant’s mother-in-law’s house, which they had assumed the mortgage loan after
her passing. 
 Applicant’s Exhibit 6. 13
 Applicant’s Exhibit 6. 14
 Applicant’s Exhibits 4 and 5. 15
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to16
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.17
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 18
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 19
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.21
4
Applicant reported the pending short sale and possible foreclosure to her
company’s facility security officer (FSO) in November 2013.  The short sale was13
unsuccessful, and the home was foreclosed upon via a trustee sale in March 2014.
Applicant reported the trustee sale to the FSO in April 2014.  The available evidence14
does not include any information about a deficiency balance from either loan.  
Applicant’s current financial situation is much improved.  A monthly cash-flow15
statement shows a positive net remainder of $1,417. The positive cash flow will allow
Applicant to address any deficiency owed. 
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As16
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt17
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An18
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  19
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting20
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An21
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.22
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.23
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 24
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).25
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.26
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 27
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant28
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
5
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate22
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme23
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.24
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.25
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it26
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant27
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 28
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
 AG ¶ 18.  29
 AG ¶ 19(a).  30
 AG ¶ 19(c). 31
 AG ¶ 20(a)–(f).32
6
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  29
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly compromise
classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It encompasses
concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important qualities. A
person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or
negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.    
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. Taken together, the evidence indicates inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within the meaning30 31
of Guideline F. 
 In mitigation, I have considered six mitigating conditions under Guideline F,  and32
I have especially considered the following as most pertinent:
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or death, divorce, or
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
AG ¶ 20(c) . . . there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control.
The circumstances surrounding the purchase of the house include the fact that
Applicant and her husband were misled about the age and condition of the property.
This unpleasant surprise occurred despite that the house passed an inspection at the
time of sale. They acted responsibly under the circumstances by making the mortgage
payments for several years until deciding moving was necessary due to the condition of
the house and the pending birth of their first child. They sought and followed
professional advice when they stopped making the loan payments and attempted a
short sale, albeit without success, resulting in the foreclosure. The available evidence
does not include information on a deficiency balance, but they have sufficient cash flow
to address a deficiency balance via a monthly repayment agreement should a
deficiency exist. Other than the two delinquent mortgage loans, the available evidence
shows that Applicant has successfully managed her financial responsibilities. The
totality of facts and circumstances strongly suggests that the delinquent mortgage loans
were a one-time occurrence that is quite unlikely to recur. 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).33
7
In sum, I am persuaded that Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain
and mitigate the concern stemming from her unfavorable financial history. The evidence
leaves me without doubt or concern about her reliability, trustworthiness, good
judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I
weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-
person concept.  Accordingly, I conclude that she met her ultimate burden of33
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her
eligibility for access to classified information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is
granted. 
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
