 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05078 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jonathan Bell, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the sexual behavior and personal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual 
behavior) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 3, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 13, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 16, 
2015, scheduling the hearing for August 18, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 26, 2015.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Continuance 
 
Applicant requested a continuance contingent on certain actions by Department 
Counsel. The continuance request was denied. The request and correspondence are 
included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through 
D, which were admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2013. He served in the U.S. military from 2002 until he was 
honorably discharged in 2008. He has a bachelor’s degree. He has never married, but 
he cohabitates with his girlfriend. He has a one-year-old child.1 
 
 In August 2013, Applicant set the timer on his cell phone’s camera and placed 
the cell phone on the floor in an attempt to take a picture of a female co-worker’s 
underwear without her knowledge. A male co-worker observed Applicant and 
interceded. The co-worker told Applicant that he could report himself to his supervisor or 
the co-worker would report him. Applicant reported the incident to his supervisor. His 
employment was terminated the next day.2 
 
 Applicant expressed remorse for his action. He stated that he had never done 
anything like it before or after the incident. He agreed with his current supervisor’s 
characterization of the incident as “[j]ust stupid young people doing stupid things.” His 
girlfriend is aware of the incident, as is his current supervisor.3 
 
 Applicant received a psychological evaluation from a licensed clinical 
psychologist. The psychologist determined that  
 
“[Applicant] does not have emotional or behavioral disorder problems 
associated with sexual problems or have rationalizations, attributes, or 
sexual attitudes similar to known sexual offenders. He produced a non-
pathological self-report.”4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 25-29, 35, 43, 45; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 32-34, 38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A. 
 
3 Tr. at 32-37, 47-48; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A. 
 
4 AE A. 
 
3 
 
The psychologist also opined that Applicant’s “inappropriate sexual behavior act was 
isolatory, and not representative of a sexual disorder nor any significant issues of 
concern.”5 
 
 Applicant listed his termination on his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in October 2013. He wrote that a “[v]iolation of 
corporate policy resulted in termination.” During his background interview in January 
2014, Applicant stated that the male co-worker interceded before the female co-worker 
was present, resulting in no picture being taken. The psychologist who performed his 
psychological evaluation wrote that Applicant described the incident as he “set his 
phone with a two second timer, placed the phone on the floor underneath a lady’s legs, 
a photo was taken that ended up blurred.”6 Applicant testified: 
 
I took my phone and with a stupid idea in my head, I set a timer on its 
camera, placed the camera on the floor near my female coworker’s feet 
basically to get an upward shot, camera shot and when I went to pick it up 
after a moment a third coworker saw me and that’s when he confronted 
me or he would confess, you know tell on me. And so, of course, I decided 
I would take the high road and confess myself and so got terminated.7 
 
Applicant testified that the photograph was “a blurry mess,” and he deleted it.8 
 
 A witness testified, and Applicant submitted several letters attesting to his 
excellent job performance, work ethic, trustworthiness, reliability, and dependability.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
5 AE A. 
 
6 GE 1, 2; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 33. 
 
8 Tr. at 33. 
 
9 Tr. at 16-24; AE C, D. 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior  
 
 The security concern for sexual behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which can 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and  
 
5 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment.  
 
 Applicant’s conduct resulted in his termination. It reflected a severe lack of 
judgment. The above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate sexual behavior security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 14. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress.  
 
 There is no evidence of any similar conduct, either before or after the incident. 
The psychological evaluation reported that Applicant does not have a sexual disorder. 
Applicant expressed remorse for the incident. His girlfriend and his supervisor are 
aware of the incident. However, the conduct reflected extremely poor judgment. I am 
also concerned about the inconsistencies in this case. I am unable to determine that 
similar incidents are unlikely to recur. The conduct continues to cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 14(b) is not 
applicable. Applicant has lessened, but not eliminated, his vulnerability to coercion, 
exploitation, and duress. AG ¶ 14(c) is partially applicable. I find that sexual behavior 
concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s conduct created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and 
duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Under the same rationale discussed above for sexual behavior, I find that 
Applicant’s conduct continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 17(e) is partially 
applicable. I find that personal conduct concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines D and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. However, this was not a high 
school or college prank. Applicant was in his early 30s when he attempted to take a 
picture of a female co-worker’s underwear without her knowledge. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. I do not have trust or confidence in Applicant’s judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the sexual behavior and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
