1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-05296
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Dominic Fahey, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On March 5, 2015, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline C (Foreign
Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative decision
based on the record. Department Counsel requested that a hearing be held and
advised Applicant. Applicant agreed to a hearing before an administrative judge. The
case was assigned to me on July 1, 2015. A notice of hearing was issued on August 11,
2015, scheduling the hearing for October 1, 2015.  Government Exhibit (GX) 1  was
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant
Exhibits (AX) A-C, which were admitted without objection. The transcript was received
on October 9, 2015.  Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Applicant originally requested a  FORM. She responded to it with documents. At the hearing, Department      1
Counsel said that he did not produce the documents that were with the FORM.
2
Procedural Issue
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
regarding Russia and (Crimean Peninsula) Ukraine. Applicant did not object, and the
documents proffered in support of the request were labeled Hearing Exhibit I and
entered into the record.
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegation under
Guideline C , but denied the allegations under Guideline B with explanations. 
Applicant is 27 years old. She was born in Yalta, Ukraine. In 1999, she came to
the United States with her family. She became a naturalized citizen in 2009. She
received her undergraduate degree in 2013 from an American university. She is
married to a U.S. citizen. She completed a security clearance application in 2013. She
has been employed with her current employer since 2013. (GX 1)
FOREIGN PREFERENCE
The SOR alleges under Guideline C that Applicant maintained her foreign
passport issued to her by the Ukraine, which had an anticipated expiration date of
August 2017.
Applicant acknowledged that she had a foreign passport, but it was in the
possession of her Facility Security Officer (FSO). She attached the document to her
answer, but it was not in the file with her answer.  She produced a letter from her FSO1
at the hearing, which certified that in March 2015 the foreign passport issued by the
Ukraine was destroyed. (AX A). She was never advised that this was an issue, even
when she became a U.S. citizen. She had not used the passport from Ukraine since
she became a U.S. citizen. (Answer to SOR; GX 1)
Applicant’s 2013 security clearance application notes that she believed that
when she became a U.S. citizen, her Ukrainian citizenship “would be lost.” She
understands that is not the case. She is now going through an official process to
renounce her Ukranian citizenship. (GX 1)
FOREIGN INFLUENCE
The SOR alleges under Guideline B that Applicant’s father is a citizen and
resident of Crimea and that he previously worked for the Ukranian KGB. (2.a) It also
alleges that Applicant’s grandmother is a citizen and resident of Crimea, Ukraine, now
under control of Russia. Finally, it alleges that she has several other relatives with whom
3
she keeps in contact with who are citizens and residents of the Crimea Ukraine, now
under the control of Russia.
Applicant’s mother and her two sisters are U.S. citizens. They came to the United
States in 1999. Her mother is married to a U.S. citizen. Applicant’s sister and her
husband’s extended family live in the United States. 
As to allegation 2.a, Applicant knows that at some point that her father was a
citizen and resident of Crimea, Ukraine. When her parents divorced in 1988, she had no
relationship with her father. However, she has not seen him since leaving the Ukraine in
1999. (Tr. 15) Her mother, who has since remarried an American citizen, officially had
parental rights revoked in 1999 by the Court in Ukraine. (AX B) Her father left the family
and did not visit or provide support to his family. The Court in Ukraine decreed that all
parental rights of the father are terminated as of 1999. (AX C) She does not know where
her father is. She has had no communications with him.  Applicant is credible when she
testified that her father has no bearing on her life. She does not even know if he is still
alive. The Ukraine Court document (AX B) states that Applicant’s father was working for
the Security Service of Ukraine in the city of Yalta.  Applicant’s mother told Applicant that
her father was discharged from his position at the “organization of Security Service.” 
Applicant’s grandmother is a citizen and resident of Crimea, Ukraine. She is
retired from a factory job. She is about 75. (Tr. 17) She has no connection to the
Ukrainian government. Applicant speaks to her grandmother through Skype
approximately once a month. Lately there have been internet issues, and she has not
spoken to her in months. (Tr. 17)
Applicant’s aunt and uncle live in the same household with her grandmother.
They have no contact with the government. Applicant’s cousin, who is 24, has little
contact with her. The last time Applicant saw them was in 2007, before she became a
U.S. citizen. (SOR 2.c) 
ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE
The United States established diplomatic relations with Ukraine in 1991, following
its independence from the Soviet Union. U.S. policy is centered on realizing and
strengthening a democratic, prosperous, and secure Ukraine more closely integrated
into Europe and Euro-Atlantic structures. 
Ukraine’s transition to an independent, democratic state that is a full member of
the global economy has faced significant internal and external challenges; none greater
than that resulting from Russia’s unlawful annexation of the Crimean Peninsula and
support of so-called separatists in Eastern and Southern Ukraine. Russia’s actions
followed peaceful protests by ordinary Ukrainians that brought down a “corrupt regime
bent on cheating people of their sovereign choice to associate with Europe.” Despite the
signing of a cease fire in September 2014, the situation in Ukraine remains precarious.
Violent clashes between Russia-backed separatists and Ukrainian forces continue in
parts of the country, resulting in thousands of injuries and deaths. In addition, Russian
4
military forces continue to occupy the Crimean Peninsula and are present on the eastern
border of Ukraine. Numerous checkpoints have been established by the Russia-backed
separatist forces and the State Department warns that “individuals, including U.S.
citizens, have been threatened, detained, or kidnapped for hours or days after being
stopped at checkpoints.” The State Department also warns that “Russia-backed
separatist groups have taken on an increasingly strident anti-American tone”, and in light
of ongoing unrest, the U.S. Embassy’s ability to provide consular services may be
limited.
In March 2014, Russian forces occupied the Crimean Peninsula of Ukraine, which
remains part of Ukraine notwithstanding Russia’s illegal intervention. In March 2014, the
U.N. General Assembly approved a resolution affirming Ukraine’s territorial integrity and
terming the March 16  referendum on annexation in Crimea illegitimate. Theth
international community, including the United States and Ukraine does not recognize
this purported annexation through Russia’s illegal military intervention. Russian military
forces continue to maintain an extensive military presence in Crimea and along the
border of eastern Crimea. The Russian Federation is likely to take further actions in
Crimea in 2015 consistent with their attempted unlawful annexation of occupation of this
part of Ukraine. Russian authorities are requiring that non-Russian citizens obtain a
Russian visa to enter and exit Crimea. In the Ukraine, Russia has demonstrated its
willingness to  covertly use military and paramilitary forces in a neighboring state.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known
as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
5
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
6
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member.  This includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign
country;
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare,
or other such benefits from a foreign country;
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements;
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial. or business
interests in another country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and
(7) voting in a foreign election;
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an
American citizen;
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as to
serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or government
in conflict with the national security interest; and,
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship.
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2013. She had a passport from the
Ukraine.  AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) applies.
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a
foreign country;
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual
was a minor;
7
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security
authority.
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security
authority, or otherwise invalidated; and
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States
Government.
Applicant  surrendered her passport from Ukraine to her FSO before the hearing,
and provided documentation to corroborate her statement. The passport has been
destroyed. She is in the process of officially renouncing her Ukranian citizenship. She
was never put on notice that she needed to relinquish it. At the time she had a Ukrainian
passport she did not have a security clearance or have any reason to understand the
import of such. No one advised her that this could be an issue. AG ¶ 11(e) applies.
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under the foreign preference guideline.
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
The security concern under Guideline B is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
A disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). A disqualifying condition
also may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person,
group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b).
Applicant’s, grandmother, aunt, uncle, and cousin are citizens and residents of
Ukraine. Applicant  maintains some contact with them.  Applicant has no idea where her
father currently lives. Moreover, his parental rights were revoked through the Ukraine
Court in 1999. She has not seen him or had any contact with him since that time.
Security concerns could arise in connection with the potential that hostile forces might
seek classified information from Applicant by threatening harm or offering benefits to her
8
extended family living in Ukraine or Crimea. but not to her father. Based on this
evidence, AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are raised.
Since the Government produced evidence to raise  disqualifying conditions in AG
¶¶ 7(a) and (b), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the
Government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it,
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States,
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-0317,
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the nature of
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is
associated with a risk of terrorism.
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Ukraine
or Russia seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through
Applicant, or her relatives living in Ukraine and the Crimea, nevertheless, it is not
possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are
known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively as capable state intelligence
services, and Ukraine now has clashes with Russia. Applicant’s relationship with her
grandmother and relatives in Crimea create a potential conflict of interest because these
relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern. 
Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.”  AG ¶ 8(a). The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well
as each individual family tie must be considered.  ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App.
Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) can mitigate concerns when “there is no conflict
of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign
person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep
9
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(c) can
mitigate if “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”
AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have applicability. Applicant’s mother, two sisters, husband
and in-laws live in the United States and are U.S. citizens. She occasionally contacts her
grandmother. She has no relationship with her father. She has shown mitigation under
AG ¶ 8(a), and Applicant met her burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his
relationships with relatives living in Ukraine could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation.”
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant
connections to the United States. She has lived in the  the United States since 1999.
She is a naturalized U.S. citizen. She married a U.S. citizen. She has chosen a life in the
United States.  Her financial, professional, and personal ties are in the United States.
Applicant took an oath and swore allegiance to the United States when she became a
naturalized U.S. citizen. She manifested her patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United
States over all other countries. 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the
potential conflict of interest created by her relationship with her grandmother and
relatives in the Ukraine. She has no connection with her father, she occasionally calls
her grandmother and relatives who live in the house may speak to her. Moreover, there
is no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Russian government or those
conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant, or her family members.
As such, there is a reduced possibility that either Applicant or her grandmother or
relatives living  in Ukraine would be specifically selected as targets for improper coercion
or exploitation. 
In sum, Applicant has not been to the Ukraine since 2007. Applicant’s
connections to the United States are strong. She is committed to her personal and
professional life in the United States. She lives with her U.S. husband. Her mother and
two sisters are U.S. citizens living in the United States. There is substantial mitigation in
this case. Applicant spoke about her undivided loyalty to the United States.  Her
connections to the United States heavily outweigh her connections to her family in
Crimea. She has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United
States that she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United
States. Foreign influence security concerns are mitigated under Guideline B.  Even if
security concerns are not mitigated under Guideline B, they are mitigated under the
whole-person concept, infra.
  Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
10
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the
facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 27 years old.  She came to the United States in 1999 with her mother and
two sisters. She has no connection with her father, who she has not seen since 1999.
His parental rights were revoked by the Ukraine Court. She was educated in the United
States. She is married to a U.S. citizen. She has relinquished her Ukrainian passport. I
found her candid and sincere in her testimony. She has been candid about her foreign
connections throughout the security clearance process. I had the opportunity to observe
her demeanor while she testified. I found her forthcoming and resolute in her ability to
resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the United States. Accordingly, if any
foreign entity were to attempt to influence her through her foreign familial connections, I
am convinced she would report any such attempt to the appropriate authorities and not
succumb to any adverse pressure or influence. She is surrounded by her mother,
sisters, husband and extended family in the United States. For all the foregoing reasons,
I find that Applicant mitigated the foreign preference and foreign influence concerns. 
Applicant provided sufficient information to establish good judgment and
reliability. She has mitigated the security concerns under the foreign preference and,
foreign influence guidelines.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C : FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
11
Paragraph 2, Guideline B : FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a-c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
