                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
------------------------------------- )          ADP Case No. 14-03906   
                           )                                                          
                                                          )
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Phillip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant did
not mitigate trust concerns regarding her finances. Eligibility for holding a public trust
position is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On October 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated
Adjudication Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DOD adjudicators determined it was not clearly consistent with the could not make
the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting eligibility for a public
trust position, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether eligibility to hold a public trust position should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
1 A memorandum from the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Counterintelligence and Security,
titled “Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases,” covering the handling of trustworthiness cases under the
Directive was issued on November 19, 2004.  This memorandum directed  DOHA to continue to utilize DoD
Directive 5220.6 in ADP contractor cases for trustworthiness determinations (to include those involving ADP
I, II. and III positions). (HE 1) Parenthetically, the Directive was designed to implement E.O. 10865.
2
as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
DOD on September 1, 2006.1
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 16, 2014, and elected to have her
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the Government’s
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 30, 2015, and responded to the FORM within
the time permitted with a letter from a credit repair firm. (Item 5) The case was assigned
to me on August 3, 2015.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 45 unresolved debts totaling
$43,607. These debts include a state tax lien in 2010 for $1,645 and a judgment
entered in 2010 for $2,043.
In her response to the SOR, Appellant admitted several debts: ones covered by
subparagraphs 1.b, 1.n, 1.p, 1.s-1.t, and 1.aa. But she denied the remaining
allegations. She claimed she paid the debts covered by subparagraphs 1.h, 1.j, 1.ii.,
1.kk, and 1.ll. 
As to the remaining allegations, Applicant denied any awareness of any
outstanding accounts she is responsible for. She claimed she will contact the
businesses to explore repayment on any accounts that belong to her.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 48-year-old medical staff quality assistant who seeks a public trust
position. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted as
relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in March 1993 and divorced her spouse in January 1995. (Item
3) She has no children from her marriage, but one child from another relationship. (Item
3) Applicant attended college classes between June 2006 and September 2011 and
earned a bachelor’s degree in September 2011. (Item 3) 
Applicant claimed no military service. Over the past 10 years, she experienced
periods of unemployment as follows: between January 2009 and November 2009,
between April 2008 and August 2008, and between November 2007 and March 2008.
(Item 3)
3
Finances
Between 2012 and October 2015, Applicant accumulated 45 delinquent debts
totaling $43,607 that have not been resolved. One of the debts is a state tax lien filed in
2010 for $1,645. Another is an entered judgment in 2010 for $2,043. Neither of these
debts has been addressed. The remaining 43 debts include delinquent medical
accounts, student loans and assorted consumer debts. While Applicant claims to have
paid several of the listed debts (i.e., creditors 1.h, 1.j, 1.ii, and 1.kk-1.ll), she provided
no documentation to corroborate her claims. Applicant also claimed to be making
payments to creditors 1.b, 1.p, 1.s, and 1.t, but provided no supporting proof of her
payments or her income sources, past and present.
Applicant claims no awareness of any of the remaining listed debts in the SOR
and assured she would contact these businesses for verification and arrange payments
to those found to be entitled to payment. To assist her in identifying listed creditors with
valid debts, she engaged a credit repair firm. (Item 5) To date, she has furnished no
updates of her verification efforts. Nor did she provide any evidence of her income
sources and financial counseling.
Endorsements
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on her behalf.
Nor did she provide any proof of community and civic contributions.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
[public trust position] and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and
many of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate [public trust] security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not eligibility to hold a
public trust position should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying
and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines
is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable public trust risk. 
4
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guideline is pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position may be made only
upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.
Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility for a public trust position depends, in large part, on the relevance
and materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain public trust position eligibility. The required materiality showing, however,
does not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has
actually mishandled or abused privacy information before it can deny or revoke
eligibility to hold a public trust position. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the
5
cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect
privacy information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her trustworthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation. Based on the requirement of Executive Order 10865 that all
trustworthiness determinations be clearly consistent with the national interest, the
applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her trust eligibility.
“[S]ecurity-clearance determinations [trust determinations] should err, if they must, on
the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Trustworthiness concerns are raised over Applicant’s accumulation of
delinquent debts (inclusive of a state tax lien and judgment) over a period of several
years that she failed to address. Applicant’s recurrent problems with managing her
finances over a period of years while fully employed reflect lapses of judgment in
administering her financial responsibilities. 
Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts warrant the application of two of
the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines. DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and DC ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligation,” apply to Applicant’s situation.
Applicant’s pleading admissions with respect to her accumulated debts covered
in the SOR negate the need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence,
§ 262 (6th ed. 2006)). Each of Applicant’s listed delinquent debts (including a state
lien and entered judgment) are fully documented in her credit reports. Some judgment
problems persist, too, over Applicant’s insufficiently explained delinquent debts once
she became aware of the status of her listed accounts and her ensuing failure to
demonstrate she acted responsibly in addressing her listed debts. See ISCR Case
03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive
positions.” See DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, ¶ ¶ C3, 1.2,
1.1.7, and C3. 1.2..3 (Jan. 1987, as amended) (the Regulation).  Holding a public trust
position involves the exercise of important fiducial responsibilities, among which is the
expectancy of consistent trust and candor. 
Financial stability in a person cleared to protect privacy information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the trust position. While the
principal concern of a trust position holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are explicit in
cases involving debt delinquencies.  
6
Although ADP I and ADP II positions are not expressly covered by Executive
Order 10865 or the Directive, which apply to contractor personnel, historically, the
same principles covering these positions have been applied in Regulation 5220.2
governing military and civilian personnel. The definitions used in the Regulation to
define ADP I and ADP II positions have equal applicability to contractors covered by
the Directive.
Although some extenuating circumstances can be inferred from Applicant’s
listed periods of unemployment (much of it while she was a full-time student), too little
information is documented to credit her with more than partial extenuating
circumstances.  Based on the developed record, it is unclear how her status as a full-
time student, her divorce, or her periods of unemployment between 2007 and 2009
played any role in her financial decision-making. Considering the available
documented materials in the FORM, demonstrated extenuating circumstances are
limited. Partially available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in
the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation, and the individual acted responsibly.” 
Applicant’s payment efforts also lack corroborative proof. Her claims of
resolving by payment her admitted debts to creditors 1.h, 1.j, 1.ii, and 1.kk-1.ll are not
documented. Her claims of starting payment plans with creditors 1.b, 1.p, 1.s, and 1.t
also lack corroborative documentary proof. The only debt resolution proof she
provided is a letter from a credit repair service she engaged to repair her credit. This
service provided no details as to which listed debts should be paid and which can be
realistically disputed and removed from her credit reports.  
Removal of any of Applicant’s listed debts from her credit reports without
explanations (e.g., because they are not her debts or because they are aged) cannot
alone represent good-faith efforts to resolve an applicant’s debts. Little weight can be
extended to Applicant’s credit repair intentions without more details of the repair
service’s plans. And without documentation of financial counseling and more specific
steps Applicant is taking to address her state lien, judgment, and admitted debts, little
mitigation credit is  available to Applicant.  Based on the documented materials in the
FORM, none of the remaining mitigation conditions apply to Applicant’s situation.
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by her failure to resolve her delinquent debts. Resolution of
her listed delinquent accounts is a critical prerequisite to her regaining control of her
finances. Applicant failed to provide more specific explanatory material for
consideration. Endorsements and performance evaluations might have been helpful,
too, in making a whole-person assessment of her overall clearance eligibility, but were
not provided. 
Overall, public trust eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited
amount of information available for consideration in this record does not enable her to
establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome trust concerns arising out of
7
her lapses in judgment associated with her accumulation of a state tax lien, judgment,
and other delinquent accounts. Each of these debts remains outstanding with no
developed plan for resolving the debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s lack of more specific explanations for her debt accruals and corrective
steps, it is still too soon to make safe predictive judgments about her ability to resolve
her outstanding debts. Applicant fails to mitigate trust concerns related to her
outstanding debt delinquencies and associated judgment lapses. More time is needed
to facilitate Applicant’s making the necessary progress with her debts to enable
conclusions that her finances are sufficiently stabilized to grant her eligibility to hold a
public trust position. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.m.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparas. 1.a through 1.m:      Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  Eligibility to hold a public trust position is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
8
  
