The Government submitted six items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 14-04890
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On November 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline
F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in
September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision based on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated August 4, 2015.  Applicant received the FORM on August 14,1
2015. She submitted additional information for the record. I received the case
assignment on October 9, 2015. Based on a review of the case file, I find Applicant has
mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised. Eligibility for a position of trust is granted.
2
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations under Guideline F,
with explanations. She also provided some documentation concerning payments and
receipts.  (Item 2) 
Applicant is 48 years old. She is employed with a health insurance company.
Applicant obtained a technical degree in medical billing and coding in June 2006. In
June 2012, she obtained a technical diploma for medical assistance.  She is divorced
and has three children. (Item 3) She has been employed with her current employer
since September 2013. This is her first application for a position of trust, which she
completed on February 28, 2013. (Item 3) 
 The SOR alleges 14 delinquent debts totaling approximately $28,000. These
debts include medical accounts and collection accounts. (Item 1) Credit reports confirm
the debts. (Items 4 and 5) Applicant produced documentation that the debts listed at
1.g ($88) and 1.n ($50) were paid.
Applicant explained in her Answer that she contacted her creditors listed in the
SOR and arranged payment plans. She was unemployed from February to August
2010; February 2007 to January 2008; and June 2012 to February 2013. She had
temporary jobs and she took care of her mother. (Item 6) Her mother has since died.
In 2013, during an investigative interview, Applicant explained that she did not
know of some of the debts until she obtained a 2013 credit report. (Item 6) During the
interview she stated that the largest debt, $14,809 for a 2012 emergency hospital visit
(SOR 1.a), was in a payment plan, but she has not been able to complete the monthly
payments due to unemployment. She states that the credit collection company wants
the entire medical bill to be paid in full. ( Response to FORM)  
 
As to the remaining SOR debts, Applicant provided documentation to support
that she has paid all  accounts or is in a repayment plan for them. In 2015, Applicant
paid the debt in 1.b ($703). The documentation shows a zero balance, paid in full.
(Response to FORM, Attachment B)
The debt in 1.c ($345) was paid in three payments. (Response to FORM,
Attachment C) The debt in 1.d ($280) was paid in full in December 2014. (Response to
FORM, Attachment D) The debt in 1.e ($265) has been paid in full. (Response to
FORM, Attachment E) The debt in 1.f ($75) was paid in December 2014. (Response to
FORM, Attachment F) The debt in 1.h ($1,995) was paid in April 2015. (Response to
FORM, Attachment H) The debt in 1.i ($2,139) was paid in nine payments. (Response
to FORM, Attachment I) The debt in 1.j ($695) was reported in error. It was part of
another medical bill. (Response to FORM, Attachment J) The debt in 1.k ($500) was
paid in full. (Response to FORM, Attachment K) The debt in 1.l ($414) was settled for
$214, and paid in full. (Response to FORM, Attachment L) The debt in 1.m ($155) was
settled and paid in full. (Response to FORM, Attachment M) The debt in 1.n ($50) was
paid in full in December 2014. (Response to FORM, Attachment N) 
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
3
The record does not indicate Applicant’s current salary. Applicant did not list any
financial counseling or provide a budget. There is no record of use of a credit
counseling organization. 
 . Policies   
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3. 1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the
interests of national security.” Regulation C6.1.1.1 Department of Defense contractor
personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final
unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶¶8.2.1
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of the national interest.” 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
4
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect sensitive information. 
 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The trustworthiness concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
Applicant’s admissions establish her delinquent debts and her credit reports
confirm the debts. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions
(FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c)
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is
left to Applicant to overcome the case against her and mitigate trustworthiness
concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” An unpaid debt is a
continuous course of conduct for the purposes of DOHA adjudications. See, ISCR
Case No. 10-11083 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2012). Applicant has paid all but one debt.
Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) partially applies.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. Applicant listed
information concerning unemployment on three different occasions and that she was
divorced. She also provided financial support for her mother. The majority of the
accounts were medical. She did not initially produce documentary evidence when she
answered the SOR, but in Response to the FORM provided evidence that nearly all
the debts have been paid or settled. The exception is the largest debt, the hospital
emergency bill for $14,809, Applicant states that she contacted the creditor and made
payment arrangements in 2014, but she was unable to finish paying the debt and the
collection company wants the payment be paid in full. In response to the FORM,
Applicant presented new information concerning update on the status of her debts.
5
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) partially applies. Applicant has paid all the debt
listed in the SOR. She initiated a payment arrangement for the hospital bill at 1.a, but
could not continue. The collection company wanted the entire amount. She did not
present evidence that she received financial counseling. AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem) does not apply.  Consequently, I
find that there are clear indications that her financial problems are being resolved and
are under control. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position
of trust  must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden
of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a public trust position. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person
factors. Applicant is 48 years old. She has worked for her current employer since 2013.
She has been unemployed and is divorced. She has had many temporary jobs and
supported her mother. She contacted her creditors and made payment arrangements.
She has shown a track record with nearly all the SOR debts. She acted responsibly.
She has  taken sufficient steps to mitigate the security concerns under the financial
considerations guideline.
 Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n: For Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a position of public trust.
Eligibility for  a position of public trust is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
