 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-04113 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Catie E. Young, Esq. 
 
 
October 23, 2015 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Drug Involvement and Criminal Conduct security 
concerns that arose out of his marijuana use and purchases from 2005 and 2010, and 
his marijuana-related infraction in 2011. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 5, 2013, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 30, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. The action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 15, 2015, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 16, 2015. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on July 21, 2015, 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on August 19, 2015. The Government 
offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, and Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without 
objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The record was left open for the receipt 
of additional documentation. On September 9, 2015, Applicant presented three 
additional exhibits, marked AE G through I. Department Counsel had no objections and 
AE G through I were admitted. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 27, 
2015.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
At the hearing on August 19, 2015, SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a were amended in order 
to conform to the evidence, pursuant to Directive ¶ E3.1.17. (Tr. 60-61.) The allegations, 
as amended, read: 
 
1.a. You were issued a citation for Possession of THC by the [state] 
Highway Patrol in approximately January or February of 2011. 
 
2.a. That information set forth under paragraph 1, above. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old government contractor. He has worked for his 
employer for the past five years. He graduated with a bachelor’s degree in 2013. He is 
single and has no children. (GE 1; AE F.) 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance under the 
guidelines for Drug Involvement and Criminal Conduct because he used and purchased 
marijuana. Additional concerns resulted from Applicant’s marijuana-related charge in 
2011. All of these facts raise questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified information. Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d. 
He denied SOR allegations 1.a, 1.e, and 2.a. (Answer.) 
  
 Applicant used marijuana from the ages of 19 to 24 (May 2005 to February 
2010). Initially, he used it two to three times per week with friends. His use gradually 
decreased to once or twice per month. He estimated that he purchased marijuana 
twenty times during that period. He also applied for and received a medical marijuana 
user’s card for 2007 to 2009, which allowed him to purchase marijuana under his state’s 
laws to treat his allergies. However, he let his marijuana card lapse in 2009 because he 
was able to access marijuana without buying it at dispensaries. Applicant described this 
five-year period of his life as his “toughest years,” where he attempted to find his way. 
He attended several different colleges and had a hard time adjusting from high school to 
college. (AE F; Tr. 20-25.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s last use of marijuana was in February 2010. He was in college at that 
time and decided to seek an internship with a government contractor. He knew he 
would be subject to random drug tests, so he ceased marijuana use. He was hired for 
the internship in September 2010. Despite ceasing marijuana use in 2010, he 
maintained friendships with marijuana users at his college. (GE 1; Tr. 24-25, 50-53.) 
 
 In January or February 2011, Applicant was issued a citation for possession of 
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) by his state highway patrol. He was pulled over for 
speeding and the officer detected the smell of marijuana in the vehicle. A small amount 
of marijuana was detected in a search of the vehicle. Applicant testified that he was 
stopped for speeding shortly after dropping off a friend nearby. His friend had used 
marijuana in his car and unintentionally dropped some of it in the car before exiting. 
Applicant was not aware of the marijuana until it was discovered by the officer. 
Applicant was upset with his friend after this incident and made it known that he no 
longer wished to be involved with marijuana. Applicant has distanced himself from that 
marijuana-using friend, although he does not think that friend still uses marijuana. No 
one used marijuana in Applicant’s vehicle after this incident. He satisfied the fine for this 
infraction. (GE 1; Tr. 25-31, 35-44, 57.) 
 
  On June 5, 2013, Applicant completed an e-QIP in connection with his position 
with a government contractor. The e-QIP asked questions in “Section 23 –Illegal Use of 
Drugs or Drug Activity,” including: “In the last seven (7) years, have you illegally used 
any drugs or controlled substances?” In this section, Applicant voluntarily disclosed his 
marijuana use, purchases, and his citation for possession of THC on his e-QIP. He 
indicated that he did not intend to use marijuana in the future and that “I was younger 
and in college but that’s all behind me.” (GE 1.) 
 
 Applicant has signed a statement of intent to never use illegal drugs again. He 
has graduated from college and is now in a professional environment. He testified he 
does not attend parties where drugs are used and would leave any situation if he ever 
discovered drugs were present. A “hair 5-drug panel” conducted September 1, 2015, 
showed that Applicant tested negative for amphetamines, cocaine/metabolites, opiates, 
phencyclidine, and THC. (AE A; AE F; AE G; Tr. 54, 57.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by those who know him, as verified by a manager and 
a friend that wrote letters of support on his behalf. They consider Applicant to be honest 
and trustworthy, despite his past marijuana use. He is dedicated to his work, and has an 
excellent work ethic. (AE B; AE H; AE I.) Applicant has received a number of awards 
and certificates for his work. (AE E.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
5 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e). Applicant used marijuana from at least 
2005 to 2010 with varying frequency. He purchased it illegally and from marijuana 
dispensaries. His association with drug users led to his drug-related citation  for 
possession of THC. The facts established through the Government’s evidence and 
through Applicant’s admissions raise security concerns under all of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant has worked hard to excel in his career, as detailed by his manager. He 
has not used marijuana since 2010. While he was cited for THC possession in 2011, he 
was not using marijuana at that time. Since his last marijuana use over five years ago, 
Applicant has matured. He has graduated from college and owns a house. He is now in 
a professional environment and does not attend parties where drugs are used. He no 
longer associates with current drug users and has distanced himself from the friend that 
left the marijuana in his vehicle in 2011. He is unlikely to use marijuana or even be in 
the same location as marijuana users in the future. The above mitigating conditions fully 
apply. 
 
 
6 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant admitted he pled guilty to the citation for possession of TCH in 2011. 
He paid the resulting fine. He also illegally purchased and used marijuana regularly from 
2005 to 2010. The above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant was cited once for possession of marijuana. He further admitted to 
using marijuana for a five-year period in violation of federal laws. However, Applicant 
presented evidence of rehabilitation. He has been fully forthright with the government 
concerning his marijuana use. He has matured, from a young student to that of a trusted 
professional, since his last marijuana use. He demonstrated sincere remorse for his 
past poor judgment in using marijuana. I find that such criminal behavior is unlikely to 
recur. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) were established. 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was only 19 years 
old at the time he first used marijuana. His marijuana use continued for five years as 
Applicant went through difficult experiences while in college. Eventually, he matured 
and by the age of 24, he had ceased using marijuana. He has further shown maturity by 
distancing himself from his former marijuana-using friends. Applicant is highly respected 
by those who know him. He has been honest about his marijuana use with the 
Government. There is little potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress in this 
instance. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Drug Involvement and Criminal Conduct security 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
