 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05077 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 5, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and C (foreign preference). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 23, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 24, 
2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on July 2, 2015, scheduling the hearing for July 23, 2015. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 31, 2015.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about the Kingdom of Morocco. The request was not admitted in 
evidence but was included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant did not 
object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in HE I. Of note is 
that Morocco is a constitutional monarchy with a bicameral parliament and independent 
judiciary. The potential for terrorist violence against U.S. interests and citizens exists in 
Morocco. Moroccan nationals have been implicated in terrorism abroad and at home. 
Morocco also continues to have human rights problems.  
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary evidence. The 
record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted 
documents that were marked collectively as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and admitted 
without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has a bachelor’s 
degree. He married in 2006 and divorced in 2009. He married again in 2010. He has a 
three-year-old child, and his wife recently gave birth to their second child.1 
  
 Applicant was born in Morocco to Moroccan parents. He attended college and 
earned his degree in Morocco. He came to the United States in 1999, and he became a 
U.S. citizen in 2005. His wife is a Moroccan citizen living in the United States as a 
permanent resident.2 
 
 Applicant’s mother is deceased. He has a large number of half-siblings. His 
father, stepmother, parents-in-law, half-siblings, and other extended family members 
are citizens and residents of Morocco. There is no indication that any of his family 
members have any direct ties to the Moroccan government or to any terrorist 
organization.3 
 
 From 2007 to 2010, Applicant worked overseas under combat conditions as a 
linguist for defense contractors. Applicant submitted commendatory material and letters 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23-26, 40, 47; GE 1, 3. 
 
2 Tr. at 23-26, 40; GE 1, 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 33-34, 53-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3. 
 
3 
 
from U.S. military and civilian personnel, who praised his character, abilities, and 
service to the mission.4 One senior U.S. official wrote: 
 
[Applicant’s] contributions are too numerous to mention. Because of his 
mastery of the both Arabic and English languages as well as his complete 
understanding of the Arab culture, he is in high demand by many 
members of the Task Force to interpret for them. This equates into a very 
busy schedule for [Applicant] that has kept him engaged at odd hours and 
at perilous places, one of the hazards of the job. Despite the danger 
[Applicant] has never wavered or shied away from a single mission.5 
 
 Applicant met and married his wife in Morocco in 2010. She was unable to 
immigrate to the United States at that time, so he remained in Morocco. He renewed his 
Moroccan passport in 2010, so that he could remain in Morocco with his wife. Their 
older child was born in Morocco in 2011. Applicant opened a bank account in Morocco 
using his U.S. passport. He transferred money that he had earned during his overseas 
assignment to the account. He purchased an apartment in Morocco in 2010 for the 
equivalent of about $50,000 in U.S. currency. He lived in the apartment with his wife 
and child while he was in Morocco. He had about $40,000 in the bank account after the 
apartment purchase.6 
 
 Applicant returned to the United States in 2012. He has not returned to Morocco 
since he left in 2012. His wife continued to live in the apartment with their child until she 
immigrated to the United States in 2014. Their youngest child was born in the United 
States. His wife plans to apply for U.S. citizenship as soon as she is eligible.7 
 
 Applicant surrendered his Moroccan passport to his facility security officer (FSO) 
in May 2014. He always traveled on his U.S. passport and only used the Moroccan 
passport for identification purposes. The passport expired in August 2015, and he does 
not intend to renew it. He is willing to renounce his Moroccan citizenship.8  
 
 Applicant intends to sell his Moroccan apartment. He owns a townhouse in the 
United States. He plans to sell the townhouse and the Moroccan apartment and use the 
proceeds to buy a house in the United States. His wife brought about $9,000 with her 
when she came to the United States. He is not concerned about the remaining money in 
the Moroccan bank because he opened the account as a U.S. citizen and does not 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 23-24, 36-38; GE 1, 3. 
 
5 AE A. 
 
6 Tr. at 24-25, 29-33, 41-43, 51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3. 
 
7 Tr. at 23, 26-29, 39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3. 
 
8 Tr. at 27-33, 45-47 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
have an immediate need for the money. He plans to take most of the money the next 
time he visits Morocco and transfer it to a U.S. financial institution.9 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that his loyalty is to the United States. He is 
appreciative of the opportunities the United States has given him and that his children 
can grow up in the United States as U.S. citizens. None of his family in Morocco knows 
that he served with the U.S. forces overseas for three years. He stated that he would 
immediately report to U.S. authorities any attempt to use his family or property in 
Morocco against him.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 42-45, 54; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
10 Tr. at 27, 34, 48, 52-56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
5 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 Applicant possessed a Moroccan passport while a U.S. citizen. He was able to 
stay and live in Morocco because of his Moroccan citizenship. AG ¶ 10(a) is applicable. 
The renewal of his Moroccan passport while a U.S. citizen could raise concerns under 
AG ¶ 10(b), as an action to obtain recognition of his Moroccan citizenship.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant’s foreign property interests were based on 
his Moroccan citizenship. That information raises the general concern under AG ¶ 9. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
 
6 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant exercised his Moroccan citizenship by obtaining a Moroccan passport 
while a U.S. citizen. Therefore, his dual citizenship is not based solely on his parents’ 
citizenship or birth in a foreign country. AG ¶ 11(a) is not applicable. He surrendered the 
passport to his FSO. The passport expired in August 2015, and he does not intend to 
renew it. He is willing to renounce his Moroccan citizenship. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e) are 
applicable. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 
7 
 
Applicant’s father, stepmother, parents-in-law, half-siblings, and other extended 
family members are citizens and residents of Morocco. His wife is a Moroccan citizen 
living in the United States as a permanent resident. The potential for terrorist violence 
against U.S. interests and citizens exists in Morocco. Moroccan nationals have been 
implicated in terrorism abroad and at home. Morocco also continues to have human 
rights problems.  
 
 Applicant’s foreign relatives create a potential conflict of interest and a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) are applicable.  
 
 Applicant’s Moroccan apartment and bank account were alleged under Guideline 
C, not Guideline B. AG ¶ 7(e) would have been applicable had the foreign property 
been alleged under Guideline B. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Morocco. Guideline B is not limited 
to countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, 
organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United States.11  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
8 
 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant’s wife and children are in the United Sates. His children are U.S. 
citizens and his wife is a permanent resident waiting to apply for U.S. citizenship. 
Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous conditions 
in support of the national defense. He credibly testified that he would report to security 
officials any attempt to use his family members against him. The Appeal Board has 
stated that such testimony, standing alone, is of limited value, unless there is record 
evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner in the past in comparable 
circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous track record of complying with 
security regulations and procedures in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which he made a significant contribution to the national security.12 In 
ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the Appeal Board discussed 
this issue: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
 
I find, because of Applicant’s relationships and loyalties in America, that he can 
be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG 
¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
9 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen 
who has worked overseas under dangerous conditions in support of the national 
defense. He credibly testified that he would report any attempt to use his family 
members to coerce him to reveal classified information. The Appeal Board has held that 
“generally, an applicant’s statements, by themselves, as to what he would do in the face 
of threats by a foreign government or entity are entitled to little weight. On the other 
hand, an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the United States is very 
important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”13 
The complicated state of affairs in Morocco places a significant burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his foreign family members do not pose an unacceptable 
security risk. He has met that burden.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
10 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.k:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
