 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05401 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations and criminal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 14, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On April 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 Item 4 (e-QIP, dated February 14, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and J (Criminal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was 
unable to make an affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a notarized statement, inadvertently dated April 29, 2014,2 Applicant responded 
to the SOR allegations and elected to have his case decided on the written record in 
lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) 
was mailed to Applicant on June 23, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a 
period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished 
a copy of the Directive as well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant 
received the FORM on June 29, 2015. A response was due by July 29, 2015. On 
September 1, 2015, an attorney wrote that he is assisting Applicant in disputing, 
referred to as auditing and verifying, unspecified accounts listed by the credit reporting 
agencies. It was Applicant’s position that the information in his credit reports was 
“inaccurate, invalid, and/or unverifiable.” On September 4, 2015, Applicant responded to 
the FORM and submitted two documents which were accepted without objection and 
marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B. The case was assigned to me on October 
5, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted five of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a., 1.c., and 1.e. through 1.g.), as 
well as the sole allegation pertaining to criminal conduct (¶ 2.a.). Applicant’s admissions 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as an aircraft mechanic with his current employer since January 2013.3 A June 
2003 high school graduate, Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army in September 2003, and 
he remained on active duty until he was honorably discharged in March 2013.4 While he 
noted in his e-QIP5 and discussed an overseas assignment to Korea (June 2006 until 
June 2007) and a deployment to Iraq (January 2005 until December 2005) with an 
                                                          
2
 It should be noted that the affidavit-form upon which Applicant was to choose either a hearing or a decision 
based upon the administrative record, and list his contact information, and which the notary public was to sign, was a 
boilerplate preprinted form with “2014” furnished by the DOD CAF. Department Counsel confirmed the error. 
 
3
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 11. 
 
4
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 12-16. 
 
5
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 13-15. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM),6 Applicant did not 
submit any military documentation regarding specific deployments he was on or any 
awards and decorations he might have earned. He was granted a secret security 
clearance in 2004.7 Applicant was married in June 2006 and divorced in February 
2008.8 He has three children (born in 2009, 2011, and 2012) from other relationships.9 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 It is unclear when Applicant first experienced the financial difficulties that led to 
the point where his accounts were not timely addressed by him to prevent them from 
becoming delinquent, placed for collection, or charged off. A review of his February 
2014 credit report reveals a number of accounts that became delinquent between 2010 
and 2012.10 Applicant generally attributed his alleged financial problems to a variety of 
factors: he was unaware of any credit issues; such problems were due to his previous 
marriage; mistakes he made when he was younger; and his ignorance.11 Applicant 
denied having any delinquent accounts when he completed his e-QIP in February 2014. 
When he was initially questioned about his delinquent accounts in March 2014, 
Applicant claimed to be aware of some of the accounts and unaware that other 
accounts were delinquent. He said that if he is responsible for any unpaid balances, he 
would pay the accounts in full.12  
 
 Following what appears to be 18 months of inaction, Applicant’s stated intentions 
eventually changed. There is no evidence that he engaged in any negotiations with his 
creditors in an effort to resolve his delinquent accounts. Instead, as noted above, 
Applicant chose to dispute unspecified accounts with the sweeping condemnation that 
the information in his credit reports was “inaccurate, invalid, and/or unverifiable.” He 
offered no documentation to indicate which accounts he was disputing or why he was 
disputing them. He failed to explain which accounts were caused by his previous 
marriage, or how that relationship resulted in delinquencies; and what mistakes he 
made when he was younger, and how those mistakes affected certain accounts. 
Applicant failed to offer specific information as to why he was unable to routinely make 
his monthly payments or if he simply chose not to honor certain debts. 
 
The SOR identified nine purportedly continuing delinquent accounts, totaling 
approximately $35,064, which had been placed for collection or charged off. Those 
                                                          
6
 Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview, dated March 14, 2014), 1-2. 
 
7
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 27-28. Department Counsel confirmed that Applicant was granted his security 
clearance in 2004. See FORM, at 3. 
 
8
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 18-19. 
 
9
 Item 6, supra note 6, at 4. 
 
10
 Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated February 27, 2014).  
 
11
 Item 3 (Answer to the SOR, dated April 29, 2015), at 3. 
 
12
 Item 6, supra note 6, at 5. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
debts and their respective current status, according to his February 2014 credit report 
and a September 29, 2014 credit report,13 Applicant’s comments to the investigator from 
OPM, and his Answer to the SOR, are described as follows:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a. – an individual installment loan with a high credit of $7,374 (used to 
pay for Applicant’s vacation) and a past-due balance of $2,942 that was placed for 
collection and charged off in September 2013;14 SOR ¶ 1.b. – an unspecified type of 
bank account that was placed for collection in June 2013 with an unpaid balance of 
$648;15 SOR ¶ 1.c. – an individual bank credit card account with a credit limit of $300 
that was placed for collection with an unpaid balance of $647 and charged off and later 
sold to another collection agent;16 SOR ¶ 1.d. – an Internet and cable television account 
with an unpaid balance of $636 that was placed for collection in October 2010;17 SOR ¶ 
1.e. – a wireless telephone account with an unpaid balance of $587 that was placed for 
collection in 2014;18 SOR ¶ 1.f. – an individual bank government travel credit card 
account with a credit limit of $4,000 that was placed for collection with past-due balance 
of $535 and charged off in May 2013;19 SOR ¶ 1.g. – an Internet, wireless telephone, 
and cable television account with an unpaid balance of $222 that was placed for 
collection in July 2012;20 SOR ¶ 1.h. – an unspecified medical account with an unpaid 
balance of $33 that was placed for collection February 2013;21 and SOR ¶ 1.i. – an 
individual unsecured credit union loan (purportedly in his ex-wife’s name) with a high 
credit of $25,515 that was placed for collection and charged off in May 2012 in the 
amount of $25,743, and then sold to another collection agent.22 None of the above-
listed accounts have been resolved. 
 
Applicant offered no evidence that he had ever received any financial counseling 
on such issues as debt consolidation, budgeting, or repayment plans. Furthermore, it is 
not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because he did not submit a 
personal financial statement to indicate his net monthly income, his monthly household 
or debt expenses, or whether or not he has any funds remaining at the end of each 
month for discretionary use or savings. Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that his 
financial problems are now under control. 
                                                          
13
 Item 7 (Equifax Credit Report, dated September 29, 2014). 
 
14
 Item 5, supra note 10, at 5; Item 7, supra note 13, at 1; Item 6, supra note 6, at 4-5. 
 
15
 Item 5, supra note 10, at 11; Item 7, supra note 13, at 2; Item 6, supra note 6, at 5. 
 
16
 Item 5, supra note 10, at 5; Item 7, supra note 13, at 2. 
 
17
 Item 5, supra note 10, at 11; Item 7, supra note 13, at 2. 
 
18
 Item 7, supra note 13, at 2. 
 
19
 Item 5, supra note 10, at 5; Item 7, supra note 13, at 2; Item 6, supra note 6, at 5. 
 
20
 Item 5, supra note 10, at 11; Item 7, supra note 13, at 2. 
 
21
 Item 5, supra note 10, at 11; Item 7, supra note 13, at 2. 
 
22
 Item 5, supra note 10, at 7; Item 7, supra note 13, at 2; Item 6, supra note 6, at 5. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 On January 6, 2013, while driving his motor vehicle, Applicant was stopped by 
the police authorities and cited for speeding, driver’s license to be exhibited, and no 
insurance. As a result of Applicant’s failure to appear in court on the appointed date, his 
operator’s license was cancelled and he was fined $1,061.50.23 When he completed his 
e-QIP in February 2014, Applicant denied having been issued any summons, citation, or 
ticket to appear in court where the fine was more than $300.24 During a June 5, 2014 
continuation of his OPM interview, he claimed to have no knowledge of the incident or 
aftermath of the incident.25 On September 4, 2015, Applicant made two payments to the 
court in the amounts of $104 each.26 He failed to explain what caused him to change his 
position regarding the incident and if those payments resolved the criminal counts or if 
they were merely partial payments. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”27 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”28   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
                                                          
23
 Item 3, supra note 11, at 2. 
 
24
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 25. It should be noted that the SOR does not allege that Applicant deliberately 
falsified his response on his e-QIP. 
 
25
 Item 6, supra note 6, at 7. The SOR does not allege a deliberate falsification pertaining to the OPM 
statement. 
 
26
 AE A (Receipt, dated September 4, 2015); AE B (Receipt, dated September 4, 2015). 
 
27
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
28
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
6 
                                      
 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”29 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.30  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”31 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”32 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
29
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
30
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
31
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
32
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant has had a long-standing problem with his finances which 
started as early as 2010. It is unclear if he found himself with insufficient funds to 
continue making his routine monthly payments or simply chose not to do so. Various 
accounts became delinquent, and were placed for collection, and charged off. AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”33 In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply if “the individual has a reasonable 
                                                          
33
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
8 
                                      
 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies. 
The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties since 
about 2010 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so 
infrequent.” Applicant attributed his financial problems to a variety of reasons, but 
without any explanation as to the specifics, it is difficult to assess the significance they 
had on his overall financial situation. He offered no documentary evidence of a good-
faith effort to resolve any of his delinquent debts. He essentially ignored them and 
claimed he was unaware of them or their status. As noted above, after the passage of 
substantial time, he seemingly continues to do so. Instead of engaging the creditors in 
an effort to resolve the delinquencies, Applicant has chosen to simply dispute his 
accounts.  
 
There is no evidence to indicate that Applicant ever received financial 
counseling. It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be, or if he has any 
funds remaining at the end of each month for discretionary use or savings. There is no 
evidence to reflect that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. Applicant has 
not acted responsibly by failing to address his delinquent accounts and by making little, 
if any, efforts of working with his creditors.34 Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances confronting him cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment.35 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
34
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
35
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), if there is an “allegation of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted,” security concerns may be raised. Applicant’s initial criminal conduct consists 
of three violations (speeding, driver’s license to be exhibited, and no insurance) arising 
out of one incident for which he was cited in January 2013. The second criminal conduct 
consists of his failure to appear in court and his failure to timely pay fines totaling 
$1,061.50. AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) have been established.  
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” Also, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply when “there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of 
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement.”  
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) do not apply. The 2013 initial criminal incident and the 
subsequent failure to appear in court or timely pay the assessed fine occurred nearly 
three years ago. Applicant denied the incident both in the e-QIP and during the OPM 
interview. He essentially ignored the law and the court, first by taking the actions that 
resulted in the citation, and then by ignoring the order to appear in court to answer the 
charges. Finally, three months before the expiration of the third year of inaction, 
Applicant made two payments to the court. However, as noted above, he failed to 
explain if those payments resolved the criminal counts or if they were merely partial 
payments. 
 
Applicant failed to address the criminal conduct issue by not explaining how or 
why the incident occurred, or if it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur. His continued silence also ignores any potential evidence of successful 
rehabilitation such as stated remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, 
good employment record, or constructive community involvement. In the absence of 
such evidence, while I believe that a person should not be held forever accountable for 
misconduct from the past, I am unable to conclude that Applicant’s criminal conduct is 
unlikely to recur, and that it does not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
10 
                                      
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.36   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has been 
with the same employer since February 2012. He served honorably in the U.S. Army 
from September 2003 until March 2013. 
 
Applicant’s long-standing failure to address or repay his creditors since 2010, 
even in the smallest amounts, or to arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise 
concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. His history is one of denial of 
any of the facts pertaining to his financial issues and his criminal conduct. He ignored 
his creditors for several years, and only now is he disputing his delinquent accounts 
without offering explanations for his inaction or follow-up dispute actions. Likewise, he 
denied and ignored his criminal conduct, and only recently appears to have addressed 
them. Applicant’s actions under the circumstances cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Considering the absence of confirmed debt 
resolution and elimination efforts, Applicant’s financial issues are likely to remain. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:37 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
                                                          
36
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
37
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an essentially negative track record of debt 
reduction and elimination efforts, generally ignoring his delinquent debts and eventually 
disputing them without specific reasons. Overall, the evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
from his financial considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
