 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01373 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He failed to file his federal 
income tax returns for tax years 2007, 2008, 2010, and 2011 in a timely manner. All the 
returns are now filed, and he has mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on May 12, 2014, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing financial considerations 
security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On June 6, 2014, 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On April 16, 2015, I was 
assigned the case. On April 29, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the hearing convened on May 8, 2015. 
 
At the hearing, Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits 
A through P were admitted without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing. The 
record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. Three 
documents, Ex. Q – S, were admitted without objection. On May 18, 2015, DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he acknowledged he had not filed federal 
income tax returns for tax years 2007, 2008, 2010, and 2011. In Applicant’s Response 
to the SOR, he stated in April 2013, he filed the federal tax returns for the years in 
question. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old security officer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since January 2013 and seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Tr. 41) From 
August 1986 through September 1991, he honorably served on active duty in the U.S. 
Air Force. (Ex. 1, Ex. M) From August 1990 through February 1991, he served in 
support of Operation Desert Shield/Storm. (Ex. M) He separated as an airman first class 
(E-3). (Ex. A, G, L, M, Tr. 25)  
 
Friends, coworkers, and supervisors state Applicant is highly professional, 
trustworthy, courteous, honest, reliable, dedicated, capable, dependable, hardworking, 
and a “man of deep integrity and honesty.” (Ex. H, P) Applicant displays a positive 
attitude, volunteers for extra duties, is willing and able to help coworkers, and has gone 
above and beyond what was expected of him. (Ex. P)  
 
In January 2013, when Applicant completed his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), he indicated he had not filed his 2007, 2008, 2010, 
and 2011 federal income tax returns. (Ex. 1) He indicated he was working with a tax 
service to file the returns.  
 
From February 2012 until January 2013, Applicant was unemployed. (Ex. 1, Tr. 
39) From February 2010 through February 2012, he was working for a federal 
contractor and living in Kosovo. (Ex. 1, 2, C) He received a certificate of appreciation for 
his work. (Ex. G) From November 2008 through February 2010, he was unemployed 
and living with his parents in the United States. (Ex. 2, Tr. 43) From November 2007 
through November 2008, he resided in Kosovo working for a federal contractor. (Ex. 1, 
2) During this period, he was employee of the month and also received a certificate of 
appreciation for his duty performance. (Ex. N) From November 2005 through November 
 
3 
2007, he was unemployed and living in the United States. (Tr. 35) During his 
unemployment, he never received unemployment compensation. (Tr. 35)  
 
Applicant was not required to file a federal tax return for tax year 2007. For tax 
year 2007, the federal tax code required all single individuals under the age of 65 with a 
gross income of $8,750 or more were required to file a federal tax return. (Ex. 4) His 
adjusted gross income (AGI) for 2007 was $5,045. (Item E) Since his income was less 
than the filing threshold, his only reason to file would be to claim a refund of any 
amounts withheld from his salary. (Tr. 36) For 2007, approximately $500 had been 
withheld from his salary. (Ex. E)  
 
For tax year 2008, Applicant’s $58,000 salary was earned overseas and, as 
such, was excluded under the foreign earned income exclusion (IRS Form 2555). 
Because of the exclusion, he had no taxable income and owed no federal tax. For tax 
year 2009, he was unemployed the entire year and owed no taxes.  
 
For tax year 2010, Applicant’s salary was approximately $31,000 earned 
overseas, which was again excluded from federal taxation by the foreign earned income 
exclusion. He therefore had no taxable income and owed no federal tax. For tax year 
2011, his salary was approximately $60,000, again excluded under the foreign earned 
income exclusion. (Ex. S) For tax year 2012, his salary was approximately $20,000, of 
which approximately half was excluded under the foreign earned income tax exclusion. 
His taxable income was approximately $1,000 on which he owed approximately $142. 
On April 13, 2013, he paid his federal tax. (Ex. 3, R) For tax year 2013, he was issued a 
$1,317 federal tax refund. (Ex. 3, C, Tr. 45) For tax year 2014, he received a $1,082 
federal tax refund. (Ex. I, Tr. 46) 
 
In 2007, while residing overseas, Applicant’s coworkers told him he did not make 
enough money to have to file a federal tax return. (Tr. 27) Relying on this advice, he did 
not file his 2007, 2008, 2010, and 2012 federal returns. (Tr. 27) A more correct 
interpretation of the IRS tax code was that his foreign earned income was excluded 
from taxation, which is different than not having to file. In 2012, when he learned the 
advice he received was incorrect, he hired a tax company specializing in overseas 
expatriate taxes. (Tr. 27) 
 
Applicant has now filed all of his federal tax returns, owes no past-due tax, and 
intends to file all future returns in a timely manner. (Tr. 30)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. 
Absent substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage their finances to meet their financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant failed to file his federal income tax return for four tax years. 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same,” apply.  
 
 Three financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant failed to file his federal income tax returns for four tax years. He was 
working overseas and received incorrect advice that he was not required to file returns 
because his income was exempt from taxation. Even though he owed no tax, he still 
had a duty to file his returns. His foreign earned income was excluded under the foreign 
earned income exclusion (IRS Form 2555). When he discovered he was required to file 
returns even though his income was excluded, he did so.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(a) applies. Applicant has filed returns 
for the tax years listed in the SOR and all other tax years. His non filing occurred under 
circumstance unlikely to recur. When overseas, he relied on the incorrect advice of 
 
6 
other U.S. citizens working overseas. When he learned the advice was incorrect, he 
filed the returns. It is unlikely he will fail to file his tax returns in the future now that he 
knows what is required when working overseas. His actions do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) applies because the matter has 
been resolved. He has filed his returns and resolved the matter. He owed no Federal 
tax after filing his returns and received federal income tax refunds for tax years 2013 
and 2014. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) applies because he has filed his 
returns. However, there was no effort to repay overdue creditors because no federal tax 
was owed.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant was working overseas and relied on advice from others working 
overseas that he was not required to file tax returns. He was required to file returns 
even though all of his foreign earned income qualified for an exclusion from federal 
income tax. When he learned of the incorrect information, he filed his federal returns. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1)) In this case, there was never a tax debt only a duty to file, which he failed to do 
until he realized he had to file. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions 
or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his 
financial considerations.  
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
