Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-3, hearing exhibit (HE I), and Applicant exhibits1
(AE) A-C. AE C was timely received post-hearing. The record in this case closed on 29 September 2015, the
day Department Counsel stated no objection to AE C.
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006. 
1
                                                        
    
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14–01262
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Philip John Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I grant Applicant’s clearance.1
On 11 September 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, Personal
Conduct.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the Defense2
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 18 July 2015
and I convened a hearing 9 September 2015. DOHA received the transcript 17
September 2015.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. She is a 42-year-old secretary employed
by a defense contractor since March 2013. She has been employed continuously in
similar jobs since May 2000, except for a period of unemployment from July 2008 to
October 2009. She seeks to retain the clearance she was issued in June 2010 (GE 1).
From March 2009 to November 2013, Applicant lived with her boyfriend, a
convicted drug dealer, who ostensibly continued to associate with drug dealers after his
release from prison (SOR 1.a). He had an extensive criminal record between March
1986 and September 1992 (GE 3), but no further criminal activity after his release from
prison. Applicant knew her boyfriend had a criminal record (Tr. 29), but also believed he
was granted early release from parole (Tr. 34). He moved out of Applicant’s house in
November 2013 because she caught him cheating on her (Tr. 33). She has had no
contact with him since then.
Applicant is close to her brother who also has a criminal record, and was recently
released from prison (SOR 1.b). He also received early release from parole (Tr. 28). He
has a job, is taking care of his family, and is engaged to be married.
Applicant’s co-worker considers her honest and trustworthy (Tr. 23-25), as do her
friends and character references (AE A-C). However, only her co-worker (who knew
about her boyfriend’s criminal record) (Tr. 25), and her best friend (AE C) appear to be
aware of the issues raised in the SOR.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶16 (g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.4
¶ 17(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or occurs under circumstances that5
do not cast doubt upon the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
3
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E, but
Applicant mitigated the security concerns. Applicant lived with her boyfriend for over
four years and has regular contact with her brother.  The disqualifying condition is broad4
enough to contemplate association with individuals who are currently involved in
criminal activity and individuals whose involvement in criminal activity has ceased.
In Applicant’s case, her cohabitation with her boyfriend began 17 years after his
last criminal involvement. Moreover, he had been granted early release from his parole.
Finally, their relationship ended nearly two years ago. Under any reasonable reading of
the disqualifying condition, her association with her former boyfriend has ceased. In
similar fashion, while her brother’s release from prison is more recent, he, too, was
granted early release from parole. And by all appearances, he has put his criminal
activity behind him. Consequently, Applicant’s association with her former boyfriend
meets the first prong of the only applicable mitigating condition, while her association
with her brother falls within the second prong.  Finally, Applicant’s co-worker, friends,5
and character references consider her honest and trustworthy. Coupled with the fact
that she has held a clearance since June 2010 without apparent incident, these
references support continuation of her clearance. The whole-person factors require no
other result, and indeed support this result. I resolve Guideline E for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-b:                                For Applicant
4
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted. 
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
