1
   
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-02798
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esquire  
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
After reviewing of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant presented
sufficient information to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline M
and Guideline E.  Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86) on February 5, 2013. The
Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated
August 21, 2014, alleging security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and
Guideline M (Use of Information Technology Systems). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
At the start of the hearing, Department Counsel withdrew allegations 2.e and 2. f.1
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 16, 2014, and requested a
hearing before an administrative judge. DOD issued a notice of hearing on July 21,
2015, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 21, 2015. The Government
submitted three exhibits marked as GE 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted three exhibits (AX A through C).
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 31, 2015.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations under both
Guideline M and Guideline E with explanations.   After  reviewing the entire record, I1
make the following  findings of fact. 
Applicant is 41 years old. He received his undergraduate degree in accounting,
and earned a graduate degree in finance. Applicant is married and has two children. He
served in the Army National Guard from 1998 until 2007, receiving an honorable
discharge. He has held a security clearance since 1998. He has been with his current
employer since September 2013. (Tr. 55) He serves as a financial management analyst.
In mid-2012, Applicant applied for positions through USAJobs.gov while he was
still employed. The new positions required a top secret (TS) clearance. He interviewed
for a  position with another government contractor. He was offered a job in
approximately January 2013. (Tr. 25)  Applicant provided an email that verified the
tentative offer. (Attachment to Answer to SOR) 
Applicant’s employer learned about the potential employment. (Tr. 25)
Applicant’s boss met with him a day or so later and told him that “he was being fired.”
(Tr. 27) Applicant stated that  the reason for the termination was accepting another
position. (Tr. 27) In reality, Applicant received a tentative offer letter, and claimed he
had not accepted the position due to the necessary security investigation, which was
pending.  He confided that information to his supervisor. Applicant provided an email
that noted the offer was tentative,  and advising him to wait for a firm offer and firm
salary. Also, at the time, due to possible freezes of jobs, he was not sure that the
position would be filled.
Applicant received a letter from his former employer, dated March 8, 2013,
stating that the company believed it was best for Applicant and the company to part
ways. Two reasons were noted in the letter. The employer noted that Applicant had
accepted a position with another company and that plans had been made to reduce the
number of team leads on the contract. March 8, 2013 was Applicant’s last day. (GX 2)
Just a few days before this incident, Applicant was awarded a cash bonus for his
performance at the job. Now he found himself unemployed.
At the time of his dismissal, Applicant had a company laptop in his possession.
He and his wife were attending a weekend wedding out-of-town and he packed the
3
laptop with luggage that his wife took with her.  He was to join her at the wedding and
he stated that they were then taking an extended vacation. (Tr. 27) He changed his day
of departure so that he could attend company training. However, after the training, he
was told that he was being terminated.
The day of the dismissal, Applicant told the company that he had company
supplies in separate places. The first place was at the client site, and the second place
was at home. (Answer to SOR) Applicant stated in his answer that he did not want to tell
the company that the laptop was out-of-state with his wife. (Answer to SOR) At that
point he was concerned about promptly returning it.
On March 14, 2013, Applicant received a letter from legal counsel for his former
employer. The letter noted that they monitored Applicant’s laptop and knew when it was
opened and that Applicant copied files to a thumb-drive. The letter further explained that
the company knew that Applicant updated his resume. The letter accused Applicant of
lying to the company by not telling them that the laptop was with his wife on a trip.
(GX2) When Applicant returned the allegation was that the thumb-drive  was blank.
Applicant and his wife returned from the wedding, and Applicant started to clean
the laptop by removing personal files from it. (Tr. 31) He denied that he copied or
erased Government files. He testified credibly that he attempted to copy over personal
files which included his resume, bank statements, and pictures saved on the laptop. (Tr.
31) Applicant explained that there was no Government information on the laptop as
required by  non-disclosure agreements and other agreements that he signed with the
company. (Tr. 31)
At the hearing, Applicant again denied the allegation concerning copying
government files to a thumb drive. He maintained that he unsuccessfully attempted to
cover over personal files which included his resume.  He explained that the company
laptop had nothing on it that was proprietary Government information.  The company
had no validation that Applicant had copied any Government files to a thumb drive.  
When Applicant was interviewed in March 2013 by the security investigator, he
told him the reason that he was no longer employed with his former employer. The
report used the word “laid off”, but it continues to state that Applicant showed him the
termination letter. There is no evidence that Applicant lied to the investigator. (GX 3)
At the hearing, when questioned about the whereabouts of the laptop, Applicant
stated that he told the employers that the laptop was with his wife. This is inconsistent
with his statement in his answer to the SOR. He also testified that since he had just
been terminated on the spot, that he was shaken at the sudden dismissal, and  did not
make an attempt to call his wife to get the laptop sent back immediately. (Tr. 30).
Applicant testified that he believes his dismissal and the allegations against him
were the result of Applicant’s statement that he would file a complaint with the Defense
Contracting Agency. (Tr. 33) He wanted to file a complaint because he believed this
4
was unusual in that normally a contractor had to give the Government agency 30 days
notice that a particular contractor was being removed from a project.  (Tr. 33)
Applicant was adamant that he was authorized to have the company laptop and
he admits to having a thumb drive. However, he was not authorized to do any
Government work on that laptop. He made an attempt to retrieve his resume but he
could not do so. He used the laptop for business correspondence, and some reports.
There were no Government files on it and when he returned the thumb drive it was
empty. (Tr. 62) He used a Government laptop at the contracting site for such
information. (Tr. 63)
Applicant submitted three letters of recommendation, which state that he is a
dedicated role model for any company. His former colleague has known him for a
number of years and worked closely with him on government projects. Applicant is
described as honest and trustworthy. The colleague saw the termination letter and was
shocked based on Applicant’s track record. (AX C)
A subordinate of Applicant’s wrote that Applicant was his manager and that they
worked closely together on a number of projects. He stated that Applicant was a leader
and showed integrity, good judgment and dedication.  He noted that Applicant has been
a mentor to him for years. (AX A) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
5
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline M: Use of Information Technology Systems
AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information
technology systems:
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations pertaining
to information technology systems may raise security concerns about an
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication,
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of
information.
AG ¶ 40 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following: (e) unauthorized use of a
government or other information technology system; (f) introduction, removal, or
duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or media to or from any information
technology system without authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedure,
guidelines or regulations; and (g) negligence or lax security habits in handling
information technology that persist despite counseling by management.
Applicant denied copying Government files to a thumb drive with his company
laptop. He had authority to have the laptop in his possession. The Government did not
establish that Applicant copied any Government files after being terminated from his
employment. A letter from the company’s law firm, dated  March 14, 2013, summarizes
6
policies and procedures related to the use of protecting classified information. However,
not only is there no signed agreement by Applicant, there is no validation of the “copied
government files.” The letter cites to federal and state laws, but does not state how the
computer was monitored and how the company knew that Government files were
copied. The thumb drive was returned to the company. It was blank because the
attempt to copy or update his personal resume was not successful. The Government
has not established a prima facie case under Guideline M. 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and especially the following:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
7
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information:
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and,
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources; and
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the
individual to the employee as a condition of employment.
Applicant did not lie to his company about having a tentative offer of employment.
He also did not lie to the investigator about his termination because he showed him the
termination letter. The Government has not established that Applicant copied any
Government files onto a thumb drive after his was terminated. His behavior did not
violate any policies or procedures. There is no information that was unreliable or that he
had a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. The Government did not establish a
significant misuse of Government time or other time or resources. Finally, there was no
information in the record that established that he violated a commitment to his
employer.
The following AG ¶ 17 mitigating security concerns apply:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment.
The inconsistent statement about when or whether he told the company
about the location of the laptop, given the record as a whole, surrounding
his sudden termination does not negate mitigation security concerns under
Guideline E. Personal conduct has been mitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
8
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
served honorably in the U.S. military. He is married and has children. He has held a
security clearance for many years without incident. He has letters of recommendation
from several persons. He is an educated man who values his work.
Applicant was terminated by his company because he sought other employment.
He received a tentative offer of employment and told his employer. He was terminated
without any notice and had to return his laptop and other items. He was credible in his
explanations that he told the Government investigator that he was terminated. The
government did not establish that Applicant copied any Government files or that he lied
to anyone. The fact that there is an inconsistent statement about the location of the
laptop at the time of the sudden termination does not rise to a credibility concern in light
of all factors considered. 
For all these reasons, I conclude the Government has not met its burden to show
that Applicant violated Guideline M or Guideline E.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline M: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
9
Subparagraphs 2.a-d For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.e, 2.f: WITHDRAWN
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
Noreen A. Lynch
Administrative Judge
