 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02147 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
financial considerations concerns raised by his history of financial problems. He 
demonstrated neither a good-faith effort to resolve his debts nor financial rehabilitation 
or reform. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing, 
convened on June 3, 2015, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10 and 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through B, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant 
submitted AE C through F, which were also admitted without objection.3 I received the 
transcript (Tr.) on June 11, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 40, has worked as a locksmith for his employer, a federal contractor, 
since February 2010. He completed a security clearance application in February 2013, 
disclosing one Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition dismissed in 2009 and 13 derogatory 
accounts. The ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant filed five Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petitions between 1996 and 2008, all of which were dismissed. The 
investigation also revealed that Applicant is indebted to 25 creditors for approximately 
$50,700.4  
 
 Applicant admits that his financial problems began during his first marriage, 
which lasted from 1995 to 2012. He allowed his ex-wife to handle the household 
finances despite evidence of her repeated acts of financial mismanagement. According 
to Applicant, his ex-wife routinely wrote bad checks and served jail time for the offense 
in approximately 2006 and 2009. He also claims that his ex-wife opened credit accounts 
in his name without his knowledge, specifically SOR ¶¶ 1.j, 1.k, 1.m, 1.n, 1.q, 1.t, 1.u, 
1.x, 1.y, 1.aa, and 1.bb, totaling approximately $6,800. Applicant admittedly did very 
little to limit her access to their bank account.  Instead, he often gave her signed, blank 
checks and entrusted her to pay the household bills. She often misappropriated the 
money.5  
 
 In this way, Applicant and his wife accumulated significant delinquent debt. To 
deal with the debt, Applicant and his wife jointly filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
protection. They filed their first application in 1996, shortly after getting married. The 
petition was dismissed for failure to make the plan payments. They filed Chapter 13 
petitions again in 1999, 2000, 2003, and 2009. Each was dismissed within six months of 
filing. When they divorced in 2012, their divorce decree did not assign or divide 
responsibility for the marital debt. As a result, Applicant carried the delinquent debt into 
                                                          
2 The Government’s discovery letter, dated October 15, 2014, is appended to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3 The e-mails regarding the admissibility of the Applicant’s exhibits are included in the record as HE II.  
 
4 Tr. 16-18; GE 1-10. 
 
5 Tr. 19-21, 26-27, 50-51; Answer.  
 
 
3 
 
his second marriage. Applicant testified that he did not learn of the full extent of his ex-
wife’s financial misdeeds until his April 2013 subject interview.6 
 
Applicant remarried in 2012. He and his wife manage their household finances 
together. They are able to meet their recurring expenses and do not rely on consumer 
credit. Applicant intends to pay his delinquent debts when he is able, but with only $300 
to $400 in disposable income each month, he cannot afford to do so now. He hopes to 
generate additional income from a gun restoration business he recently started.7 
 
 By the time of the hearing, all but two of the alleged debts remained unresolved. 
The bank holding the loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.o ($911) and 1.p ($36,105) charged off 
the accounts and has forgiven the loans. However, the bank permitted the Applicant 
and his ex-wife to keep the two cars purchased with loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p. After the 
hearing, Applicant paid off the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g – 1.i, 1.s, and 1.v, totaling 
$600. Applicant has also negotiated a payment plan scheduled to begin in July 2015 for 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.z ($483). He has not filed disputes with the credit agencies 
or a police report regarding the accounts he considers to be fraudulent.8  
 
At work, Applicant is performing well. He has received several awards and has 
been recognized for his customer service and technical skills. He is current on all of his 
security training. Applicant’s supervisor testified at the hearing and is aware of 
Applicant’s financial problems. He has not witnessed Applicant engage in any behavior 
indicative of a security risk. He finds Applicant to be a hardworking, reliable, and 
security conscious employee.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
6 Tr. 27-28, 52-55; GE 6-10. 
 
7 Tr. 35, 39, 41-43, 45-48; AE D. 
 
8 Tr. 22-24, 43-45; AE B-C.  
 
9 Tr. 57-64; AE A, E-F.  
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a security concern because “an individual who is 
financially over extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”10 Financial difficulties have proven to be a significant motivating factor for 
espionage or attempted espionage.11 The Government does not have to prove that an 
applicant poses a clear and present danger to national security,12 or that an applicant 
poses an imminent threat of engaging in criminal acts. Instead, it is sufficient to show 
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 18. 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 96-0454 (App. Bd. Feb. 7, 1997). 
  
12 See Smith v. Schlesinger, 513 F.2d 463, 476 n. 48 (D.C. Cir. 1975). 
 
 
5 
 
that an applicant has a history of unresolved financial difficulties that may make him 
more vulnerable to financial pressures.13  
 
Applicant has a long history of financial problems dating back almost 20 years. 
During Applicant’s first marriage, his ex-wife’s mismanagement and Applicant’s failure 
to deal with the problem resulted in the accumulation of delinquent debt and multiple 
dismissed petitions for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. The majority of the alleged 
accounts remain unresolved because Applicant does not have the means to resolve 
them. These facts are enough to establish the government’s prima facie case that 
Applicant has both a history of not paying his debts and an inability to do so.14  
 
The record does not contain sufficient evidence to rebut the financial 
considerations security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems were not caused by 
events beyond his control, but the result of Applicant’s and his first wife’s financial 
habits. Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to repay his creditors. Neither the 
decision of the creditor holding SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.p to forgive the $37,000 in delinquent 
debt nor Applicant’s post-hearing payments of six of the SOR debts is indicative of the 
required good-faith effort. These actions do not establish a positive history of debt 
repayment or debt reduction.  He has not challenged or disputed the accounts he 
believes were fraudulently opened by his ex-wife.  
 
Applicant did not present evidence of financial rehabilitation or reform. His 
current ability to live within his means and more responsible use of consumer credit do 
not resolve the issue. Because his delinquent debt is unresolved, his financial problems 
are ongoing and, consequently, his finances are not under control. He has not sought 
financial counseling or provided any assurances that he would not treat his finances 
with a lack of care.  
 
After reviewing the record, I have doubts about Applicant’s suitability for access 
to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). The favorable information in the record, regarding 
Applicant’s work performance, is not sufficient to mitigate the financial concerns raised 
in the SOR.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.i, 1.s, 1.v, 1.z:   For Applicant 
 
  
                                                          
13 See ISCR Case No. 87-1800 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 1989) 
  
14 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
6 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f, 1.j-1.r,  
1.t -1.u, 1.w-1.y, 1.aa -1.dd:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
