 
1 
 
 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06444 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has unpaid delinquent 
obligations resulting from a repossessed vehicle, collection accounts, and past-due 
student loans. When completing his security questionnaire, he failed to disclose his 
financial difficulties. Financial considerations and personal conduct remain a security 
concern. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 On April 6, 2015, acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On May 11, 2015, Applicant answered the 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
SOR and requested a hearing. On June 29, 2015, I was assigned the case. On June 
29, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing convened on July 10, 2015. I admitted Government’s Exhibits 
(Ex) 1 through 3 and Applicant’s Exhibits A through G, without objection. Applicant 
testified at the hearing.  
 
The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. 
Additional material (Ex. G and H) was submitted and admitted into the record without 
objection. There was no objection to the material that accompanied Applicant’s SOR 
answer and that material also was admitted into the record. (Tr. 20) On July 20, 2015, 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admits the 19 delinquent SOR debts and 
admitted falsifying his Questionnaire for National Security Positions. I incorporate 
Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old computer scientist who has worked for a defense 
contractor since March 2004, and he is seeking a security clearance. From August 2000 
to December 2003, he honorably served in the U.S. Army. (Ex. 1, Tr. 28) He served 
overseas in Operation Iraqi Freedom. (Tr. 28) His Army military occupational specialty 
(MOS) was combat engineer. His current take-home pay is approximately $1,600 every 
two weeks, and after paying his expenses, he has approximately $800 remaining each 
month. (Tr. 31, 32) He asserted, but provided no documentation, that $500 was 
automatically deducted monthly from his account to pay other creditors (Tr. 32) He has 
three children ages 11 months, 2, and 14. (Tr. 33)  
 
 In February 2010, Applicant and his then-fiancée purchased a $15,535 car with 
$447 monthly payments for five years. (Ex. 2) In 2011, his fiancée quit her job, moved to 
a new location, and stopped making payments on the vehicle. (Tr. 20) In early 2012, he 
received notice the vehicle was repossessed. The creditor demanded payment of 
$7,587 (SOR 1.a) on the loan. (Tr. 21) The debt remains unpaid and Applicant has no 
recent communication with the creditor (Tr. 21) His plan to repay his delinquent 
accounts is to first contact the creditors to which he owes the least and start repaying 
them. (Tr. 21) 
 
 Applicant attended a technical institute and obtained five student loans (SOR 1.b, 
$5,861; SOR 1.c, $4,252; SOR 1.d, $3,948; SOR 1.e, $3,216; SOR 1.f, $2,069) totaling 
approximately $19,000. As of April 2015, he was approximately $850 past due on the 
accounts. He talked with the creditors and they wanted $200 monthly payments on the 
loans. (Tr. 22) He asserted he was unable to pay this amount because, as of May 2015, 
which was two months before the hearing, he had entered into an agreement whereby 
$500 was automatically taken monthly from his account to pay other creditors. (Tr. 22) 
 
 In 2011, Applicant had gall bladder surgery. Nine of the delinquent SOR debts 
are medical collection debts totaling approximately $4,700. He has started paying two of 
 
3 
 
 
 
the creditors He provided documentation showing he made two payments: one of 
$25.59 and the second payment of $29.69, both to the same creditor concerning an 
energy debt.2 (Ex. C, E, G). Approximately $1,100 is owed on the obligation. He also 
made one $28.01 payment to collection agency concerning a $2,661 bank debt. (Ex. F) 
He agreed that his bank account would be electronically debited monthly to make these 
payments. (Ex. C, E, F, G, Tr. 30) 
 
 Applicant asserted he was paying a $2,690 (SOR 1.k) collection account, had 
paid a $637 telephone service provider (SOR 1.o),3 and made payment on a $549 cell 
telephone service collection account (SOR 1.p). (Tr. 24) No documentation showing 
payment was received.4  
 
 Applicant has more than $31,000 in his retirement account, which he transferred 
from his 401(k) retirement account to an IRA. (Ex. A, C) In November 2014, he 
purchased a $28,000 mobile home, which is paid for. (Ex. B, Tr. 29) He is driving a 
1999 Oldsmobile. (Tr. 31) He does not have a mortgage or car payments. (Tr. 33) He is 
receiving calls from a cable company and some of the medical account creditors. (Tr. 
31) He has discussed finances with his father. (Tr. 34)  
 
 In 2004, Applicant divorced after a three-year marriage. (Tr. 35) He was required 
to pay $320 monthly child support for his now 14-year-old son until 2012, when custody 
changed. (Tr. 35) His ex-wife is not currently paying child support and will not do so until 
she gets back on her feet. (Tr. 35) The divorce cost him $1,800. (Tr. 36)  
 
 In March 2013, Applicant completed a Standard Form (SF) 86, Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions. (Ex. 1) In Section 26, Financial Record, he was asked if 
there had been a repossession of his property, if he had an account turned over to a 
collection agency or had an account charged off, or if he had ever been 120 days or 
more delinquent on a debt. He answered “no” to the question. He asserted in 2013 he 
was at a low point in his life and had forced himself to believe he did not have any 
issues. (Tr. 27) Since completing his SF 86, he has had a change of attitude and is no 
longer in denial over his debts. If asked in the future, he would fully disclose his financial 
difficulties.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
2 This energy account may or may not be the same $429 electrical collection account listed in SOR 1.q. 
The collection agencies, amounts due, and electric companies are not the same. He asserted he had 
made no payments on the debt listed in SOR. 1.q. (Tr. 25) 
 
3 Applicant provided a letter dated June 2015 indicating a different cable television service provider was 
processing a $239 payment on a debt of $341. (Ex. D) There is no indication or assertion that this 
payment settled the debt.  
 
4 Throughout the hearing, Applicant was informed that he needed to provide documentation supporting 
any assertions of payment.  
 
 
4 
 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had a vehicle 
repossessed resulting in a $7,500 debt, five past-due student loans, which total more 
than $19,000, nine medical collection accounts totaling approximately $4,700, and four 
additional delinquent accounts totaling more than $4,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant presented documents indicating he had made a $240 payment on a 
non-SOR debt two weeks prior to the hearing. He also provided documents indicating 
he had established three automatic monthly debits to address $3,730 of delinquent 
debt. The agreements required automatic monthly payments of $25, 28, and $29. He 
provided documentation showing one payment was made on each agreement for a total 
of $82. He asserted, but failed to document, that he was making $500 monthly 
payments to other creditors. No additional evidence of payment was provided following 
the hearing.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s numerous delinquent obligations remain unpaid. 
The nature of the debts, student loans, medical bills, and a repossessed vehicle are not 
so unusual that they are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. In 2004, Applicant 
divorced and paid child support until 2012. Additionally, in 2011, he had gall bladder 
surgery. These are events beyond his control. However, they occurred long enough ago 
as to not have a significant impact on his current finances. He has been employed since 
2004 with no periods of unemployment. AG & 20(b) does not apply.  
 
Under AG & 20(c) and & 20(d), Applicant made a $240 payment to one television 
service provider and one payment on each of three accounts. A single payment in 
compliance with a repayment agreement is insufficient to establish good faith.  He 
talked to his father about finances. There is no clear indication his finances are under 
control. The mitigating factors listed in AG & 20(c) and AG & 20(d) do not apply 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct, which is 
conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s concealment of relevant and material information demonstrates a lack 
of candor required of cleared personnel. Failing to provide truthful and complete 
information on a security clearance application and to background investigators is never 
a minor offense. The Government has an interest in examining all relevant and material 
adverse information about an applicant before making a clearance decision. The 
Government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose that adverse information in a 
timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be prudent or convenient. An applicant’s 
willingness to report adverse information about himself provides some indication of his 
willingness to report inadvertent security violations or other security concerns in the 
future, something the government relies on to perform damage assessments and limit 
the compromise of classified information. 
 
7 
 
 
 
Applicant had a vehicle repossessed, had accounts that were in collection and 
past due, and he was more than 120 days delinquent on other debts. He falsified his SF 
86 because he had convinced himself his debts were under control. Applicant’s conduct 
suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate government interest. 
I resolve Guideline E, personal conduct, against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s service to 
the U.S. military in hostile territory. Applicant did not list his financial problems on his SF 
86 because he was at a low point in his life and had forced himself to believe he did not 
have any issues. He has since had a change of attitude and is no longer in denial over 
his debts.  
 
In April 2015, Applicant received an SOR informing him of the Government’s 
concern about his delinquent financial obligations. At the hearing, he documented he 
had made approximately $220 in payments on his delinquent debts. This is insufficient 
to establish a meaningful track record in paying his delinquent obligations. 
  
The concept of “meaningful track record” includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required to establish 
that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is for him 
to demonstrate he has established a plan to resolve his delinquent debt and has taken 
significant action to implement that plan. I must reasonably consider the entirety of 
Applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that plan 
is credible and realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all 
outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for payment 
on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
8 
 
 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his financial considerations.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. The repossessed vehicle, past-due student loans, and other 
collection accounts have yet to be addressed. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, 
a clearance is not warranted. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent 
obligations, established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially 
addressed his past-due obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of 
his security worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a –1.s:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
  
