1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 14-02138
          )
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant had just begun receiving firearms instruction when he mishandled his
M-16 during basic training. His termination from his job with a cell phone company was
not misconduct-related. Under these circumstances, I conclude that there are no
personal conduct issues that generate a security concern. Conversely, Applicant’s
failure to pay his delinquent debts generates a financial considerations security concern
that he failed to mitigate. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On November 12, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline E, personal conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on
September 1, 2006.
2
 
 On February 26, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting the allegations
and requesting a hearing. The case was assigned to me on June 8, 2015. DOHA issued
a notice of hearing on July 21, 2015 scheduling the hearing for August 10, 2015. The
hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, I received six Government exhibits (GE
1 through GE 3), and two Applicant exhibits (AE A and AE B). Also, I considered
Applicant’s testimony.  At the close of the hearing, I left the record open through August
24, 2015 to allow Applicant the opportunity to submit additional exhibits. (Tr. 56) He did
not submit any exhibits, whereupon, the record closed. DOHA received the transcript
(Tr.) on August 20, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 27-year-old single man. He has a high school diploma and has
earned some college credits. Since August 2012, he has worked for a defense
contractor as a service desk analyst. (GE 1 at 10) 
In August 2010, Applicant joined the U.S. Army National Guard. (GE 1 at 16)
During basic training, he was awarded non-judicial punishment for mishandling his M-16
rifle during shooting instruction. (Tr. 16) Specifically, he failed to keep it pointed down
when he was not using it. He was fined $316 and ordered to perform 14 days of extra
duty. (Tr. 17)
This incident occurred on the first day Applicant received firearms training. (Tr.
15) Subsequently, he completed basic training satisfactorily without any additional
incidents. After completing basic training, however, Applicant decided that “the Army
was not for [him].” (Tr. 16) Consequently, he quit before beginning his advanced
individual training, and received an uncharacterized discharged. (GE 1 at 16)
In February 2012, Applicant was terminated from his job as the manager of a cell
phone store for violating company policy governing the customer exchange of cell
phones. (GE 1 at 12) Applicant filed a claim for unemployment security benefits, and his
ex-employer denied the claim, asserting that his conduct was fraudulent. (AE B at 2)
Applicant contended that he followed standard procedure when facilitating the cell
phone exchange, consistent with how the previous manager had trained him. (AE B at
1) After conducting a hearing, the state labor department ruled that there was
insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant’s actions constituted misconduct in
connection with work. (AE B at 4)
The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totalling $3,010. Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b,
and 2.d, are student loans. Subparagraph 1.c is a delinquent phone account. Applicant
attributes the debts to a six-month period of unemployment between February and
August of 2012. (Tr. 17-18) The SOR debts became delinquent between 2010 and
2011. (GE 8-10) 
3
 
Applicant also attributes the debts to medical bills triggered by a car accident in
which he was involved. (Tr. 17-18) He did not specify the date that the car accident
occurred.
Applicant contends that he paid the debts alleged in subparagraphs 1.a through
1.c and was making payments on the debt alleged in subparagraph 1.d. (Tr. 32) In
support thereof, he provided a credit report dated June 4, 2015. Subparagraphs 1.a
through 1.c were not listed. The debt alleged in subparagraph 1.d was listed with an
outstanding balance of $408, the amount alleged in the SOR. He provided no additional
evidence of debt payment.
Applicant earns approximately $4,000 monthly after taxes. This includes income
from a part-time job. (Tr. 26) He has $4,000 in savings and between $800 and $1,200 in
discretionary income.  (Tr. 28) 
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, they are applied together with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The applicant
has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security decision.
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” (AG ¶ 15) 
Applicant was disciplined for negligently mishandling his weapon during his first
day of firearms training while in the Army National Guard. He subsequently completed
4
 
the weapons training course satisfactorily, and his basic training. He received an
uncharacterized discharge only after deciding he no longer wanted to be in the military; a
decision unrelated to the non-judicial punishment he received for mishandling his firearm
during basic training. Under these circumstances, subparagraph 1.a does not generate a
security concern.  
Applicant appealed his termination from his job with a cell phone store. The state
insurance board conducted a hearing and ruled in his favor, concluding that there was
insufficient evidence to conclude that his actions leading to his termination constituted
misconduct. I conclude that subparagraph 1.b does not generate a security concern.
There are no personal conduct security concerns.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.” (AG ¶
18) Between 2010 and 2011, Applicant incurred approximately $3,100 of delinquent
debt. AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history
of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant incurred his debts before he lost his job with the cell phone company.
Moreover, he testified that medical expenses related to a car accident contributed to his
inability to pay these debts, but he did not specify when the car accident occurred. AG ¶
20(b) does not apply. 
In support of Applicant’s contention that he paid the debts listed in subparagraphs
1.a through 1.c, he submitted a credit report. Although subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c
were not listed on the credit report, it did not indicate whether Applicant had satisfied
them. The absence of a debt from a credit report, alone, does not establish that the debt
5
 
was paid. Absent supporting documentary evidence, assertions that a debt was paid
based on its omission from a credit report has limited probative value. Similarly,
Applicant’s contention that he is making payments toward the satisfaction of the debt
listed in subparagraph 1.d, absent corroborating evidence, has limited probative value.
Under these circumstances, neither AG ¶ 20(c), nor AG ¶ 20(d) are applicable.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They are as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
In order to mitigate the financial considerations security concern, Applicant has
the burden of proof to establish payment of his delinquent debts. The minimal amount of
the delinquencies does not obviate his responsibility to prove that he has paid them.
Applicant did not submit sufficient corroborating evidence at the hearing, and did not
submit any additional corroborating evidence when I afforded him that opportunity to do
so, by leaving the record open for an additional two weeks. Under these circumstances, I
conclude that Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concern.
Formal Findings
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d: Against Applicant
6
 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
