1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-04037
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant has been involved in sporadic alcohol-related misconduct, including
driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol and abusing alcohol at a workplace social
event, since 1984. He is currently on probation until 2018 following a 2013 DUI
conviction. Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns about his alcohol
consumption. His request for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On January 29, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to renew a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of his background investigation,
Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive).1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included four exhibits (Items 1 - 4) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
2
consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access to classified
information.  1
On November 10, 2014, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On
March 19, 2015, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in3
support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on May 4, 2015, and was advised he
had 30 days from the date of receipt to submit additional information in response to the
FORM. The record closed on June 3, 2015, without any response to the FORM from
Applicant. The case was assigned to me on August 12, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline G, the Government alleged that Applicant has consumed
alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of intoxication, from age 18 until at least
January 2013 (SOR 1.a); that in May 1984, he was arrested and charged with DUI, to
which he pleaded guilty (SOR 1.b); that in August and September 2003, he completed
inpatient alcohol treatment (SOR 1.c); that in December 2009, he received from his
employer a written warning about violating standards of conduct and substance abuse
policies after his involvement in three alcohol-related incidents (SOR 1.d); and that in
January 2013, he was arrested and charged with DUI, to which he pleaded nolo
contendere, and for which he is on probation until 2018 (SOR 1.e). Applicant admitted
all of these allegations. In addition to the facts established by his admissions, I make the
following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor and requires a
security clearance for his work. From September 1985 until March 2006, Applicant
served in the United States Navy as an aviation electronics technician. He retired with
an honorable discharge as a chief petty officer. Applicant has worked for his current
employer since May 2008. He worked for a different defense contractor from May 2006
until May 2008. Applicant has held at least a secret-level security clearance since 1988.
(FORM, Item 2)
Applicant has been married since September 1989. A previous marriage began
in September 1978, ended by divorce in February 1981, and produced one child.
(FORM, Item 2)
In his EQIP, Applicant disclosed the information about his alcohol-related arrests,
his alcohol-related misconduct at an office holiday party, and alcohol-related counseling
as alleged in the SOR. Applicant disclosed in an April 2013 personal subject interview
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
3
that he started consuming alcohol when he was 18 years old. He avers that he does not
drink according to any pattern; and that, until January 2013, he consumed two or three
beers with friends two or three times each week. Applicant claims he has not consumed
alcohol since January 2013. (FORM, Items 2 and 3)
As a result of Applicant’s January 2013 DUI arrest and conviction, he is on
probation until 2018. According to the terms of his probation, Applicant is not to
consume or possess alcohol. He also is required to use an ignition interlock device for
any motor vehicle he owns or operates until 2016. Further, Applicant must submit to
unannounced drug and alcohol screening over the course of his probation. (FORM,
Items 3 and 4)
Applicant submitted six character references with his response to the SOR. All of
the authors praised Applicant’s professionalism, integrity, and trustworthiness. None of
those letter reflected any knowledge of the adverse conduct documented in this record.
His performance evaluations for 2009 and 2010 reflect that he is a “solid performer.”
Among the personal decorations awarded to Applicant during his Navy career are six
good conduct medals and six Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medals. (FORM,
Item 1)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Alcohol Consumption
Available information, including Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations,
establishes that Applicant has consumed alcohol, at times to the point of excess and
intoxication, for his entire adult life. He also has been twice arrested for alcohol-related
offenses, despite completing inpatient alcohol treatment and being counseled for his
alcohol-related conduct at an office party. This information raises a security concern
expressed at AG ¶ 21, as follows:
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the following AG ¶
22 disqualifying conditions:
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of
5
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent.
I have also considered the potential application of the mitigating condition at AG
¶ 23(a):
so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment.
Applicant has not consumed alcohol since his January 2013 DUI arrest.
However, his adverse alcohol-related conduct has taken place at various points in the
past 31 years. It has also occurred after inpatient alcohol treatment and workplace
counseling about his alcohol use. Available information does not include any input from
a medical professional regarding Applicant’s current relationship with alcohol. Thus, this
record suggests that Applicant’s abstinence is due more to the requirements of his
probationary status. Criminal penalties await Applicant should he be found to have used
or possessed alcohol while on probation. On balance, I conclude Applicant has not
mitigated the security concerns raised by the Government’s information about his use of
alcohol.
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline G, I have reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). I note that Applicant is a retired
Navy veteran who has the support of current and former associates and shipmates. He
is a solid performer at work. However, without additional information showing that he is
unlikely to abuse alcohol or to engage in alcohol-related misconduct, the positive whole-
person information in this record is not sufficient to resolve the doubts about his
suitability for continued access to classified information. Because protection of the
national interest is the principal goal of these adjudications, those doubts must be
resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e: Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
