 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-02106 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. (The SOR was incorrectly 
numbered as 01-02106. The correct case number is 14-02106.) The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 17, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
based on the written record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on April 23, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on June 19, 2015. He had 30 
days from his receipt of the FORM to submit additional information in response to the 
FORM. Applicant timely submitted a response to the FORM which is admitted as Item 6. 
Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. Department 
Counsel’s response is admitted as Item 7. On September 16, 2015, the FORM was 
forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on September 22, 2015. Based 
 
2 
 
 
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Rulings on Evidence  
 
 Item 3 of the FORM is a portion of the Report of Investigation (ROI) from 
Applicant’s background investigation, specifically a summary of an interview of 
Applicant on June 4, 2012. DODD 5220.6, enclosure 2, ¶ E3.1.20 states, “An ROI may 
be received with an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible under the 
Federal Rules of Evidence.” (see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd., February 3, 
2014)).  
 
Although Applicant, who is representing himself, has not raised the issue via an 
objection, I am raising it sua sponte because Item 6 is not properly authenticated. 
Applicant’s failure to mention this issue in his response to the FORM is not a knowing 
waiver of the rule because he more than likely was unaware of the rule.  Waiver means 
“the voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage, the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of 
the existing right and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. 
Garner, editor-in-chief, 9th ed., West 2009).  
 
Department Counsel indirectly informed Applicant of the requirement under ¶ 
E3.1.20 of the Directive in Footnote 1 on pages 1-2 of the FORM. I cannot conclude 
Applicant expressly waived this rule. He did not mention Item 6 in his Response to the 
FORM. In accordance with the Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ E3.1.20, Item 6 is not 
admissible and will not be considered in this Decision because the document is not 
authenticated.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits SOR allegation 1.a, and denies all 
remaining allegations.     
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to obtain a security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since June 2008.  He served on 
active duty in the United States Navy from April 1982 to April 1992. He received an 
Honorable Discharge. He has worked for several DOD contractors since 2002. He is 
twice divorced. The first divorce occurred in July 1998. The second divorce occurred in 
August 2014. He has one adult daughter from his first marriage. (Item 2; Item 6 at 3-5)   
 
On March 13, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application as part 
of a periodic background investigation related to his security clearance. In response to 
Section 26 – Financial Record, Applicant answered, “No,” to questions regarding 
whether he had any of the following happen to him the past seven years: a lien placed 
against his property for failing to pay taxes or other debt(s); defaulted on a loan; bills or 
debts turned over to a collection agency; had any account or credit card suspended, 
 
3 
 
 
charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; were currently over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt. (Item 2, Section 26). A background investigation revealed that 
Applicant had two tax liens and eight accounts placed for collection; a total approximate 
balance of $31,017. (Item 4)  
 
The debts include: a $3,054 state tax lien from State A entered against Applicant 
in 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 4 at 3); a $1,568 credit card account placed for collection; 
(SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 4 at 8); a $9,851 automobile loan placed for collection ( SOR ¶ 1.c: 
Item 4 at 5 and 10); a $3,999 student loan account that was past due over 180 days 
(SOR ¶ 1.d: No government exhibit provides evidence of this debt); a $4,683 student 
loan account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 4 at 9); a $3,095 student loan 
account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 4 at 9); a $224 credit card debt placed for 
collection (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 4 at 10); a $3,066 state tax lien from State B entered against 
Applicant in 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 4 at 3); a $71 debt placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.i: 
Item 4 at 4); and a $236 cable television account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.j: Item 4 
at 7)    
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits to the tax lien owed to State A, but 
is formally disputing the debt. State A asserts that he is a legal resident of State A. He 
states he has resided in State C for the past six years and has provided copies of W-2s 
showing that he has listed an address in State C. He believes he has a valid claim to 
dispute that he is not a resident of State A and should not have to pay state income tax 
to State A. Should his dispute not result in his favor, he will pay the amount of the tax 
lien.  (Item 1 at 7; 10-13) He denies the $3,066 tax lien owed to State B. He claims he 
never lived or worked in the State B. He thinks this may be an incorrect entry on his 
credit report. He contacted State B to inquire about the lien and is still waiting for a 
response. He claims the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j were his ex-
wife’s responsibility. He paid them to get the matter resolved. (Item 1 at 7-8)  
 
Applicant does not recognize the student loan debt that was alleged to be $3,999 
past due over 180 days in SOR ¶ 1.d. He believes it may be his daughter’s college loan, 
but he is not a co-signer or guarantor of her student loans. He pays most of her tuition  
directly to the school. The Government did not provide evidence of this debt in their 
FORM. However, the debt is listed on the most recent Equifax credit report provided by 
Applicant. It is listed as current. (Item 6 at 21) He denies that the student loans alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f are delinquent. He researched the balance on the student loans 
and discovered they were current with a combined balance of $5,817. (Item 1 at 7-8)  
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant provided a credit report which he states 
indicates all negative items have been paid off or are addressed. Several items that he 
disputed are no longer on his credit report. The current status of the delinquent 
accounts are as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a:  $3,054 tax lien owed to State A. Under dispute, but not resolved. 
Applicant claims he is now a resident of State C.  If his dispute is not ruled in his favor, 
 
4 
 
 
he intends to pay the tax debt. The tax lien remains on Appellant’s credit report dated 
July 14, 2015. (Item 1 at 7, 10-13; Item 6 at 7) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b:  $1,039 credit card account placed for collection. Appellant claims 
this account was incurred by his ex-wife. He claims he settled the account for $546.22. 
He did not provide documents verifying that the debt was paid. The debt is no longer 
listed on his current credit report. (Item 1 at 7; Item 5; Item 7 at 20) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $9,851 automobile loan debt placed for collection. Appellant admits 
the loan was originally incurred by him. He recalls sending his wife at the time a check 
to pay off the automobile loan in full while he was on deployment. She did not pay off 
the loan. Instead, she moved out of the house and took the car with her. He was waiting 
for his now ex-wife to pay off the automobile loan. After being unable to locate her, he 
settled the loan for $3,743.54 on August 11, 2014. The debt is resolved. (Item 1 at 7, 
15-16)   
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d: Student loan account that is 180 days or more past due in the 
amount of $3,999; account number 2844760581. Applicant disputes this account. The 
Government did not provide evidence of this debt in the FORM. The debt is listed in a 
recent credit report provided by Applicant, dated August 4, 2015. The account is 
current. Applicant pays as agreed. SOR ¶ 1.d is found for Applicant. (Item 6 at 21)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e and SOR ¶ 1.f: Two student loan accounts in the amounts of $4,683 
and $3,095 that were placed for collection. Applicant disputes these accounts. He 
claims his student loan accounts are current and the total balance due on all of his 
loans, including principle and interest is $5,817. He provided documentation verifying 
his student loans are current. (Item 1 at 8, 18-19)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: $224 account placed for collection. Applicant claims this is his ex-
wife’s debt. Although he admits it is an account that he opened for her to use. He 
provided proof that he paid this account on March 10, 2014. The debt is resolved. (Item 
1 at 8, 20). 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h: $3,066 tax lien owed to State B. Applicant disputes this account. He 
claims he never lived or worked in State B. He believes this account was incorrectly 
reported on his credit report. He e-mailed State B to get more information about this 
debt. He was waiting for a response when he answered the SOR. The status of the 
dispute is unknown. However, the debt is no longer listed on his recent credit report. 
(Item 6 at 7-20). 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i: $71 account placed for collection. Applicant claims the debt was 
incurred by his ex-wife. He paid the debt off on March 7, 2014. The debt was actually 
$64.01. (Item 7 at 8, 21) 
 
 
5 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j: $236 cable television account placed for collection. Applicant claims 
the debt was incurred by his ex-wife under a joint account. He paid the debt on March 7, 
2014. (Item 1 at 8, 22)  
 
In his SOR response, Applicant provided a Personal Financial Statement. While 
deployed overseas, his total net monthly income was $20,338. His net monthly 
expenses were $2,230. He listed monthly debt payments of $1,796. This is not accurate 
because he did not list his monthly payments towards his student loans. However, even 
when considering the student loan payments, Applicant has sufficient income left over 
each month to pay his bills. (Item 1 at 9) Applicant owns a sports bar in addition to his 
primary employment. A good friend manages the sports bar while he is deployed.  
 
Applicant is alleged to have deliberately falsified his response to section 26 on 
his security clearance application because he answered “No” in response to questions 
about his delinquent debts. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denies deliberately 
falsifying his security clearance application. He did not explain the basis for doing so, 
but did underline the words “and deliberately” and wrote “I DENY” near the words. It is 
concluded that he did not list the debts because of oversight. (Item 1 at 6)   
 
Applicant requests that his 10 years of active duty service in the Navy be 
considered. He has worked for the defense industry since 2002. He worked for a 
defense contractor from 2002 to 2008, before transferring to his current employer. Since 
October 2008, he has served on many long-term deployments with his current 
company. He estimates he has been deployed 59 months out of the 78 months he has 
worked for his current employer. He hopes to work another 12 to 18 months until his 
daughter graduates from college. He then plans to retire and start a second business. 
Applicant says he is very patriotic and is extremely proud to serve and support his 
country and the men and women of the military with whom he works with on a daily 
basis. (Item 6 at 2)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
6 
 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
 
7 
 
 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
incurred several delinquent debts which were placed for collection. He was also late 
making payments towards his student loans. He also incurred two tax liens that were 
placed against him by State A and State B. Both AG &19(a) and AG &19(c) apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control); 
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
 
8 
 
 
AG &20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue). 
 
AG & 20(a) applies because Applicant resolved most of his delinquent debts. He 
is current on his student loan accounts. The one account that remains unresolved on his 
credit report is the $3,054 state tax lien owed to State A. Applicant is in the process of 
disputing State A’s claim that he is a resident. If he does not prevail, he will pay the 
debt. He has sufficient income to pay the debt.  
 
AG & 20(b) applies, in part, because Applicant’s ex-wife incurred the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.g, 1.i, and 1.j while married to Applicant. Applicant paid the debts 
after being unsuccessful in getting his ex-wife to pay them. Under the circumstances, he 
acted in a responsible manner.   
 
AG & 20(c) only partially applies because there is no evidence that Applicant has 
attended financial counseling. However, his financial situation is under control because 
he resolved most of the delinquent debts and is capable of resolving the debts he is 
disputing if the dispute is not resolved in his favor.  
 
Applicant provided proof that he resolved the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.g, 
1.i, and 1.k. He said the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is resolved, but did not provide 
documentation to corroborate this assertion. However, it is no longer listed on his credit 
report, so SOR ¶ 1.b is considered resolved. He provided proof that his student loan 
accounts are current. He is formally disputing the tax liens entered against him by State 
A and State B. It is noted that the State B tax lien is no longer on his credit report. He  
has not received a final ruling as to whether State A finds him to be a resident. Should 
he not be successful in his appeal, his income is sufficient to pay the tax lien owed to 
State A. Applicant made a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts.    
 
AG & 20(e) partially applies with respect debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h. 
However, Applicant did not provide an update regarding the status of either dispute.  
 
Overall, Applicant’s efforts to resolve his delinquent debt mitigated the financial 
considerations concern.  
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
9 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 The following disqualifying condition potentially applies to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities). 
  
 I cannot conclude Applicant deliberately omitted his delinquent debts and tax 
liens in response to section 26 on his e-QIP application dated March 13, 2012. 
Applicant has been deployed to overseas locations consistently since 2008. His failure 
to list his delinquent debts were the result of oversight as opposed to an intentional 
omission. He cooperated fully with the government once he learned of the delinquent 
accounts.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s past active 
duty service in the Navy as well as his extensive employment history with DoD 
contractors since 2002.  Applicant did not intend to falsify his security clearance 
application. He has taken significant action towards resolving his delinquent debt.  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:    For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a:     For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
