 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06667 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F. DOD CAF took that action under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant a security clearance. On April 10, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on June 15, 2015. The Defense 
 
2 
 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on July 6, 2015, and 
the hearing was convened as scheduled on July 21, 2015.  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. The record of the 
proceeding was left open until August 4, 2015, to provide Applicant the opportunity to 
submit additional matters. Applicant timely submitted additional documents that were 
marked as AE B through O. All exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 27, 2015. 
 
Preliminary Matters 
 
Department Counsel made a motion to withdraw the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a 
because it was a duplicate of the one in SOR ¶ 1.k. Applicant had no objection to that 
motion. The motion was granted and SOR ¶ 1.a was withdrawn.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old administrative assistant who has been working for a 
defense contractor since December 2012. She graduated from high school in 1989 and 
earned a bachelor’s degree in December 2014. She is married and has three children, 
ages 12, 13, and 17. She is seeking a security clearance for the first time.2 
 
Excluding the withdrawn allegation, the SOR alleged that Applicant had 12 
delinquent debts totaling $8,068. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($681), 1.j ($895), 1.k ($2,621), and 1.l ($1,287) and denied 
the remaining allegations. Her admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. With the 
exception of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i, credit reports (GE 3 and 4) establish the alleged 
debts.3  
 
Applicant attributed her debts to periods of unemployment. She worked at a bank 
from December 1998 to December 2009. She started at that bank in administrative 
positions, but later was promoted into security positions. In one of her security positions, 
she had access to the video equipment that recorded activities in and around the bank. 
When she was promoted to another security position, she no longer needed access to 
the video equipment, but informed her supervisor that she still had access to such 
equipment. At some point, a female coworker of hers, who was involved in an 
adulterous relationship, became aware of a threat supposedly made by the wife of the 
coworker’s paramour to shoot certain people as they exited the bank. The coworker 
                                                          
1 Tr. 11-12. 
 
2 Tr. 5-7, 24-29; GE 1. 
 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. Applicant admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. She did not admit or deny 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.k, but noted it was a duplicate of the one in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
 
3 
 
 
informed Applicant of the threat and asked whether she had access to the video 
equipment. Applicant notified her supervisor and other security personnel of the threat. 
Applicant’s supervisor informed Applicant that she would handle the response to the 
threat and the bank took steps to increase its security. The coworker involved in the 
adulterous relationship was later terminated for being involved in questionable banking 
activity with her paramour. After this incident, Applicant was investigated for “blowing 
the whistle” on the coworker. During that investigation, Applicant’s continuing access to 
the video equipment after she switched jobs became an issue of concern. She told 
investigators that she informed her supervisor of her continuing access to the 
equipment in her new position, but her supervisor denied ever being informed of her 
continuing access. Due to this issue, Applicant left her position at the bank. In her 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), she reported that she 
left that job by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct. She 
was earning about $40,000 annually at the time her employment at the bank ended.4 
 
Following the termination of her employment at the bank, Applicant was 
unemployed from January 2010 to August 2010 and did not collect unemployment 
compensation. She then obtained a couple of temporary jobs, but was again 
unemployed from December 2010 to March 2012, and October to November 2012. Her 
periods of unemployment since January 2010 total about 25 months. She was the 
primary wage earner in her household. Her husband has a flooring business in which he 
earns about $25,000 annually. His work and earnings are seasonal. They struggled 
financially when she lost her job at the bank.5 
 
The status of the alleged debts is reflected in the following table: 
 
SOR ¶ Amount Comments and Status Evidence 
1.b $681 This was a credit card debt that had a date of last 
activity of February 2011. It was assigned for 
collection in May 2011. Applicant testified that she 
has been in contact with the creditor to establish a 
repayment plan, but that plan had not yet been 
finalized. This debt is unresolved. 
Tr. 51-53; 
GE 2, 3, 4.
1.c $269 This was a department store charge card that had a 
date of last activity of June 2014. Applicant testified 
that this debt was paid in March 2015. However, she 
failed to provide proof that it was paid. Insufficient 
evidence was presented to show this debt was 
resolved. 
Tr. 53-54; 
GE 4. 
 
 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 27-40, 78-80; GE 1, 2.  
 
5 Tr. 27-43; GE 1, 2.  
 
 
4 
 
 
1.d $616 This was a medical debt that had a date of last 
activity of March 2012. Applicant testified this debt 
was incurred for one of her children who qualified for 
Medicaid. She did not know why Medicaid did not 
cover this debt. It remains unresolved.  
Tr. 54-58; 
GE 2, 4. 
1.e $470 This was a medical debt that had a date of last 
activity of March 2012. Applicant did not have health 
insurance when she incurred this debt. It remains 
unresolved. 
Tr. 58-59; 
GE 2, 4. 
1.f 
1.g 
$306 
$110 
These were medical debts that had dates of last 
activity of January and February 2010. No evidence 
was presented to establish these debts were 
resolved. 
Tr. 58-59; 
GE 2, 4. 
1.h $30 This was a medical co-pay that had a date of last 
activity of February 2010. No evidence was 
presented to establish this debt was resolved. 
Tr.  59-60; 
GE 2, 4. 
1.i $500 This was a credit card account that had a credit limit 
of $500 and a date of last activity of February 2011. 
Comments in a credit report entry reflect that this 
account was charged off, was transferred or sold, 
and had a zero balance. Applicant testified that she 
did not have any knowledge of this account. No 
other credit report entries reflect the transfer or sale 
of this debt or the actual amount owed.  
Tr. 60-61; 
GE 4. 
1.j $895 This was a dental bill that had a high credit amount 
of $895 and a date of last activity of November 
2010. Comments in a credit report entry reflect that 
this account was charged off, was transferred or 
sold, and had a zero balance. No other credit report 
entries address this debt. Applicant testified this 
account is unresolved. 
Tr. 61-62; 
GE 2, 4. 
1.k $2,621 This was a judgment filed in January 2010 on a 
credit card account. As of November 2014, the 
amount of this debt had increased to $4,273 
because of accrued interest and court costs. In 
February 2015, Applicant was a defendant in a 
garnishment action for this debt and agreed to have 
$200 of her monthly wages garnished. She provided 
two pay stubs reflecting the garnishment was being 
executed. 
Tr. 62-64; 
GE 2, 4; 
AE A, D-
H.    
1.l $1,287 This was a charge card account from a retail store 
that was assigned for collection in May 2011. It 
remains unresolved. 
Tr. 64; 
GE 2, 3. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
1.m $283 This was a checking account that was reported in a 
collection status in March 2013. The date of last 
activity and the date it was assigned for collection 
are unknown. It is unresolved. 
Tr. 64-68; 
GE 2, 3. 
 
In her post-hearing submission, Applicant submitted a personal financial 
statement (PFS) that reflected her total net monthly income was $4,280, her total 
monthly expenses were $2,015, and her monthly debt payments were $2,263, leaving 
her a net monthly remainder of $2. The garnishment of her wages for the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.k was apparently factored into her reported total monthly income. One of the debt 
payments listed in the PFS was for $25 to the creditor listed in SOR ¶ 1.c, but she 
provided no documentation establishing such payments. In her post-hearing 
submission, she provided proof of paying a $249 debt to a department store, but that 
debt does not appear to correlate to any of the SOR debts. She and her husband own a 
home and are current on the mortgage payments. She testified that she had about $100 
in a savings account and $150 in a checking account.6 
 
In the email forwarding her post-hearing submission, Applicant indicated that she 
had contacted several of the collection agencies handling the alleged debts and 
expected to receive documentation in the near future for establishing payment 
agreements for three of the debts. She also indicated that a medical creditor was 
researching the process for filing Medicaid claims for her daughter’s medical bills.7 
 
Applicant has about $26,000 in student loans that were in forbearance. She 
testified that monthly payments on those loans would start becoming due in September 
2015, and she did not know the amount of those upcoming payments.8  
 
 Applicant presented letters of reference attesting to her good character. Her 
supervisor stated that she is a hard worker who handles sensitive and personal 
information with the utmost professionalism. An Army staff sergeant stated that 
Applicant’s integrity is above reproach. Others described her as honest, reliable, 
trustworthy, and a great asset.9 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
                                                          
6 Tr. 44-48, 77-78; AE C, I. 
 
7 AE B. 
 
8 Tr. 48-49. 
 
9 Tr. 68; AE J-O. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, in reaching a decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
 
7 
 
 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 The evidence established that Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that she 
was unable to pay for an extended period. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply in this case. 
 
 The past-due amount of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i has not been established by 
substantial evidence. I find in favor of Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.i. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
8 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Insufficient evidence was presented to establish that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control or will be resolved within a reasonable period. Her 
delinquent debts are recent and ongoing. She testified credibly that her employment 
was terminated in 2009 due to circumstances beyond her control and resulted in 
significant periods of unemployment. However, she has been steadily employed for 
almost the last three years and, since then, has been done little to resolve the debts, 
including some relatively minor debts. Her pay is being garnished to resolve the debt is 
SOR ¶ 1.k, but such action does not amount to a “good-faith” resolution of that debt. 
Applicant is barely living within her means and soon after the hearing was scheduled to 
become responsible for making payments (amount unknown) on her student loans. 
Insufficient evidence was presented to conclude her delinquent debts do not cast doubt 
on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. No documentation was 
presented to show she has a legitimate basis for disputing any of the debts. AG ¶¶ 
20(a), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. 
Financial security concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
9 
 
 
My comments under Guideline F are incorporated in this whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some 
warrant additional comment.  
Applicant is a valued employee. Her supervisor and others hold her in high 
regard. Nonetheless, her financial status is unstable. Her delinquent debts remain 
unresolved, and she presented no realistic plan for resolving them.  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to her 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns under the financial considerations guideline.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive 
are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Withdrawn 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.h:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j-1.m:  Against Applicant  
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
