 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-04927   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s three unpaid debts total $10,800 or less. After almost ten years of 
self-employment, he experienced a serious downturn in his business, eventually 
resulting in its sale and depletion of assets. Due to circumstances beyond his control, 
including a current period of unemployment, he has insufficient financial resources to 
pay those outstanding debts at this time. Resulting security concerns were mitigated. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On December 3, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On March 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the  Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 20, 2015 (Answer), and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 2.) On July 15, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, 
was provided to Applicant on July 20, 2015, and he was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on July 31, 2015, and timely returned the receipt to the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). He submitted a letter in response to the FORM within the 30-day 
period. I marked the letter as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, and entered it into the record, as 
Department Counsel had no objection to it. DOHA assigned the case to me on 
September 1, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer Applicant admitted the allegations contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.c, and denied the allegation contained in SOR ¶ 1.b. (Item 2.) In his response to the 
FORM, he acknowledged that after researching the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, it 
was his debt. (AE A.) His admissions are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and married. He has two adult children and custody of 
two minor nieces. From 1995 to 2004 he owned a farm and supplied a company with 
stock. In 2004 the company changed its purchasing policies, which in turn seriously 
affected Applicant’s income over the next two years. As a consequence, he began using 
credit cards and assets for living expenses. In 2007 he moved his family to improve his 
income. In 2010 he obtained a loan to expand his business and pay debts. His financial 
situation did not improve substantially and he sold his business in January 2014. (AE 
A.) Prior to the sale, he started a security guard position with a federal contractor in 
October 2013 and subsequently submitted a SF-86. He was unemployed from June 
2013 until October 2013 when he obtained said position. (Item 3.)  
 
 Based on a credit bureau report (CBR) dated September 2014, the SOR alleged 
two unpaid judgments from 2007 and one delinquent debt from 2013. The debts totaled 
$10,794 and are unresolved. The CBR listed other creditors or accounts, which are 
paid, including two different judgments he resolved in 2010, as he mentioned in his 
response to the FORM. (Items 4, 5; AE A.) The status of the debts is as follows: 
  
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant disputes the amount of the $1,353 cell phone debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a. He said he contacted the company to establish a payment plan, but it insisted on 
the full amount and would not accept a payment plan. (Item 2.) He noted that he has 
had an account with this company for 15 years. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant thought that he had satisfied the $5,783 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b, because he paid other judgments in 2010. Initially, he was unable to locate this 
judgment on his credit report, through his lawyer, or through contact with the creditor. 
After receiving the FORM he found the judgment because he had the correct case 
number. He is unable to pay that judgment because he lacks sufficient income at this 
time, but he intends to satisfy it when he is employed. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant contacted the creditor of the $3,658 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c in 
March 2015. The judgment balance as of that date is $5,444. The creditor agreed to 
settle it for 40% of that balance, which is $2,177. Applicant is unable to pay that amount 
because he does not have sufficient income. (Item 2; AE A.)   
 
 Applicant stated in his response to the FORM, “let me say, at no time did I ever 
pass off, forget or ignore the obligation of any of my debt, much less the judgments. I 
honestly believed that my judgments were settled in 2010 through the assistance of my 
lawyer.” (AE A.) He emphasized that he was not unwilling to settle the three debts, but 
apparently neither he nor his lawyer were aware of them. (AE A.) 
 
 Applicant emphasized that has been unable to pay his debts because he is not 
currently employed with the defense contractor, pending the outcome of this case. He 
collects $272 a week in unemployment, which is insufficient for living expenses and 
debts. He stated that if he receives his security clearance, he will have enough money 
to make payment arrangements on the three debts. (AE A.) He did not provide a budget 
or financial information. There is no evidence that Applicant obtained credit counseling 
or sought financial assistance for resolving the debts.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has two unresolved judgments from 2007, and a delinquent debt from 
2013, all of which he has been unable to resolve because he does not have sufficient 
income. The evidence raises both security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s three delinquent debts occurred under circumstances that are unlikely 
to recur, given the fact that he sold his business in 2014 and was employed with a 
defense contractor until recently. The September 2014 CBR documented his assertion 
that he resolved other debts in 2010, and demonstrated that similar circumstances are 
unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. There is some evidence to raise the applicability of AG ¶ 20(a) as there are 
no recent delinquent accounts listed on his CBR. There is evidence to establish 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b), as the evidence indicates that he experienced 
 
 
6 
 
 
circumstances beyond his control due to a business downturn, and that he resolved 
some debts in 2010. 
 
 Applicant has not participated in financial or credit counseling, and there are no 
clear indications that the three delinquent debts are under control at this time because 
he does not have sufficient income; thus, AG ¶ 20(c) has no application. He provided 
documentation to demonstrate that he made a good-faith attempt to resolve the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Hence, AG ¶ 20(d) has application as to that debt.  
 
 Applicant does not deny any of the three debts, although he disputes the amount 
of the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.a. Because he did not submit evidence that he formally 
filed a dispute regarding that delinquent debt, or successfully resolved it through the 
dispute process, AG ¶ 20(e) has no application.  
 
 In sum, Applicant fell behind on his debts primarily because of insufficient 
income, resulting from economic conditions affecting his business that began in 2007, 
and culminated in January 2014 when he sold his business. At this time he has three 
debts, which total $10,800 or less. He is unable to pay those debts and support his wife 
and two nieces on his unemployment income. He indicated that should his security 
clearance be reinstated, he intends to resolve them.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 53 years old. He 
began employment with a defense contractor in September 2013, and is recently 
unemployed. Prior to obtaining that position he had been self-employed since 1995. In 
 
 
7 
 
 
2004 his business began experiencing substantial income problems, resulting in its sale 
in early 2014. He used credit cards and assets to support his wife and two nieces during 
those financially difficult years. Other than owing $10,000 or less, his credit history 
documents financial responsibility. He indicated that he cannot pay or resolve the three 
debts now because he has insufficient income, as he is currently unemployed during 
this security clearance investigation. There is no significant evidence in the record to 
raise questions about his judgment, reliability, or statement that he will resolve those 
issues if he resumes employment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
substantial doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security 
clearance. He met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
