 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05198 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 23, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 20, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on May 27, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
of hearing on June 11, 2015, scheduling the hearing for July 13, 2015. The hearing was 
continued at Applicant’s request. The case was reassigned to me on June 26, 2015. 
 
2 
 
DOHA issued another notice of hearing on July 23, 2015, scheduling the hearing for 
August 19, 2015. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. The objection to GE 4 was 
sustained. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A, A(1), and B 
through E, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. He did not submit any additional material. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 27, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since September 2013. He served in the U.S. military from 2004 
until he was discharged in June 2013 with a general under honorable conditions 
discharge due to a pattern of misconduct. He seeks to retain his security clearance, 
which he has held since he served in the military. He has an associate’s degree. He is 
divorced. He has three children.1 
 
Applicant had a series of disciplinary problems while he was in the military. In 
July 2009, he received nonjudicial punishment (NJP) under Article 15 of the Uniform 
Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) for violating Article 92 for failing to obey a lawful order 
to refrain from contact with a female service member. He was reduced a pay grade, 
ordered to forfeit $1,063 pay per month for two months, ordered to perform extra duties 
for 15 days, and he was reprimanded. The reduction and forfeitures were suspended.2 
 
Applicant received a letter of reprimand in December 2009 for having a physical 
confrontation with his spouse. Applicant stated that he and his wife were arguing. He 
stated that he went into another room to defuse the situation, but she followed him.3 He 
stated in his response to the letter of reprimand: 
 
I sat on the stool and began working on my homework and continued to 
block her out, until I got upset. At which point, I stood up, faced her, held 
her arms with my hands and aggressively walked her across the room.4 
 
Applicant received a letter of reprimand in August 2011 for driving a motorcycle 
in a reckless manner and exceeding the speed limit. He received a letter of counseling 
in January 2012 for reporting 38 minutes late to his appointed place of duty. He 
received a letter of reprimand in March 2012 for reporting an hour late to his appointed 
place of duty.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 16-19, 39-40; GE 1, 2; AE A1, C. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-21; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A. 
 
3 Tr. at 33-36; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A. 
 
4 AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 37-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A. 
 
3 
 
Applicant received NJP in December 2012 for violating Article 92 of the UCMJ by 
willfully disobeying an order to complete a motorcycle safety course before riding his 
motorcycle. He was reduced a pay grade and ordered to perform extra duties for seven 
days. The reduction was suspended.6 
 
Applicant was issued traffic citations in 2012 for: 1) expired license plate; 2) 
disobeying turn lane; 3) basic speeding; 4) registration violation; 5) speeding 11-20 
miles per hour over the speed limit; and 6) no proof of insurance. He did not pay the 
citations or appear in court, and an arrest warrant was issued. Applicant and several 
other motorcycle riders were stopped by the police in February 2013 for excessive 
noise. Applicant did not have a valid license plate on his motorcycle. The police officer 
arrested Applicant for the outstanding warrant. Applicant paid the fines and fees for the 
citations in March 2013.7 
 
In February 2013, Applicant’s commanding officer determined that Applicant 
violated Article 90 of the UCMJ by disobeying the commanding officer’s order not to ride 
his motorcycle. That conduct violated the terms of the suspended reduction from the 
December 2012 NJP. Applicant was reduced a pay grade.8  
 
Applicant received NJP in March 2013 for violating Article 86 of the UCMJ by 
absenting himself without authority from his place of duty for two days. The two days 
were the days Applicant was in jail after he was arrested on the warrant in February 
2013. He was reduced a pay grade, ordered to forfeited $1,007 pay per month for two 
months, and reprimanded. The forfeitures were suspended. By a separate action, 
Applicant’s security clearance was suspended.9 
 
Applicant indicated that he has had no additional arrests or citations since the 
2013 incidents. He stated that his motorcycle is now properly registered and insured. He 
has a valid driver’s license. He believes his actions did not constitute a pattern of 
misconduct. Instead, he views them as isolated incidents. He believes he has learned 
from his mistakes, and he asserts they will not be repeated.10 
 
 Applicant deployed twice while he was on active duty in support of Operations 
Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom. He also worked in combat zones for his current 
employer. He submitted several documents attesting to his excellent job performance.11 
 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 21-26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 27-30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE A. 
 
8 Tr. at 26-27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A. 
 
9 Tr. at 26-29, 38-39, 45-46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A. 
 
10 Tr. at 31-32, 36, 40-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE E. 
 
11 AE A, A1, B-D. 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant’s disciplinary problems in the military, his traffic-related offenses, and 
his criminal conduct reflect questionable judgment and an unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations. They also created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, 
and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) are applicable.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i alleges that Applicant’s security clearance was suspended due to his 
military pattern of misconduct. SOR ¶ 1.k alleges that Applicant was discharged from 
the military due to a pattern of misconduct. Those allegations reflect the consequences 
of conduct already alleged. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under 
the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s 
favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3. SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.k 
are concluded for Applicant. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
6 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 There is no evidence of any citations, arrests, or convictions since February 
2013. However, Applicant exhibited poor judgment and a disregard for the law on 
multiple occasions. I am unable to determine that similar incidents are unlikely to recur. 
The conduct continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 17(e) is partially 
applicable. I find that personal conduct concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military and civilian service, and particularly his 
deployment to combat zones. However, there are numerous incidents of poor judgment 
and disregard for the law.  
 
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
