KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: The Judge’s error in his findings of fact was not harmful.  Had he not made the error
the Judge would still have decided the case the same way.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-04570.a1
DATE: 10/16/2015
DATE: October 16, 2015
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-04570
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Carolyn Tatum Roddy, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 28, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
2
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On July
29, 2015, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge
Robert Robinson Gales denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed
pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  He received a bachelor’s degree in 2011 and is
pursuing a master’s degree.  He has never held a security clearance.  Applicant began smoking
marijuana in late 2010, when he reconnected with an old high school friend (A).  Although he began
using marijuana in his friend’s apartment, he eventually used it alone in his own apartment.  In his
security clearance application, he acknowledged having used it approximately 250 times until early
2014.  He stated that since the beginning of 2014 he has used marijuana on only one occasion,
focusing his attention instead upon his job.
In his security clearance interview, he stated that he had purchased marijuana from another
person, B.  He stated that, in March 2014, he smoked marijuana for two to three hours a day for
seven straight days in his parents’ house during Spring break.  During this time, he obtained the drug
from a third person, C.  “Applicant also purchased marijuana from two other individuals (Messrs.
D and E).”  Decision at 3. 
Applicant stated that he used marijuana because it enabled him to relax.  He stopped using
it because he does not want to lose his job, which requires a clearance.  Applicant does not question
that his drug use violated state and Federal laws, and he regrets his misconduct as irresponsible.  He
signed a statement of intent to refrain from illegal drug use, with an automatic revocation of
clearance should he fail to honor the promise.
Of his former acquaintances, A lives in another state, and B is deceased (from drug-related
causes).  Applicant comes into contact with C once every six months and keeps in close personal
contact with D and E.  Applicant’s character references include his former scoutmaster, who opines
that he has grown into a responsible adult.  He enjoys a good reputation for honesty,
professionalism, and hard work.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s drug use was recent, frequent, and did not occur under
unusual circumstances.  Though citing Applicant’s statement of intent not to use marijuana in the
future, the Judge found that there is little evidence that he has changed or avoided circumstances
3
where drugs are used.  He stated that Applicant still has encounters with persons involved in drugs,
in that he associates with C once every six months and has close contact with D and E.  The Judge
concluded that Applicant’s abstinence since early 2014 was not sufficient to overcome the security
concerns arising from his drug use.
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to favorable aspects of Applicant’s case, such
as his character references, his abstinence, and a lack of evidence that he has ever been diagnosed
as a substance abuser or as drug-dependent.  However, he found the reason for denying a clearance
to be more compelling than those for granting one.  He stated that holding a clearance requires a
willingness to abide by rules and regulations, to exert control over one’s impulses, and the ability
to make commitments over time.  Applicant’s drug use displayed shortcomings in at least some of
these qualities, in that he failed to respect authority and to exercise self control.  The Judge
concluded that Applicant had failed to mitigate the concerns raised by his marijuana use.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in some of his findings of fact.  Specifically, he
states that the Judge erred in finding that he had obtained marijuana from D and E.  He argues that
this error affected the overall outcome of the case, given the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s
continued association with these two individuals showed that he had not disassociated himself from
those who use illegal drugs.  We evaluate a Judge’s findings of fact to see if they are based upon
“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in
light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  
We find Applicant’s argument to be persuasive.  Applicant mentioned four persons in his
clearance interview, two of whom provided him with marijuana and another two who were aware
of his marijuana use but were not described as users or suppliers.  The first two appear to correspond
with B and C in the Judge’s findings and the other two with D and E.  In his testimony, Applicant
described D and E as close friends who themselves were not involved with drugs.  There is nothing
in the record that would support a finding that the persons identified as D and E ever provided
Applicant with marijuana or used it with him.  Therefore, the Judge’s finding that Applicant
obtained marijuana from these two persons was erroneous.
Having found error, we must address whether it was harmful or not.  A harmful error is one
that, had it not occurred, the case might have been differently decided.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-
11920 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 24, 2014).  We note first of all that the Judge’s finding that Applicant still
associates with those who supplied him with drugs is supported by evidence that he has contact with
C twice a year.  Moreover, the Judge’s overall adverse conclusion rested not only on Applicant’s
continued personal associations but on his extensive history of misconduct that raises questions
about his “willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.”  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 24.
Indeed, in the whole-person analysis, the Judge did not mention C, D, or E at all, focusing instead
on the nature and extent of Applicant’s conduct.  Examining the record as a whole, we conclude that,
even if he had not made the factual error identified here, the Judge would have decided the case in
the same way.  The error in the Judge’s findings of fact is harmless.
4
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan               
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                   
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
