KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s challenged findings are consistent with the record evidence.  Applicant
was adequately advised of her rights and obligations.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-03414.a1
DATE: 10/28/2015
DATE: October 28, 2015
In Re:
----------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-03414
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 5, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
2
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On August 17, 2015, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Erin C. Hogan denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is employed by a Defense contractor.  She has worked for this company since
2013.  Applicant’s SOR lists numerous delinquent debts, the largest of which are liens for Federal
and state taxes.  In 2013, Applicant retained a debt relief organization to settle her debts.  She
terminated the relationship a little over a year later.  There is no evidence concerning any debts that
this organization may have resolved.  In early 2014, Applicant retained a tax relief organization to
help with her tax problems.  A consultant filed Applicant’s taxes for the years under review but
made mistakes, resulting in an audit and substantial tax bill.  Applicant and her husband were in a
repayment program, but they could not afford the monthly payments after her husband was laid off
from his job.  
Applicant claims to be making payments to settle her debts.  She contends that several of
them are beyond the seven year reporting period for credit reports.  She states that she is of high
character and has never been in trouble with the law.  
Applicant is currently attempting to resolve her Federal tax debt on her own.  However, her
state and Federal tax problems are ongoing as of the close of the record.  She stated that she had
submitted an offer in compromise to the state but did not provide information as to whether it was
accepted.  In addition, one of the SOR debts was for a judgment entered against Applicant in late
2012.  Applicant claims that she settled this debt, but she provided no corroboration.  
Applicant did not provide information about her and her husband’s current financial status,
such as her husband’s total net monthly income, total monthly expenses, and total monthly debt
payments.  She provided no evidence about her duty performance, nor did she provide character
references.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge cleared Applicant of most of the SOR allegations.  However, she entered adverse
findings for the state and Federal tax liens, a judgment in favor of a bank, and two collection
accounts.  She stated that Applicant had no plans for resolving her largest debts.  She also stated
that, although Applicant’s financial problems had been affected by circumstances outside her
control, Applicant had not presented enough evidence to permit a conclusion that she had acted
1“[Y]ou . . . have 30 days from the receipt of this information in which to submit a documentary response setting
forth objections, rebuttal, extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, as appropriate.”  FORM, dated April 23, 2015.
2“[Y]ou have an opportunity to review the attached copy of [the FORM] and submit any material you wish the
Administrative Judge to consider or to make any objections you may have as to the information in the file.  You have
30 days from receipt of this letter to submit your objections or any additional information you wish to be considered.”
DOHA Cover Letter, dated May 29, 2015.   
3
responsibly in regard to her debts.  She also found that Applicant had taken little action to resolve
her tax debts after terminating the contract with the tax relief firm.  In the whole-person analysis,
the Judge stated that Applicant apparently lacks a plan for addressing her largest debts and provided
no evidence of her budget and income.  
Discussion
Applicant has challenged some of the Judge’s findings of fact.  In doing so, she presents
matters from outside the record, some of which post-date the Judge’s decision.  We cannot consider
new evidence on appeal.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ E3.1.29.  See also ISCR Case No. 14-03062 at
3 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2015).  The Judge’s decision was based upon Applicant’s substantial,
unresolved tax delinquencies and on three other debts, one of which was a judgment that the record
shows was owed to a bank.  Although Applicant claimed to have settled this debt, her documentation
appeared to refer to the settlement of a debt to a different bank.  The Judge’s finding that Applicant
did not corroborate her claim to have settled the judgment is consistent with the record that was
before her.  We have considered the totality of Applicant’s challenges to the Judge’s findings.
Viewed in light of the record as a whole, the Judge’s material findings are based upon “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See ISCR Case No. 14-04226 at 3
(App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015).   
Applicant notes the Judge’s finding that she did not provide character or job performance
references or current financial information.  She states that she was not aware that this was
necessary.  However, Applicant received notice of her right and obligation to provide a documentary
response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM).  She received this notice in the Department
Counsel memo1 as well as in the DOHA cover letter,2 both of which accompanied the FORM.  She
also received a copy of the Directive, which explains her rights as well.  Although the notice that
Applicant received did not mention explicitly the particular types of evidence she could submit, it
was sufficient apprise her of her responsibilities.  Applicant was not denied the due process provided
by the Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03612 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015) (“Although
character references and performance evaluations were not explicitly mentioned, the guidance that
Applicant received was sufficient to place a reasonable person on notice of the general extent of his
right to present evidence.”)  
Applicant cites to evidence that was favorable to her.  However, her argument is not enough
to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 12-08412 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2015).  Neither is it sufficient to show that the Judge
4
weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-05251 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 5, 2015).
   The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan          
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
