 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03088 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency from 1999 to June 
2012. He used marijuana while possessing a top secret security clearance in 2012. 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to mitigate the drug involvement and personal 
conduct security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 5, 2010. On 
November 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement) and 
Guideline E (personal conduct).1 Applicant answered the SOR on December 19, 2014, 
and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
                                            
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
2 
 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), dated April 30, 
2015, was mailed to him on May 14, 2015. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the 
FORM on June 1, 2015. He was allowed 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM 
and to provide material in extenuation and mitigation. Applicant did not submit any 
information within the period of 30 days after his receipt of the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on August 4, 2015. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations, except for SOR ¶ 1.c, which 
he failed to admit or deny. However, because SOR ¶ 1.c cross-alleges the same facts 
alleged under SOR ¶ 2, I construe his admission to SOR ¶ 2 as an admission to SOR ¶ 
1.c. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review 
of the record evidence, including his 2010 SCA (FORM, Item 2), his answers to the 
SOR (Item 1), and his May 2014 responses to interrogatories (Item 3), I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old concrete finisher. He graduated from high school in 
1999, and has been working as a concrete finisher and laborer for different federal 
contractors. He has never been married and has no children. 
 
Applicant was hired by his current employer in July 2009, and he was promoted 
to foreman in May 2010. Applicant has possessed a top secret security clearance 
during an undisclosed period incidental to his job.  
 
Applicant admitted that he illegally used marijuana from about June 1999 until 
June 2012, about once a year while on vacation. In June 2012, Applicant illegally used 
marijuana while on vacation. When he returned to work he was asked to participate in a 
drug screening test, which was positive for marijuana.  
 
Applicant’s use of marijuana was against his employer’s policy, which prohibits 
its employees from using illegal drugs. He was suspended from his job in July 2012, 
pending his completion of a substance abuse rehabilitation program. Applicant stated 
that his suspension cost him a lot of time and money because he was not allowed to 
work until he completed his rehabilitation program.  
 
Applicant stated during his 2014 interviews that he only used marijuana 
recreationally, and about once a year. He admitted that he has a couple of friends that 
still use marijuana. He explained that he does not see his marijuana-using friends often, 
and that they do not try to get him to use marijuana. He claimed that he stopped using 
marijuana in June 2012, after he tested positive. (Item 3; See the summaries of 
Applicant’s interviews conducted by OPM investigators.) Applicant possessed a top 
secret security clearance when he illegally used marijuana. 
                                                                                                                                            
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
 
The record is silent as to whether Applicant purchased marijuana, the 
circumstances surrounding his use of marijuana, the friends and acquaintances with 
whom he used marijuana, and the extent of his contacts with his drug-using friends and 
associates. There is no documentary evidence to show that Applicant successfully 
completed his rehabilitation program, whether he continued to participate in aftercare, 
and whether he received a favorable diagnosis and prognosis. 
 
Applicant’s most recent SCA, dated May 5, 2010, asked him to disclose whether 
he had used any illegal drugs, including marijuana, during the preceding seven years. 
He failed to disclose in his 2010 SCA that he illegally used marijuana in 1999. 
Applicant’s record evidence shows that he was convicted of driving under the influence 
both in 1999 and in 2003. On both occasions he was required to attend alcohol and 
drug awareness classes. Between 2003 and 2006, Applicant received six letters of 
reprimand for his failure to follow company policies. Additionally, in his 2010 SCA, 
Applicant reported having financial difficulties that included having a lien placed against 
him, a judgment, delinquent debts turned over to collection agencies, credit card 
suspended, wages garnished, and being over drawn on his checking account. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern for personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency from around 1999 to at 
least June 2012. He tested positive for marijuana use while possessing a top secret 
security clearance in 2012. His illegal use of marijuana violated his employer’s policy 
against the use of illegal drugs. Although Applicant denied any use of marijuana after 
2012, he continues to associate with his drug-using friends and associates. Between 
2003 and 2006, Applicant received six letters of reprimand for his failure to follow his 
company’s policies.  
 
  Applicant’s illegal marijuana use triggers the applicability of the following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 lists six conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns: 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 None of the above mitigating conditions is sufficiently raised by the facts and 
evidence in this case and they are not applicable. Additionally, for the same reasons 
discussed under Guideline H, incorporated here, I further find that the above mitigating 
conditions do not fully apply, and do not mitigate the personal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
 Applicant’s drug-related behavior extended from 1999 until 2012. The evidence 
failed to establish that his illegal drug use occurred under unique circumstances and is 
unlikely to recur. On the contrary, it appears that it occurred as part of Applicant’s 
lifestyle. Applicant’s illegal drug use while possessing a top secret security clearance 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
6 
 
 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana with varying frequency from around 1999 to at 
least June 2012. He tested positive for marijuana use while possessing a top secret 
security clearance in 2012. His illegal use of marijuana violated his employer’s policy 
against the use of illegal drugs. Although Applicant denied any use of marijuana after 
2012, he continues to associate with his drug-using friends and associates. 
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes three conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and are disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and  
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides three potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
 (3) an appropriate period of abstinence . . . ; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
None of the Guideline H mitigating conditions fully apply. I considered that 
Applicant’s most recent illegal drug-related behavior occurred in 2012. Thus, his drug-
related behavior is not recent. Applicant claimed that his marijuana use was occasional, 
and limited to once a year during his vacations between 1999 and 2012. He also 
claimed that he has not used marijuana after 2012, because such conduct resulted in 
him being suspended from his position. Nevertheless, he illegally used marijuana from 
1999 to June 2012, and while possessing a top secret clearance in 2012.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant presented no documentary evidence to show that he successfully 
completed any substance abuse counseling, or that he has continued his rehabilitation 
by participating in aftercare. I note that he participated in two drug and alcohol 
awareness classes after DUI convictions in 1999 and 2003. However, that did not 
prevent his use of marijuana between 2003 and 2012. Applicant presented little 
evidence about his past marijuana use habits. He submitted insufficient evidence to 
show that he no longer associates with his drug-using friends and contacts, or that he 
changed his lifestyle and avoids the environments where illegal drugs are used. 
Considering Applicant’s age and experience working for a federal contractor while 
holding a top secret security clearance, his favorable evidence is insufficient to mitigate 
the drug involvement security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. (AG ¶ 2(c)) I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines H and E in my 
whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
federal contractors since 1999, and he possessed access to classified information at the 
top secret level. He illegally used marijuana while possessing a top secret security 
clearance in 2012. 
 
 Applicant failed to submit evidence to establish his successful rehabilitation and a 
change of lifestyle to avoid future illegal drug use. He submitted no recent evidence to 
show he is currently exercising good judgement, and to establish his reliability and his 
willingness and ability to comply with the law, rules, and regulations. Moreover, he failed 
to disclose in his 2010 SCA that he illegally used marijuana at least in 1999. This is a 
concern in light of his past failure to comply with his company’s policies, DUI 
convictions, delinquent debts, and illegal drug use.  
 
 In sum, Applicant’s favorable evidence is insufficient to mitigate the security 
concerns. His past illegal drug use while possessing a clearance continues to raise 
questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and ability to comply with the 
law, or to protect classified information. He failed to mitigate the Guidelines H and E 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
