                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-02176
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Deputy Chief Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
October 8, 2015
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on August 7, 2009.  On July 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG),
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on July 30, 2014, and requested
an Administrative Determination by an administrative judge.  Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 30, 2015.  Applicant did not respond
to the FORM.  The case was assigned to me on July 6, 2015.  Based upon a review of
the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
2
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in
Paragraphs 1.b., and 1.i.~1.n. of the SOR, with explanations.  She denied the factual
allegations in Paragraphs 1.a. and 1.c.~1.h. of the SOR.
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
1.a.  Applicant denies she is indebted to Creditor A for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $2,886.  She, under the name she used when she executed her 2009
e-QIP, “has satisfied” this debt, as evidenced by a letter from Creditor A.  (Answer at
page 4, and Item 3 at page 5.)
1.b.  Applicant admits she is indebted to Creditor B for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $865.  She, under another name she was known by when she
executed her 2009 e-QIP, appears to have settled this debt for $221, as evidenced by a
letter from her credit card company.  (Answer at page 5, and Item 3 at page 6.)  This is
corroborated by the Government’s most recent, February 2015 credit report, showing no
such past-due debt.  (Item 9.)
1.c.~1.h.  Applicant denies she is indebted to Creditor C for past-due student
loans in an amount totaling about $2,969.  She, under the name she used when she
executed her 2009 e-QIP, has “Paid in full” her six student loans, as evidenced by a
letter from Creditor C.  (Answer at pages 6~7, and Item 3 at page 5.)
1.i.  Applicant admits she is indebted to Creditor I for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $84.  She avers that she settled this debt for $109.78, and provides a
confirmation number.  (Answer at page 2.)  This is corroborated by the Government’s
most recent, February 2015 credit report, showing no such past-due debt.  (Item 9.)
1.j. and 1.n.  Applicant admits she is indebted to Creditor J for two past-due
debts in an amount totaling about $278.  She, under the name she used when she
executed her 2009 e-QIP, has “paid” this debt, as evidenced by a letter from Creditor J
and the successor creditor to Creditor J.  (Answer at pages 8~9, and Item 3 at page 5.)
1.k.  Applicant admits she is indebted to Creditor K for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $221.  She, under the name she used when she executed her 2009 e-
QIP, has paid this debt, as evidenced by a letter from the successor creditor to Creditor
K.  (Answer at page 12, and Item 3 at page 5.)
1.l.  Applicant admits she is indebted to Creditor L for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $100.  She, under another name she was known by when she
executed her 2009 e-QIP, appears to have paid this debt, as evidenced by a letter from
the original creditor.  (Answer at pages 11~12, and Item 3 at page 6.)  This is
corroborated by the Government’s most recent, February 2015 credit report, showing no
such past-due debt.  (Item 9.)
1.m.  Applicant admits she is indebted to Creditor M for a past-due debt in the
amount of about $80.  She avers that she paid this debt, and provides a confirmation
3
number.  (Answer at page 3.)  This is corroborated by the Government’s most recent,
February 2015 credit report, showing no such past-due debt.  (Item 9.)
1.n.  This admitted debt has already been discussed, above.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG
Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
4
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Applicant has had difficulty meeting her
financial obligations.  However, under Subparagraph 20(d), it may be mitigating where
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts.”  Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve all of the alleged past-
due debt.
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate determination of
whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept.
The administrative judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  The record evidence leaves me without
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
5
For this reason, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from
her Financial Considerations, under the whole-person concept.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.n. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
