 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05229 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 15, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On February 12, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and she elected to have 
her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.1 On July 15, 2015, 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The 
FORM was mailed to Applicant, and it was received on July 30, 2015. Applicant was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and it is admitted.  
 
As part of the FORM, Department Counsel requested that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts about Taiwan and the People’s Republic of China (PRC). (Items 9 
and 10) Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of facts 
contained in the administrative notices that are supported by source documents from 
official U.S. Government publications. Some of those facts are summarized in the 
Findings of Fact, below. In response to the FORM, Applicant provided an additional 
document that was admitted into evidence as Item 11. The case was assigned to me on 
October 10, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except ¶ 1.e. I have incorporated 
her admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. She was born in Taiwan. She moved to the United 
States in 1996 and became a naturalized citizen in 2007. She is married and has a 21-
year-old daughter. Both her husband and daughter were also born in Taiwan. They 
became naturalized citizens of the United States in 2006. Applicant earned a bachelor’s 
degree in Taiwan and a master’s degree in the United States. She has held a secret 
clearance since 2011. She has worked in federal contracting since 1998.2 
 
 Applicant’s father is deceased. Her mother, brother, and sister are citizens and 
residents of Taiwan. Her mother retired from her job as a nanny in 2005. Her brother 
owns a furniture store. Her sister works for a small company as a 
bookkeeper/accountant. After moving to the United States in 1996, Applicant returned to 
Taiwan about once a year to visit her family. In 2010, her father was diagnosed with 
cancer, and she traveled more frequently, approximately two to three times a year to 
see him until his death in 2013. She has visited her mother more frequently since her 
father’s death, continuing to travel to Taiwan about three times a year. She speaks on 
the phone a few times a year with her mother and sister, usually on Taiwanese 
holidays. She speaks to her brother about once a year. None of these family members 
have an association with the Taiwanese government or any political organizations. They 
are unaware of the nature of Applicant’s business. Applicant began providing some 
financial support to her parents sometime between 1998 and 2000. There is a cultural 
expectation that children help their parents if they are financially able. Applicant 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s answer is dated February 12, 2014, which is an obvious error as it predates the SOR. 
 
2 Items 4 and 5. 
 
3 
 
 
provided additional support to her parents when her father was undergoing cancer 
treatment to help with their medical expenses. She continued to provide support to her 
mother after her father passed away, but has discontinued it recently because her 
mother is financially stable. None of her family in Taiwan has visited her in the United 
States.3 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of Taiwan. 
Her father-in-law is a businessman working in the same textile industry for five decades. 
He intends to retire in the next couple of years. Her mother-in-law is a housewife and 
has not been employed since Applicant has known her. They do not have an 
association with the Taiwanese government or political organizations. Applicant and her 
husband visit his parents about once a year and also speak to them on the phone about 
once a year. His parents are unaware of the nature of Applicant’s business. Neither 
Applicant nor her husband provides financial assistance to his parents. They have never 
visited Applicant or her family in the United States.4 
 
 Applicant has no financial interests in Taiwan. She has substantial financial 
interests in the United States. In 2004, she started her own business that has been very 
successful. It has an annual revenue of approximately $10 million. It employs about 70 
people. Applicant is proud of the services it provides to the federal government. She has 
been nominated and been the recipient of numerous awards and recognitions, as has 
her business.5 Applicant has substantial personal financial interests in the United 
States. She and her husband have personal assets over $2.7 million. They have lived in 
the same state since 1996. They have lived in the same house that they own since 
1999.6 Their daughter is pursuing higher education in another state. The United States 
is the only home her daughter has ever really known. Applicant, her husband, and her 
daughter intend on remaining in the United States for the rest of their lives. Applicant 
has no other ties to Taiwan. Applicant has voted in local, state, and federal elections. 
She is keenly aware of the opportunities she has had as a woman in the United States, 
and she has a desire to give back. She makes charitable contributions, sponsors 
charitable events, and volunteers her time with numerous medical facilities and 
fundraising campaigns as well as scholarship funds.7  
 
 From 2013 to 2014, Applicant served as head of an organization. After her term 
ended she remained as an inactive member. She is no longer a member. She indicated 
that this organization seeks to help Taiwanese-American-owned businesses develop in 
the United States, primarily through networking and information sharing between 
business professionals and local area merchants. Its membership is comprised of 
                                                          
3 Item 4 and 7. 
 
4 Item 4.  
 
5 Item 4, Exhibit 3, 4. 
 
6 Item 4, Exhibit 6. 
 
7 Item 4, Exhibits 5. 
 
4 
 
 
Taiwanese-Americans, but does not include foreign Taiwanese citizens or officials. It 
does not assist business development in Taiwan, and it does not assist in the 
development of non-Taiwanese-American-owned businesses in the United States. The 
organization does not advocate for U.S. policies to help Taiwan businesses, but rather 
seeks to provide assistance to Taiwanese-American-owned businesses in the United 
States through member sharing, guidance, and experience.8  
 
The organization’s website, states the group’s purpose is to promote cooperation 
between Taiwanese businesses in the metropolitan area where it is located, in order to 
develop and to expand to international markets. Applicant indicated that every member 
of the organization is an American citizen or an American company.9 
 
 When Applicant was elected to head the organization in 2013, she immediately 
reported the matter to the Defense Security Service (DSS). She discussed with a 
representative whether her role impacted her holding a secret security clearance. She 
was advised it did not. Applicant stated in her answer to the SOR that if she had been 
advised differently, she would have resigned. Since her tenure as the head of the 
organization ended in 2014, she has disassociated herself from any position of 
leadership within the organization as well as any business, programs, and directives of 
the organization. She has not attended any of the organizations events since 2014 and 
does not have a relationship with its current leaders.10  
 
 During Applicant’s tenure as head of the organization, she had contact with the 
administrative staff associated with the Taiwan Consulate. The Consulate would reach 
out to the organization with information about upcoming charity and cultural events with 
the intent to have the organization publicize the event to the local membership. As head 
of the organization, Applicant was the public point of contact. She would receive 
information from the Consulate and relay it to the organization’s membership through 
emails, flyers, and other communication. In 2013, Applicant attended a Consulate 
function in her role as head of the organization. It was attended by over 300 guests. 
Overall, Applicant has had limited contact with the Consulate and the contact was only 
in relation to her past position with the organization.11 
 
 On two occasions, between 2011 and 2013, Applicant attended Chinese New 
Year celebrations at the PRC Embassy. Embassies extend invitations to local area 
communities as a gesture of goodwill in celebrating mutually shared cultural holidays. 
The invitation was extended to the head of the organization at the time, who in turn 
extended the invitation to Applicant, and the organization’s Board of Directors. There 
                                                          
8 Items 4, 11. 
 
9 Item 6. 
 
10 Items 4 and 11. 
 
11 Items 4, 7 and 11. 
 
 
5 
 
 
was no fundraising involved or any other type of monetary contribution associated with 
the event.12  
 
 The Chinese New Year events were hosted and attended by the Minister of the 
PRC and his counselors, but Applicant did not have one-to-one contact with any of them 
on the two occasions she attended the event. There were never any follow-up 
communications from the Minister of the PRC or any of his counselors as a result of 
attending this event on two occasions.13 
 
 Applicant also had limited contact with the administrative staff from the PRC 
Embassy on two other occasions. These contacts were based solely on her position 
with the organization, and involved the logistics of picking up Chinese New Year annual 
calendars and desserts to be shared with her organization’s members. On the first 
occasion, she picked them up from the embassy without making any contact with the 
Minister of the PRC or any of his counselors. On the second occasion, Applicant made 
arrangements with the administrative staff over the telephone for two of her employees 
to pick up the desserts. Other than this contact, Applicant has had no contact, 
correspondence, or communication with representatives, foreign or domestic, related to 
the Minister of the PRC or his counselors.14  
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from a former government attorney and 
current practitioner in government contracting. He is aware of the importance of 
handling classified information and its impact on the interests of the United States. He 
has worked with Applicant for three years and advised her on legal and regulatory 
requirements. He stated without reservation that she is committed to following the rules, 
rather than finding a loophole. She is dedicated to upholding the intent of the law and its 
purpose to the benefit of the government, rather than for individual gain. She seeks 
advice on matters that may conflict with regulations. She does not rely on her own 
interpretations. He believes Applicant’s respect for the law in her professional and 
personal life is rooted in her loyalties and dedication to the United States. He believes if 
ever a situation arose between the United States’ interest and that of a foreign interest, 
Applicant would, without hesitation, side with the United States.15 
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from the deputy chief of a government 
agency, who has worked with her for the past four years. He witnessed first-hand, her 
dedicated efforts to support his agency’s mission objectives. He considers her the 
consummate professional who follows through on her commitments and faithfully 
complies with the contractual requirements. She has handled sensitive information in 
the past and clearly demonstrated her adherence to safeguarding it. She is a proactive 
                                                          
12 Items 4 and 7. 
 
13 Items 4, 7, and 11. 
 
14 Items 4, 7, and 11. 
 
15 Item 4, Exhibit 2. 
 
 
6 
 
 
member of the community. Her demeanor, attitude, and actions reflect a professional 
and personal respect and devotion as an American citizen. She can be trusted to 
handle classified information.16  
 
 Applicant provided a character letter from the director of a company, who also 
served for 30 years in the U.S. military and retired as a colonel. He held numerous 
leadership positions while on active duty and is fully aware of the responsibility of 
holding a security clearance. He has worked closely with Applicant for the past two 
years on several different projects. He described her as a loyal, dedicated, and 
trustworthy professional who is committed to furthering the mission of the agency, which 
she supports. He has personally witnessed her rigorous adherence to providing the 
highest quality of support for her clients, despite more financially advantageous options. 
He described Applicant as one of the most trustworthy, principled, loyal, and ethical 
people he knows. She takes her responsibilities seriously, and he believed she would 
never compromise the interests of the United States.17 
 
Taiwan18 
 
 In a 2008 report to Congress, Taiwan is listed among the top eight countries 
involved in criminal espionage and export control enforcement cases. The 2000 version 
of the report lists Taiwan as being among the most active collectors of U.S. economic 
and proprietary information and highlights specific incidents where it engaged in 
attempts to acquire export-restricted products. There are numerous cases that involve 
the illegal export, or attempted illegal export of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to 
Taiwan. Illegal technology transfers are a significant concern because foreign 
government entities, including intelligence organizations and security services, have 
capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology. 
 
 The Ministry of State Security for the PRC is the preeminent civilian intelligence 
collection agency in the PRC. It maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan through a 
bureau utilizing PRC nationals with Taiwan connections. This raises a concern that 
some Taiwan-based intelligence collection activities may actually be for the benefit of 
the PRC. 
 
PRC19 
 
 The PRC is an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist 
Party (CCP). CCP members hold almost all top government, police, and military 
positions. DOD reports assess the PRC’s expanding military capacity and interest in 
                                                          
16 Item 4, Exhibit 2. 
 
17 Item 4, Exhibit 2. 
 
18 Item 9. 
 
19 Item 10. 
 
7 
 
 
global power, as well as pursuit of advanced technology to advance its strategic military 
and commercial interests.  
 
 The PRC uses state sponsored industrial/technical and economic espionage to 
increase its level of technologies and expertise to support military research, 
development, acquisition, and to supplement their military modernization efforts.  
 
 In 2012, the DOD noted that the PRC is the world’s most active and persistent 
perpetrator of economic espionage and will continue to be a threat to U.S. economic 
security. In 2013, the DOD noted that the PRC’s Army is pursuing a long-term, 
comprehensive modernization of its military forces and has articulated a wide range of 
missions beyond its immediate territorial concerns that go beyond its coastal borders. In 
2014, the DOD noted that the PRC relies on foreign technology, acquisition of dual-use 
components, and focused internal research and development to further military 
modernizations. It uses intelligence services and other illicit approaches to collect 
sensitive U.S. information and export controlled technology in violation of U.S. laws. 
 
 There are specific cases cited by the U.S. Department of Justice that are 
illustrative of actual or attempted espionage and illegal export of sensitive technology to 
the PRC by naturalized U.S. citizens from the PRC employed in the U.S. defense 
industry.   
 
 According to the U.S. State Department, repression and coercion, particularly 
against organizations and individuals involved in rights advocacy and public interest 
issues, were routine in the PRC. There is repression of fundamental rights to freedom of 
speech, religion, association, and harsh restriction on the movement of certain ethnic 
groups. There are numerous serious human rights issues in the PRC. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
8 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them. The following conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(d) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. 
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.20  
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.”21 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record 
are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
                                                          
20 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
21 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **16-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
 
10 
 
 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue.22  
 
Applicant has family ties to her mother, sister, brother, and her husband’s parents 
living in Taiwan. She visits these family members about once a year and has telephone 
contact with them. Taiwan has a significant history of conducting economic espionage 
against the United States. This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of 
interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  
 
I have considered the evidence regarding Applicant’s membership in an 
organization that promotes Taiwanese-American businesses. She is no longer actively 
involved in it. I find her past involvement does not raise a heightened risk or a security 
concern, as its members are Taiwanese-American citizens, and its purpose is to 
promote American businesses. Although the Government disputed its purpose based 
on its website, I found Applicant’s information and description compelling. I find none of 
the above disqualifying conditions apply to SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
Applicant had limited contact with the Taiwanese Consulate based on her 
position as head of the organization. As the public point of contact at the time, she 
would send emails or flyers received from the Consulate to advertise or promote cultural 
and charitable events. I find these minimal contacts do not rise to the level of creating a 
heighten risk or a security concern. She no longer is a member of the organization. 
These types of contacts are typical of social interactions between embassies and the 
local community. I find none of the above disqualifying conditions apply to SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
I find Applicant’s contact with the Minister of the PRC and his counselors who 
work in the embassy was consistent with any other guest invited to its embassy for a 
cultural event. Applicant provided detailed information as to the extent of the contact, 
which consisted of twice being a guest at a Chinese New Year event. She also 
coordinated with the administrative staff at the embassy to retrieve Chinese calendars 
and desserts. Applicant was contacted because of her position as head of the 
organization. There is no evidence to remotely suggest that her contact in this context 
created a heightened risk or security concern. Applicant is no longer involved with the 
organization, and therefore, future contact is unlikely. I find none of the disqualifying 
conditions apply to SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
I have analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions for 
this security determination under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
                                                          
22 See generally; ISCR Case. No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activities in area where family members 
resided. 
 
11 
 
 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Security concerns are reduced where contact and correspondence with foreign 
citizens are casual and infrequent because the risk of foreign exploitation or pressure is 
less. Applicant’s contact with her mother, sister, brother, and husband’s parents is not 
casual. She and her husband travel to see their family once a year and maintain some 
telephone communication. AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
The foreign influence concerns are increased because Taiwan aggressively and 
actively engages in foreign economic collection and industrial espionage against the 
United States. Applicant’s and her husband’s family are not affiliated with or dependent 
upon the Taiwanese government. They either are retired or work in the private sector. 
Although Taiwan is actively engaged in economic espionage, there is no evidence that 
they target, coerce, pressure or attempt to manipulate or exploit their citizens to obtain 
information. Therefore, it is unlikely Applicant would be placed in a position of having to 
choose between her family interests and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) 
applies.  
 
Applicant has made her life in the United States since 1996. She owns a 
successful business that employs 70 people and has worked in federal contracting 
since 1998. She has been a citizen since 2007 and her husband and daughter since 
2006. Her daughter is pursuing higher education, and the United States is the only 
home she has known. Applicant and her family intend on remaining in the United 
States. They have substantial personal assets and have lived in the same house and 
community since 1999. She has deep roots in the community and is actively engaged 
both personally and professionally in charitable endeavors. Applicant has held a secret 
clearance since 2011, and there is no evidence of security problems. Applicant has the 
strong support from people who have worked with her and can attest to her 
trustworthiness, loyalty to her country, and her commitment to complying with the rules 
and regulations required of her to accomplish the mission. Applicant’s deep and 
longstanding relationship and loyalty to the United States is such that she can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. I find AG ¶ 8(b) 
applies.  
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 44 years old. She has been a naturalized citizen of the United States 
since 2006. She and her family are firmly ensconced in the United States. Although she 
has family members who are citizens and residents of Taiwan, she can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. The record evidence leaves 
me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising under Guideline B, foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
