 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06440 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 20, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 11, 2015, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 12, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
18, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 17, 2015. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. In addition, the Government submitted a copy of the transmittal letter 
sent to Applicant that included the Government’s documents and an exhibit list that 
were marked as Hearing Exhibits I and II. Applicant testified and offered Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional documents, which he did. 
The documents were marked as AE F and G. The Government did not object to the 
documents, and they are admitted into evidence.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on September 25, 2015.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 The Government moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.g to accurately reflect the facts as 
follows: “You are indebted to [mortgage lender] on a real estate mortgage account with 
a total loan balance of approximately $175,020, and with a past-due balance of 
approximately $53,633. As of the date of the Statement of Reasons, the account 
remains past due.” There was no objection and the motion was granted.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He denied the 
remaining allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He has bachelor’s and master’s degrees. He was 
married from 1974 to 1982. He remarried in 1989 and has two children ages 24 and 28. 
He served honorably in the military from 1977 to 1997. His oldest child graduated from 
college in 2013 and his younger one is attending college. He provided his older child 
financial support during college. He currently is providing approximately $1,200 a month 
for living expenses to his younger child. Prior to July 2013, his wife was not employed. 
She now earns about $30,000 annually.3 
 
 Applicant purchased a home in 1998. He obtained a second mortgage in 1999 to 
add a pool to the property. In 2006, he and his wife agreed to purchase another house 
for her sister. The sibling made a $40,000 down payment and was to make the monthly 
mortgage payments. Applicant and his wife believed at the time they had the resources 
to pay the three mortgage loans. In 2007, Applicant took equity from the home to pay 
some credit card debts and finance a new boat. Applicant indicated that he refinanced 
                                                          
1 HE III and IV are the Government’s email memoranda. 
 
2 Tr. 121-124. 
 
3 Tr. 30-35. 
 
 
3 
 
 
the two mortgages on their primary residence, which was appraised at $408,000, for 
less than $300,000. Applicant indicated he was able to make the payments at the time.4  
  
 In 2009, Applicant began experiencing financial difficulties due to family issues. 
His wife’s parents passed away, leaving her and her sister their family home, which was 
in a trust. The mortgage was not satisfied, and Applicant and his wife attempted to pay 
the mortgage until they could sell the house. They had difficulty dealing with the bank, 
and paying the additional mortgage loan was a financial strain. They had trouble selling 
the home because it was appraised at less than the mortgage loan. They continued to 
pay the mortgage through the middle of 2010. During that year, Applicant’s younger son 
started college and also got into legal trouble. Applicant paid the legal fees for his son. 
This son also had a medical issue and approximately $10,000 of medical expenses was 
not covered by insurance. His oldest son was also attending college at this time. In 
addition, Applicant was traveling to another city to help his brother move their mother to 
an assisted living facility. Due to these events, Applicant’s credit card debt increased. 
He withdrew assets from his 401(k) pension plan to help pay their bills.5  
  
 Applicant made a decision to increase his pay by accepting a job in another 
state. He intended to sell his primary residence in State A and move to State B. His new 
salary with a bonus in 2011 was to be approximately $225,000. He moved in October 
2010, and his wife remained in State A to sell their primary residence. He received a 
financial relocation package from his new employer, which included assistance in selling 
his house in State A. Around the same time, his vehicle was beyond repair. He 
indicated that he could not afford to purchase a new vehicle. He chose to liquidate his 
401(k) pension plan and purchased a used 2002 Porsche for approximately $30,000. 
He indicated he received a warranty on the vehicle and believed it was a good value.6 
 
 Applicant’s attempts to sell the house in State A were unsuccessful because the 
value of the house was less than the mortgage. In addition, there were other 
comparable houses in the same neighborhood that were selling for far less than 
Applicant’s list price. His realtor suggested a short sale on the house, which he 
declined, believing it would jeopardize his security clearance. He was at his new job for 
three months, and he still had not been assigned the work he had been told he would 
be performing. He decided to return to State A since they could not sell the house and 
his new job was not what he expected. Around the same time, he experienced some 
medical issues. He returned to his former employment in State A in January 2011. His 
salary from 2011 to 2013 was approximately $130,000 annually. He received $1,650 
per month in military retirement pay. He was required to pay the rent on the premises he 
vacated early in State B, until the landlord could find new tenants. The rent was $2,750 
per month. He was required to repay his employer from State B the approximately 
                                                          
4 Tr. 43-44; Answer to SOR. 
 
5 Answer to SOR. 
 
6 Tr. 110-111; Answer to SOR. 
 
 
4 
 
 
$10,000 for moving expenses he received in cash. He believes he lost about $30,000 
on the move.7  
 
 In 2011, Applicant was audited by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), and it was 
determined that he owed an additional $12,000 for taxes. He entered into an installment 
agreement and began making $500 monthly payments.8  
 
 Applicant’s sister-in-law lost her job in 2011 and was unable to make the 
mortgage payments on the house on which Applicant and his wife held the mortgage 
loan. Applicant had four credit cards and the creditors raised their interest rates on the 
balances owed.9 
 
 In 2011, Applicant and his wife sought legal advice. On the advice of their 
attorney, they stopped paying the mortgage loan on his wife’s parents’ house. Their 
attempt to return the house to the bank was unsuccessful. Applicant indicated that they 
constantly had difficulty trying to deal with the bank.  
 
 Regarding Applicant’s mortgage loans and credit card debts, the attorney initially 
suggested bankruptcy. His attorney then advised him to stop making the payments on 
the three mortgage loans, and it was agreed that Applicant would seek a debt 
settlement for each of the debts. Applicant attempted to obtain a loan modification for 
the primary mortgage debt (SOR ¶1.a - $222,786) and was unsuccessful. The creditor 
filed suit against Applicant and a final judgment in foreclosure was entered for $278,388 
in January 2015. Applicant stated that the house is now awaiting a short sale. He stated 
that, once the property sells, this will resolve the first mortgage loan; and there is a 
deficiency clause that will resolve the second mortgage loan (SOR ¶ 1.b-$56,250). He 
anticipated it would be resolved by the end of the year. At this point, the judgment has 
not been satisfied, and these two mortgage loan debts are not resolved.  
 
 Applicant understood he was making a business decision to strategically default 
on his mortgage loans. He has not made a mortgage payment since 2011 and has 
continued to live in the house to the present. His combined mortgage payments were 
$2,300. He indicated that he disputed what he owed on the mortgage loans, believing 
he was not credited for certain payments he had made. He stated that he could not 
afford to make the monthly payments.10 
 
 Applicant also did a strategic default for the mortgage loan on the house he 
financed for his sister-in-law (SOR ¶ 1.g-$175,020, the past due for $53,633 as of May 
2014). He has not made a payment on the loan since 2011. She continued to occupy 
                                                          
7 Tr. 36-43; Answer to SOR.  
 
8 Tr. 43, 113-115. 
 
9 Tr. 45-46. 
 
10 Tr. 44-77; GE 3, 5, 6; AE A, F. 
 
 
5 
 
 
the house until 2014, and then his older son moved into it. His son does not pay the 
mortgage loan or rent. Instead his son contributes $500 monthly towards Applicant’s 
attorney’s fees. Applicant provided information to show he has paid approximately 
$27,000 for attorney fees since 2011. Applicant disputes the amount he owes on this 
loan. He is hoping to resolve this mortgage loan debt through a short sale of the 
house.11  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶ 1.c ($11,105), ¶ 1.e ($5,543), and ¶ 1.f ($4,434) are for 
delinquent credit cards. Applicant received an IRS Form 1099C-Cancellation of Debt for 
each debt. He stated he filed the forms with his 2013 federal income tax returns and 
paid the taxes. Applicant indicated the creditors increased the interest rates on the 
cards and then would not agree to settle the debt, but chose to cancel them instead. His 
last payments on the delinquent accounts were in August through October 2011. He 
stated he was advised if he continued to make payments on the account, the creditors 
would not negotiate a settlement. He decided to default on his payments and attempt to 
settle the accounts.12 
 
 The creditor for the credit card in SOR ¶ 1.d ($7,663) refused to cancel the debt 
and instead filed a lawsuit. It later voluntarily dismissed the lawsuit and agreed to a 
settlement for $4,008, paid by installment payments over nine months. Applicant 
complied with the terms and completed the payments in March 2015, thereby resolving 
the debt.13 
 
 In 2013, Applicant’s salary was reduced to $85,000 because he was cut from a 
contract. He saw this as a fortuitous event, because he became ill around the same 
time and needed time to recuperate.14 
 
 Applicant explained that he chose to proceed with a strategic default strategy 
regarding his mortgage debts in lieu of filing bankruptcy. He could not afford to pay his 
creditors so he made this choice. He believed it forced the mortgage loan companies to 
negotiate settlements via short sales for the properties. He stated he had some 
experience dealing with banks after the difficulty he experienced with his wife’s parents 
home. He knew he could not sell the houses to satisfy the mortgage loans, so chose to 
stop paying the mortgages on the advice of his attorney.15 
 
 Applicant estimated he has about $500 expendable monthly income at this time, 
because he recently completed his IRS installment payments and the credit card 
                                                          
11 Tr. 94-103; AE D, E. 
 
12 Tr. 78-84; AE B. 
 
13 Tr. 86-94. 
 
14 Tr. 36. 
 
15 Tr. 103-109. 
 
 
6 
 
 
settlement payments. He received some credit counseling from his attorney. He has a 
credit card with a $4,000 balance that he makes timely payments, and his wife has one 
credit card with a $1,500 balance. Applicant self-reported to his facility security officer 
that his house was being foreclosed.16  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
16 Tr. 115-117. 
 
7 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has an unpaid $222,786 judgment and two charged-off mortgage loans 
with past-due balances owed of $56,250 and $53,633. He had delinquent credit cards 
totaling approximately $28,745. He stopped making payments on all of these accounts 
in 2011. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
8 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has numerous debts that are not resolved. Due to his financial 
difficulties, he chose to default on his debts to force creditors to negotiate settlements 
with him. He settled and paid the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. The other credit card 
creditors chose to cancel their debts and issue him IRS 1099C forms. Applicant made a 
business decision to strategically default on his mortgage loans. He also decided to stop 
paying his credit cards accounts to force the creditors to negotiate settlements. He did 
this on the advice of his attorney. I find his behavior did not occur under unique 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur. His actions cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to many things, such as: the downturn 
of the real estate market; medical expenses for his son; paying his son’s legal fees; 
supporting his sons while in college; traveling to help his brother move his mother; 
paying the mortgage on his wife’s parents home; agreeing to purchase a house for his 
sister-in-law; changing jobs and incurring expenses when he moved to State B and then 
returning to State A; and being audited on his federal income taxes and owing additional 
taxes. Some of these things were beyond his control, but not all of them. He made 
decisions to take on additional debt and became overextended financially. He chose to 
refinance his home and take equity from it and use the money before the downturn in 
the real estate market. He chose to purchase a house for his sister-in-law, 
understanding that if she could not pay the mortgage, then he was responsible. He 
already had two mortgages on his home at the time and his wife was not employed. He 
decided to move to make more money and then moved back and had to repay his 
employer. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant chose to stop paying his mortgage loans and credit 
cards in 2011. He made business decisions to strategically default on his loans and 
debts. He continues to live in his primary residence, and his sister-in-law and son have 
occupied the other house rent-free. He forced his mortgage company to take him to 
court. He lost and the mortgage company was awarded a judgment. Although he is 
currently waiting for the short sale on his home to take place, he has not satisfied the 
judgment for the first mortgage or resolved the second mortgage. He settled one credit 
card debt, and he received IRS 1099C forms for the others. Although, these debts are 
no longer enforceable, I find he has not acted responsibly regarding his finances. Given 
 
9 
 
 
the way he has handled his finances, I find that AG ¶ 20(b) has limited applicability in 
this case. 
  
 Applicant hired an attorney to help him resolve his debts. Applicant received 
some financial counseling through his attorney. His three mortgage loans, one of which 
has gone to judgment, are not yet resolved. Based on the current status of his 
delinquent debts, I do not find that there are clear indications that Applicant’s financial 
problems are under control. I find AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies in that he is no longer 
legally liable for the credit card debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f, and he has settled the 
credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. He has not made sufficient progress toward resolving his 
mortgage debts to fully mitigate the financial concerns under AG ¶ 20(c). 
 
 Applicant’s “strategic defaults” of his debt obligations, which forces his creditors 
to resort to court action or accept lesser amounts in settlement, do not constitute good-
faith efforts to repay his creditors. Although some of the creditors canceled their debt 
and issued him tax forms, it also does not constitute a good-faith effort to repay his 
creditors. SOR ¶ 20(d) is not fully established.  
 
 Applicant disputes the amounts owed on his mortgage loans. It appears he is 
attempting to resolve the amount through legal means. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is a 
judgment for more than $200,000 that has been adjudicated and is still owed. Applicant 
testified that he anticipated that judgment and the second mortgage debt would be 
resolved after the short sale of the house, but that has not yet occurred. In addition, he 
also disputes the amount owed on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g. He anticipated dealing with 
that debt after his primary residence’s debt was resolved. It is premature to apply AG ¶ 
20(e).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
10 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 60 years old. He served honorably in the military for twenty years. He 
had some financial problems that were beyond his control. He also made poor decisions 
that had a negative impact on his finances. He has chosen to strategically default on 
several loans. He settled one credit card debt, but the others were charged off, and he 
received IRS cancellation of debt forms, which he stated he filed with his tax returns. 
Applicant’s choices in how he is resolving his financial problems may be legal and an 
appropriate business strategy, but it raises questions about his judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness. He still has a significant amount of delinquent debt that has not been 
resolved. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:    Against Applicant    
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
