 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03087 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 5, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 On December 9, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR, and he elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On April 15, 2015, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
 
2 
 
 
mailed to Applicant, and it was received on June 30, 2015. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object and the documents were admitted into evidence. Applicant did 
not submit additional information. The case was assigned to me on September 10, 
2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted both of the SOR allegations. I have incorporated his 
admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings 
and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He has worked for his present employer since October 
2006. Before that he was unemployed from August 2006 to October 2006. He worked at 
a retail store from February 2003 to his termination by mutual agreement due to 
unsatisfactory performance in August 2006. 
 
 On July 26, 2013, during Applicant’s background interview with a government 
investigator, he admitted he had a delinquent student loan and personal loan. He did 
not disclose them on his SCA because he did not have a copy of his credit report. The 
student loan debt (SOR ¶ 1.a, $48,562) was incurred from 1998 to 2004, and was 
originally between $30,000 and $35,000. The loan was deferred for two years after his 
graduation in 2004 and became due sometime in 2006. He was unable to make 
payments on the loan due to unemployment and underemployment. He attempted to 
get an extension on the deferments, and in May 2010 it was sent to a collection agency. 
Applicant indicated in his interview that he always intended on paying his student loan, 
and planned on contacting the collection company to arrange a payment plan now that 
he was making good money and could afford to pay the debt. He indicated he intended 
to pay every penny back as soon as possible.1 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
stated: “upon pulling my credit report via Transunion, my debt to [student loan] shows 
as being removed from collections as of 12-9-2013.”2 Applicant did not provide any 
other information about this debt. 
 
 Applicant also acknowledged owing the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($3,400) for a 
personal loan from a creditor obtained in about March 2008. He used the money for 
day-to-day living expenses. As stated above, he was unable to repay the loan when it 
became due because of unemployment and underemployment. He always intended to 
repay it and stated during his background interview he was going to contact the creditor 
to arrange a payment plan. He indicated he hoped to settle the debt in full within a year. 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated the debt was no longer on his credit 
report as a collection account.3  
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Item 1. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant did not provide any documentary evidence of efforts he made to fulfill 
his financial obligations and pay the delinquent accounts as promised.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
4 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant acknowledged he owed the debts alleged in the SOR. The student loan 
has been delinquent since before 2010 when it was turned over to a collection agency. 
The personal loan has been delinquent since 2008. Applicant indicated he was making 
good money and in a position to repay the loans. Instead, he chose not to fulfill his 
obligation and promise. Applicant is unwilling to satisfy his debts. He has a history of not 
meeting his financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions have been 
established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant used student loans to pay for his college education. He was 
unemployed and underemployed after completing college. He obtained a personal loan 
to pay for his living expenses. These were conditions beyond his control. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly. He became employed 
in 2006. He has since ignored his financial obligations. In 2013, he advised a 
government investigator that he was making good money and would repay his 
delinquent debts. He has not paid his delinquent debts despite acknowledging the 
financial means and promises to do so. Instead, he relies on the fact that the debts are 
no longer reported on his credit report. Although the creditors may no longer be able to 
seek payment, it does not negate that Applicant has failed to act responsibly, reliably, or 
trustworthy in meeting his financial obligations. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. None of the 
other mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant is 35 years old. After college he was unemployed and underemployed 
for a period and was unable to pay his student loan and a personal loan. He began 
working with his current employer in 2006 and indicated he was making good money. 
During his background interview, he admitted he owed the debts and promised to 
contact the creditors and pay them. He did not. Applicant’s disregard for his legitimate 
financial obligations and responsibilities is a security concern. His empty promises raise 
questions about his trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. The record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
