The Government submitted five items for the record.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-01082
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On May 16, 2015, the Department of Defense  (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a review based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. The case was assigned to me on October 9, 2015.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated July 30,
2015 . Applicant received the FORM on August 25,  2015. Applicant timely submitted  a1
response to the FORM. Based on a review of the case file, eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations (1.a through
1.i) under Guideline F. He also provided explanations. 
Applicant is 32 years old. He is married, and has no children. He graduated from
high school in 2003, and received his undergraduate degree in 2007. (Item 2) Since
2012, Applicant has been employed with his current employer. He completed an
application for a security clearance on August 31, 2012. 
Financial
The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts totaling approximately $150,000, of
which five are “private” student loans and the other five are federal student loans. (Item
4 and 5)  In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that the first and second  set of
student loans were in collection because he had not reached an agreement with the
company for an affordable payment plan. After contacting them several times, he
arranged a payment plan. He submitted information with his Answer to the SOR that he
reached an agreement on the first set of student loans (1.a-1.d), which required him to
pay $1,000 as a down payment and $600 that would be automatically deducted from
his bank account monthly beginning in June. Applicant stated the settlement amount for
this plan is $103,044.97.
As to the second set of student loans (1.e-1.i) , Applicant’s answer noted that
they are currently in good standing. He is on a payment plan, which requires him to pay
$256.06 each month. 
Applicant admits the student loans became delinquent due to periods of
unemployment and underemployment. (Item 1) He worked part-time jobs while he was
in college. After graduation, he took a series of low paying jobs due to the poor
economy.  He submitted his pay stubs to show that he made about $9.20 an hour. He
found a position in his field, but he was laid off. His unemployment spans the following
periods: from10-2008 to 3-2009; from 9-2007 to 1-2008; and 6-2006 to 1-2007. (Item 2)
In addition, he explained that the interest rates on the student loans increased. 
Applicant’s 2012 security clearance application noted that he agreed that his
wages would be garnished at a rate of 10% based on a salary of $40,000, because he
could not pay the amount requested for the student loans. He had no routine delinquent
debts. (Item 2 and 3)
Applicant responded to the FORM by supplementing documentation and
evidence to show that he is on a payment plan for both sets of student loans. He
provided a copy of his banking statement as proof that an amount of $256.06 is
automatically deducted from his account.  (Response to FORM; AX A) 
Applicant ‘s payment plan for the first set of student loans is $600 a month. He
provided proof that this amount is also automatically deducted from his bank account.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
3
The payment plan started in June 2015. He submitted evidence to show that he is
current with the payments.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
 Applicant incurred delinquent debt in the amount of $150,000. His admissions
and credit reports confirm the delinquent debts. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),
and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate
security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulty
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant’s debts remained
unpaid until recently. However, they are in payment plans. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment) partially applies.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
5
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
applies. Applicant worked through college, but after graduation, he could not find steady
employment. He had periods of unemployment. He worked in various part-time jobs,
which were low-paying. He found a permanent position, but was then laid off. Since
2012, he has been employed, and agreed to a wage garnishment. He has recently
arranged two separate payment plans for the student loans. He is current with the
plans. He acted responsibly under the circumstances. He did not incur new debts.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) partially applies, There is some indication that he
agreed to a garnishment in 2012. However, the two payment plans are recent. There is
no information to show that he has obtained recent financial counseling.  FC MC AG ¶
20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are  clear indications that the  problem is being resolved, or is under control) partially
applies because there are indications his financial problems are being resolved or
under control.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 32-year-old man who is married  and has no children. He had student
loans that he could not pay due to a series of low paying jobs and unemployment. He
now has two separate payment plans in place for the student loans and is current with
his payments.
Applicant provided sufficient mitigation to mitigate the financial considerations
security concerns.
6
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-i: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
