 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00427 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 21, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 23, 2015, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 12, 2015. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on August 
19, 2015. I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 17, 2015. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. In addition, the Government submitted a copy of the discovery letter 
sent to Applicant and an exhibit list that were marked as Hearing Exhibits I and II. 
Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on September 25, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His admissions have been 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He married in 2005. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
2006. He has two children, ages seven and three. He began working for a federal 
contractor in 2006, was laid off for four to six weeks in 2009, and then resumed work 
with the same employer.1  
 
 Applicant stated that he was financially irresponsible and accumulated debt when 
he was younger. He had a credit card and purchased a jet ski in 2006. He was able to 
pay his bills at the time. His wife lost her job in approximately 2008 or 2009. She was a 
secretary. He was laid off for four to six weeks around the same time. His eldest child 
was born in 2008, and his medical insurance did not cover all of the costs. He estimated 
he owed a couple of thousand dollars for medical expenses. He contacted some of his 
creditors at the time because he had difficulty paying his bills. The creditors would not 
work with him until the debts were delinquent. Once the bills were delinquent, the 
creditors’ payment plans called for large payments that mostly paid interest and not 
principal. He could not afford the payments. When he was laid off, he stopped making 
any payments because he did not have enough money. When he resumed working, the 
debts were with collection companies, which required high payments that he could not 
afford. The collection companies would not accept lesser amounts.2  
 
 Applicant acknowledged that he made mistakes with his finances because he 
was eager to acquire things and did not live within his means. He has learned from his 
mistakes. All of his current expenses are paid timely. His wife went back to work part-
time after their second child was born, and she will start full-time employment shortly. 
Applicant earns approximately $60,000 annually, and he anticipated his wife will earn 
between $1,000 and $1,500 a month.3  
 
 Applicant has two credit cards with balances of $500 and $700 that he is making 
payments on. He has a loan he owes for a surgery for his son (balance of $800) and 
two car loans for new vehicles he and his wife purchased in 2011. Each car loan was 
                                                          
1 Tr. 14-17. 
 
2 Tr. 18-24. 
 
3 Tr. 15-17, 22. 
 
3 
 
 
$21,000. These loans are all current. Applicant also is in good standing on a $27,000 
student loan.4 
 
 Applicant admitted he owes the eight debts totaling more than $24,000, alleged 
in the SOR, but has not paid any of them. He was disputing the amounts of some of the 
medical debts, and he was unable to work out payment plans. He stated he believed he 
already paid the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($88), and tried to dispute it, but was unsuccessful. 
He did not provide any documents to support his claim. He acknowledged the debts in 
SOR ¶1.d ($327) and ¶ 1.e ($241), but has not been able to work out a payment plan. 
He decided to focus on paying his monthly expenses. He expects his delinquent debts 
will eventually drop off his credit report. He has not contacted any of the creditors of the 
delinquent debts recently. He explained he tried to take care of the debts at one time, 
but the creditors wanted too much money. He has no way to pay the amounts the 
creditors want.5  
 
 Applicant had credit counseling in 2009 or 2010 with a company that was 
supposed to negotiate reasonable payment plans with his creditors. He paid the 
company $300 a month for two years, but none of his debts were resolved. He ceased 
working with them. Applicant explained that his wife pays some of their bills and he pays 
others. They have on average between $500 and $1,000 remaining at the end of each 
month after paying their bills. They have no savings, but Applicant has about $15,000 to 
$20,000 in a 401(k) retirement account.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 23-29. 
 
5 Tr. 22-23, 29-34. 
 
6 Tr. 34-38. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 
5 
 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
Applicant has eight delinquent debts totaling more than $24,000. He has been 
unwilling or unable to pay or resolve them for several years. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has been consistently employed since 2006, except for four to six 
weeks in 2009. Also his wife became unemployed during that time. She recently went 
back to work part-time and expects to work full-time. Applicant’s has numerous debts 
that are unpaid and unresolved. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant and his wife’s unemployment and medical expenses were conditions 
beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), he must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. At first, Applicant attempted to negotiate payment 
plans that he could afford with creditors, but was unsuccessful. He contracted with a 
credit counseling service to help him resolve his debts, but it did not. His actions show 
an attempt to act responsibly, but eventually he decided to only focus on his current 
 
6 
 
 
expenses and wait for the delinquent debts to drop off his credit report. I find AG ¶ 20(b) 
partially applies. 
  
 AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies to the extent that he sought credit counseling. But 
none of the debts have been paid or resolved. Initially, Applicant made a good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors and resolve his delinquent debts when he paid $300 a 
month for 24 months to a credit counseling company. The company failed to resolve 
any of his debts. AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant disputes a debt, but he did not provide documentary proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or to show what actions were taken to resolve the 
debt. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old married father of two young children. He admitted that 
when he was younger he was not responsible with his finances and lived beyond his 
means. He is older now and understands the importance of financial stability. He made 
some attempts to resolve his debts, but when he was unsuccessful, he decided to wait 
and let the debts drop off his credit report. His early efforts to resolve his debts do not 
outweigh his recent abandonment of addressing them. He is paying his current bills, but 
is unable to pay his legitimate delinquent debts. Applicant’s conduct raises questions 
about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
 
7 
 
 
me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
