KEYWORD: Guideline E
DIGEST: Given record evidence, to include admissions by Applicant, that Applicant’s security
significant conduct constituted an act of fraud, the Judge’s credibility determination was
sustainable.  The Judge’s findings constitute a reasonable interpretation of the record evidence. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 09-07597.a1
DATE: 10/19/2011
DATE: October 19, 2011
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-07597
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Richard L. Morris, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 21, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On July 25, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to consider all of
the record evidence; whether the Judge erred in his credibility determination; and whether the
Judge’s adverse security clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent
with the following, we affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a systems engineer
working for a Defense contractor (Contractor B).  A college graduate with a degree in management
information systems, he is married with two children.  He previously worked for another Defense
contractor (Contractor A).
While performing temporary duty (TDY) at a military installation for Contractor A in 2007,
Applicant stayed with his sister, who lived nearby.  He submitted a travel voucher requesting
reimbursement for lodging expenses.  The voucher noted that he paid a $450 lodging expense in
cash.  In fact, his sister did not operate a lodging business, and she did not provide him with a
receipt.  He did not reimburse his sister for any expenses she incurred while he stayed with her.
Contractor A did not investigate this claim.
Applicant performed TDY for Company A in 2008.  The TDY was performed at the same
military installation.  As he had the year previously, Applicant stayed with his sister, and he listed
a lodging expense on his voucher.  A travel clerk for Contractor A advised Applicant that, because
he did not incur a lodging expense and did not provide the company with his sister’s actual expense
in hosting him, the claim was disallowed.  Applicant submitted an amended voucher.  Applicant
knew from his exchanges with the travel clerk that he could only be reimbursed for the actual
expenses incurred by his sister.  He did not attempt to determine the actual expense incurred by her
during his stay.
In 2009, Applicant traveled to the same installation for TDY duty.  Again, he stayed with
his sister.  When he submitted his travel voucher, he submitted a receipt from a fictitious bed and
breakfast (B & B).  He admitted that he created this document on his computer, giving the B & B
a fictitious name, address, and lodging rate.  When the travel clerk processed Applicant’s voucher,
she could not locate the B & B.  She denied Applicant his claimed lodging expense and informed
his supervisor.  
Applicant began negotiating with Contractor B for a job.  He notified Contractor A of these
negotiations.  He accepted the position with Contractor B later in 2009 and submitted his
resignation.  When his supervisors at Contractor A learned of this, they attempted to get him to stay.
Prior to this, however, Contractor A investigated Applicant’s 2009 travel voucher, concluding that
his claim for the fictitious B & B was fraudulent.  Applicant’s supervisor counseled him and gave
him an administrative warning.  When he actually left Contractor A’s employ, his final pay was
docked by the amount of the fictitious travel expense he had claimed.  Contractor A personnel
submitted a report of this matter to the appropriate security officials, and Contractor B’s security
manager notified Applicant of the report.    
Employees of Contractor A have expressed dissatisfaction with that company.  There have
also been “disagreements and friction” between Contractor A and other contractors who have hired
Contractor A’s personnel.  Decision at 5.
1Applicant’s brief once cites the Judge’s application of the mitigating conditions.  No elaboration is offered and
we conclude that no issue of error is raised.  Compare DDES Case No. 97-0001, in which we concluded that language
in a caption, standing alone, was not sufficient to raise an assignment of error.     
2“Q: What is your understanding of what fraud means? [Applicant]: My understanding is intentionally
performing an action that is deceptive or incorrect.  Q: So, intentionally submitting an expense report with a fake lodging
receipt to receive money that you didn’t spend, that would fit within your definition of fraud?  A: Yes.”  Tr. at 79.  
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation for the quality of his work performance as well as
for his integrity, trustworthiness, and reliability.  Some of Applicant’s co-workers believe he was
mistreated by Contractor A.  One of his supervisors does not believe that the incident should have
been reported through security channels.
In the Analysis portion of the Decision, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s 2009 voucher
was deliberately false.  Along with his having received an administrative warning form his
employer, the false voucher raised security concerns under Guideline E.  The Judge went on to say:
I considered the testimony of his supervisors, friends, and fellow employees
concerning his reputation for honesty, candor, reliability, judgment, and
trustworthiness.  I considered his reputation as an excellent employee and his record
of accomplishments, and that he successfully held a security  clearance for a number
of years.  However, offset against this good character information are his actions in
knowingly and deliberately providing false documents with intent to gain monetary
reimbursement for expenses he did not incur.  This type of action indicates that he
may not properly safeguard classified information.  Decision at 10.     
Applicant contends that the Judge did not consider all of the record evidence, for example
his testimony acknowledging his wrongdoing.  However, a Judge is presumed to have considered
all of the record evidence.  In this case, the Judge made extensive findings, a large portion of which
were favorable to Applicant.  As the above quotation demonstrates, he discussed the favorable
findings in his detailed analysis.  He was not required to discuss every pieces of record evidence,
which is a practical impossibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12742 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 25, 2011).
The Judge’s findings and analysis constitute a reasonable interpretation of the record evidence.
Applicant has not demonstrated that the Judge failed to consider the entirety of the record.  Neither
has he demonstrated that the Judge mis-weighed the record evidence.1  
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in his credibility determinations.  He contends that
the witnesses favorable to Applicant were worthy of belief and the Judge “gave no finding that any
witness was not credible nor did he give any indication that any witness’s testimony was not
plausible or consistent with other record evidence.”  Applicant Brief at 6.  However, while
acknowledging that Applicant’s witnesses held Applicant in high regard, and that the opinions of
these character witnesses were uniformly favorable, the Judge nevertheless reasonably concluded
that Applicant had defrauded his employer.  Given Applicant’s own testimony acknowledging the
fraudulent nature of his conduct, there is no reason to disturb the Judge’s credibility determinations,
whether of Applicant or of any other witness.2  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-17076 at 3 (App. Bd.
May 11, 2011).  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan            
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields                 
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
