 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00266 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Roderic G. Steakley, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on March 6, 2008. On July 7, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline E. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On August 23, 2010, Applicant answered the 
SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on August 9, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on August 24, 2011, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on September 14, 2011. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 7. GE 1, 2, and 3 were admitted into evidence without objection. GE 5 
was admitted into evidence over Applicant’s objection. I deferred ruling on Applicant’s 
objections to GE 4, 6, and 7 until issuance of this Decision. Applicant testified and 
offered exhibit (AE) A. Department Counsel objected to AE A and I deferred ruling on 
that objection until issuance of this Decision. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on September 21, 2011.  
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
As noted above, rulings on certain evidentiary objections were deferred until 
issuance of this Decision. Those rulings are as follows: 
 
GE 4. This is an email string that Applicant initiated. The names of the senders 
and recipients of the subsequent emails as well as other information have been 
redacted. In general, the subsequent emails address Applicant’s work performance at 
Company B. Applicant’s Counsel objected to this exhibit essentially claiming it was 
hearsay and not relevant. He also indicated that its admission would be inappropriate 
because he did not have an opportunity to cross-examine the senders of the emails. 
The objection to GE 4 is sustained. GE 4 is excluded from evidence based on lack of 
relevance, hearsay, and ¶ E3.1.22 of the Directive.1 
 
 GE 6. This is an email string from employees of Company A discussing whether 
Applicant was resigning from his job. Applicant’s Counsel objected to this document for 
the same reasons he objected to GE 4. Department Counsel also indicated that it was 
being offered to show that Applicant was not candid during his resignation and for the 
                                                          
1 Tr. 18-24. Applicant’s email at the bottom of the email string is admissible as an admission, but 
it is not relevant to the issues in this case. The Appeal Board has held that ¶ E3.1.22 does not require 
exclusion of statements that are admissible under ¶ E3.1.20 or as exceptions to the hearsay rules under 
the Federal Rules of Evidence. See ISCR Case No. 06-06496 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun 25, 2009) and ISCR 
Case No. 08-06997 (App. Bd. Mar 1, 2011). Emails between employees are not per se business records. 
See Keneally, White Collar Crime: E-mails Sent During The Business Day May Not Be Admissible As 
Business Records, 28 Champion 42 (2004). “The business record exception to the proscription against 
hearsay set out in Rule 803(6) requires a showing that ‘it was the regular practice of that business activity 
to make’ the document proposed for admission into evidence, and that the document was ‘kept in the 
course of a regularly conducted business activity.’ Several courts have found that e-mails often do not 
meet these tests.” Id. at 42. See also Westfed Holdings, Inc. v. United States, 55 Fed. Cl. 544, 566, U.S. 
Claims LEXIS at *48 (Ct. of Fed. Claims 2003); New York v. Microsoft Corp, 2002 U.S. Dist. LEXIS, at *9 
(D.D.C. April 12, 2002). In this case, it is unknown whether the emails in question were generated as a 
regular practice of the business. 
 
3 
 
 
whole-person concept. The objection to GE 5 is sustained. GE 5 is excluded from 
evidence based on lack of relevance, hearsay, and ¶ E3.1.22 of the Directive.2 
 
 GE 7. This is an email string from employees of Company A discussing 
Applicant’s resignation from that company. It also indicated that an investigation was 
initiated into ZIP files found that apparently belonged to Applicant. Applicant’s Counsel 
objected to this exhibit for the same reasons he objected to GE 4. The objection to GE 7 
is sustained. GE 7 is excluded from evidence based on hearsay and ¶ E3.1.22 of the 
Directive.3 
 
AE A. This exhibit is two pages of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
report of investigation (ROI) into Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. It reflects that 
Applicant was involuntarily terminated from Company B due to no billable work 
matching his skills and also indicates that no other documents pertaining to Applicant’s 
termination were located. Department Counsel objected to this exhibit based on ¶ 
E3.1.20 of the Directive. Under ¶ E3.1.20, an ROI may be received into evidence with 
an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of 
Evidence. Nothing on the face of the ROI or in its contents suggest that it was not an 
official OPM investigative report or that it was prepared and maintained other than in the 
regular course of OPM business. In making his objection, Department Counsel basically 
conceded that this document was a ROI. Its authenticity is not an issue. Department 
Counsel’s objection is overruled. AE A is admitted into evidence.4 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take administrative 
notice of which day of the week was September 12, 2005. The request was granted. 
September 12, 2005, was a Monday.5 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has a bachelor’s 
and a master’s degree in electrical engineering from a major university and, except for 
the dissertation, has completed the requirements for a doctorate degree. He has never 
been married and has no children. He has worked in the defense industry for about 20 
years and, for most of that employment, he has held a security clearance without 
committing any security violations. He testified that he was familiar with the security 
                                                          
2 Tr. 26-32. See also note 1 above. 
3 Tr. 33-37. See also note 1 above. 
4 Tr. 37-40. 
5 Tr. 73-74. See http//www.timeanddate.com/calendar/?year=2005. 
 
4 
 
 
clearance application process and was aware that prior employers are contacted during 
security clearance investigations.6 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant falsified material facts in responding to Section 
22 of his e-QIP. In his Answer, Applicant denied that allegation. 
 
Applicant worked for Company A from June 2003 to June 2005. In that job, he 
worked in a Special Access Program. After resigning from that job, he began working 
for Company B in September 2005. While working for Company B, he became the 
subject of a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) investigation. In his Answer, he 
stated: 
 
In February 2006 I had been employed by [Company B] for only a number 
of months. I received a visit at my home by representatives from the FBI 
who were investigating claims made by a former employer [Company A] 
that I had taken certain confidential, proprietary and trade secret 
information with me upon my resignation from that former employer. The 
same work day after the visit from the FBI, I advised my manager at 
[Company B] that I had been visited by the FBI regarding allegations 
made by a previous employer. I remember being placed on administrative 
leave at that time, and believe that I received a letter indicating that 
[Company B] and I should “go our separate ways” shortly thereafter. I 
received this letter while the FBI investigation was ongoing. I was 
eventually exonerated of any wrongdoing related to that investigation.7 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that Company B immediately placed him on 
administrative leave for a couple of days after he notified that company of the FBI 
investigation. He indicated his supervisor consulted with corporate counsel before he 
was placed on administrative leave. Immediately following the administrative leave, he 
was presented with an employment termination letter. He never returned to his job at 
Company B after he notified that employer of the FBI investigation.8 
 
 The termination letter from Company B is dated February 3, 2006. The first 
paragraph of the letter states: 
 
We appreciate your contributions and service during the time you have 
spent with [Company B]. Confirming your discussion with [your 
supervisor], your employment with the firm is being terminated due to lack 
                                                          
6 Tr. 42; 44-47, 49, 51, 55-56, 60-63; GE 1, 2. 
7 Tr. 47-54, 73-86; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2, 5. 
8 Tr. 76-87, 100-102; GE 2, 3. 
 
5 
 
 
of appropriate work matching your skills and abilities. We regret that we 
are unable to avoid this result.9 
 
In that letter, Applicant was informed that his last day of employment was February 17, 
2006. He was paid until the last day of his employment, but did not work during that two-
week period. He was required to surrender his building badge and allowed to obtain 
personal items from his office. He did not recall if he was escorted to and from his office 
when he went to pick up his personal items. The OPM ROI indicates that Applicant’s 
employment with Company B was terminated because there was no billable work and 
was not the result of any problems or issues related to Applicant.10  
 
Before receiving the termination letter, Applicant testified that his supervisor 
advised him the reason for his termination was the same as that stated in the 
termination letter, i.e., a lack of appropriate work matching his skills and ability. 
Applicant specifically stated that he was never informed that he was being terminated 
because of the ongoing FBI investigation. From April 2006 to March 2008, he was self-
employed doing part-time consulting work, but primarily lived off of his savings and 
investments.11 
 
In his e-QIP signed on March 6, 2008, Applicant listed his employment with 
Company B in Section 11: Your Employment Activities and submitted the following 
“Additional Comments:” 
 
I joined [Company B] in summer of 2005 to work on the GMD [ground 
missile defense] program. I left this position by Apr 2006 for personal 
reasons. My departure was by mutual agreement with the company.12 
 
In Section 22: Your Employment Record of the e-QIP, he was asked the following 
question: 
 
Has any of the following happened to you in the last 7 years? 
 
1. Fired from a job. 
2. Quit a job after being told you’d be fired. 
3. Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct. 
4. Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of unsatisfactory 
performance. 
5. Left a job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances.13 
                                                          
9 Tr. 51-54; GE 3. 
10 Tr. 112-113; GE 3; AE A. 
11 Tr. 52-54, 67, 78, 90-91, 101-104; GE 1, 3. 
12 Tr. 57-60, 67, 85-87; GE 1. 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant answered “No” to that question and submitted the following “Additional 
Comments:” 
 
I left (resigned) [Company A] in 2005 to start work with [Company B]. I left 
[Company B] in 2006 (by mutual agreement) for personal reasons. None 
of the above apply.14  
 
In signing the e-QIP, Applicant attested,  
 
My statements on this form, and any attachments to it, are true, complete, 
and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and are made in good 
faith. I understand that a knowing and willful statement on this form can be 
punished by fine or imprisonment or both (See section 1001 of title 18, 
United States Code).15 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he responded “No” to Section 22 because 
none of the five situations in that question applied to him. Specifically, he interpreted the 
word “fired” to have a negative connotation. He indicated that he thought an employee 
had to do something wrong or inappropriate to be fired. He did not believe he was fired. 
He also testified that, in retrospect, he should have indicated that he was fired because 
he was terminated from his job. He also stated that he did not leave his job with 
Company B for personal reasons or as a result of a mutual agreement. He indicated his 
“additional comments” in Section 11 were not stated well. He also indicated that his 
“additional comments” in Section 22 about leaving Company B by mutual agreement for 
personal reason was a misstatement.16 
 
Overall, I found that Applicant was not a credible witness. During his testimony, 
he was asked if he thought the termination of his employment with Company B was 
because the FBI was investigating him. In asking that question, it was first pointed out to 
him that he was placed on administrative leave for a couple of days immediately 
following his report of the investigation and was terminated immediately following the 
administrative leave. Nonetheless, he testified that he did not believe these events were 
connected. I did not find his testimony on that issue to be believable. Furthermore, 
Applicant’s claim that he did not believe there was a connection between these events 
is also contradicted by statements he made in responding to interrogatories and in his 
Answer to the SOR. In responding to the interrogatories, he stated: 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
13 Tr. 57-60, 85-90; GE 1. 
14 GE 1. 
15 Id. 
16 Tr. 52-53, 58-60, 85-90, 99-100; GE 3. In Webster’s New World Dictionary 3rd College Edition 
(1988), the word “fire” is defined as “to dismiss from a position; discharge.” 
 
7 
 
 
I still believe (now 2010) that it was fundamentally unfair to terminate my 
employment while I volunteered all information and no one had any 
information at that time regarding the FBI investigation. 
 
*  *  * 
[Company B] should have let me continue to work normally pending the 
outcome of the FBI inspecting my computer system/media.17 
 
In his Answer, he stated, “It is my understanding that [Company B] and I were simply 
going our separate ways based on allegations which I believed to be at the time and 
which were ultimately proved to be baseless.” Such statements show that he believed 
there was a connection between the FBI investigation and his termination.18 
 
Applicant testified that, in the summer of 2009, the FBI returned the property it 
seized from his house. At that time, the FBI also informed him there was no indication 
that he engaged in any impropriety.19 
 
 Applicant’s performance appraisal from Company A in 2005 reflected that he 
received the grade of “far exceeds expectation” in the category of “Act with integrity in 
all we do.” The comments provided in that section stated, “His integrity is a fundamental 
characteristic that is important in his life.” In 2009, he received a performance evaluation 
from his current company that indicated he was performing at the “exceptional” or 
“exceeds expectations” levels.20  
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
                                                          
17 GE 2 at I-13. 
18 Tr. 81-95, 101-104; GE 2, 3. Additionally, Applicant indicated in the interrogatories that “. . . I 
would not resign, therefore, I was terminated.” When questioned about that comment at the hearing, he 
stated that Company B never asked him to resign. However, it does not make sense why he would make 
that comment if he was never asked to resign. This is another inconsistency that raises questions about 
his credibility. See Tr. 78-88, 100-101. 
19 Tr. 95-96; GE 2, 3. 
20 Tr. 63-66; GE 2. 
 
8 
 
 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavourable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the concern is that conduct involving questionable judgment, 
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15.) 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
The Government has the burden of proving a controverted falsification allegation. 
Evidence that incorrect information was submitted on a security clearance application, 
standing alone, does not prove a falsification. For a finding of falsification to be 
sustainable, an applicant must have had a culpable state of mind at the time the 
information was submitted. A falsification must be made deliberately -- knowingly and 
willfully. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to 
determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence that an applicant had a 
culpable state of mind at the time of the submission.21  
 
In February 2006, Company B informed Applicant that he was being terminated 
due to lack of appropriate work matching his skills and abilities. There is no evidence in 
the record that he was provided any other reason for that termination.  
 
                                                          
21 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. 
June 9, 2004)). See also ISCR Case No. 05-03472 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 12, 2007), ISCR Case No. 03-
09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov 17, 2004). 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Applicant indicated that, when he was completing Section 22 of the e-QIP, he did 
not believe any of the five situations set forth in that question applied to him. 
Specifically, he believed he was not “fired” because his termination was not based on 
any wrongdoing or misconduct on his part. Essentially, Company B informed him that 
he was being laid off. Based on the circumstances surrounding his termination, 
Applicant’s interpretation of the question in Section 22 and its subparts was not 
unreasonable. Given the expressed reason provided by Company B for his termination, 
he could have answered “No” to the question in Section 22 without falsifying that 
application. He did not need to speculate about the employer’s motive for terminating 
his employment. I find that Applicant did not deliberately falsify his e-QIP by checking 
the “No” block in Section 22. 
 
 However, in responding to Section 22, Applicant did more than check the “No” 
block. He provided “additional comments” that he “left [Company B] in 2006 (by mutual 
agreement) for personal reasons.” Those additional comments were false and 
misleading. He did not leave his employment with Company B by mutual agreement or 
for personal reasons. When he made those “additional comments,” he knew that 
Company B terminated his employment and that he had no input in that decision. He 
provided those false statements in both Section 22 and Section 11. I find that he 
deliberately made those false statements. 
 
 Sufficient circumstantial evidence exists to establish that Applicant believed 
Company B terminated his employment, in whole or in part, because the FBI was 
investigating whether he took proprietary and trade secret information from a former 
employer. Immediately following his report to Company B of the FBI investigation, he 
was placed on administrative leave for a couple of days and immediately thereafter was 
terminated. He never returned to work at Company B after informing it of the FBI 
investigation. I did not find credible Applicant’s statements that he did not believe there 
was a connection between his reporting of the FBI investigation and his termination. 
 
When Applicant submitted his e-QIP in March 2008, the FBI investigation against 
him was still ongoing. At that time, he knew that his previous employment was 
terminated almost immediately after reporting that he was being investigated by the FBI 
for allegedly taking proprietary information and trade secret from a former employer. To 
avoid a similar recurrence, he provided false and misleading statements in the e-QIP 
about the circumstances surrounding his departure from Company B. These false 
statements were “material” because they were intended to mislead and had the 
potential effect of influencing decision-makers to which they were addressed.22 I find 
                                                          
 
22 Deliberate and materially false answers on a security clearance application violate 18 U.S.C. § 
1001. The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 (1995): as a 
statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of influencing, the decision making 
body to which it is addressed.” See also United States v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 2004). 
Making a false statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony (the maximum sentence 
includes confinement for five years and a $10,000 fine).  
 
11 
 
 
that AG ¶ 16(a) applies to Applicant’s deliberate false statements in the “additional 
comments” to Section 22 of his e-QIP. 
 
Six personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
In his e-QIP, Applicant deliberately provided false information about the 
circumstances surrounding his departure from Company B’s employment. When 
applicants intentionally provide false information on their e-QIPs, they seriously 
undermine the entire security clearance investigation process. Throughout the security 
clearance adjudicative process, Applicant denied that he falsified his e-QIP. He has not 
accepted responsibility for his misconduct. I find that none of the mitigating conditions 
apply to the security concerns arising under AG ¶ 16(a).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
12 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. Applicant has worked in the defense industry for about 
20 years and held a security clearance for most of that time. Neverthess, his deliberate 
false statements on his e-QIP are serious, recent, and not mitigated. As such, I have 
concerns about his current ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts 
and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person concept, I conclude he has not 
mitigated personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
