1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-02492
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I grant Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
Statement of the Case
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on November 20, 2009. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on December 14, 2010, detailing
security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, that provided the basis
for its preliminary decision to deny him a security clearance. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for
Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient1
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
GE 1; AE F; Tr. 18, 35.2
2
Applicant received the SOR on February 9, 2011. He answered the SOR on
February 22, 2011 and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department
Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 28, 2011. I received the case assignment on
May 5, 2011. DOHA issued the first Notice of Hearing on May 17, 2011. I cancelled this
hearing for workload considerations. DOHA issued a second Notice of Hearing on July
8, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 27, 2011. The Government
offered exhibits marked as GE 1 through GE 6, which were received and admitted into
evidence without objection. Applicant testified. He submitted exhibits marked as AE A
through AE F, which were received and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 11, 2011. I held the record open until
August 11, 2011, for Applicant to submit additional matters. Applicant timely submitted
AE G through AE K without objection. The record closed on August 11, 2011.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Notice
Applicant received the hearing notice on July 14, 2011, less than 15 days before
the hearing. (Tr. 8.) I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to
receive the notice 15 days before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to
the 15-day notice. (Id.) 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegation in the SOR.  He1
also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the
following additional findings of fact. 
Applicant, who is 34 years old, works as a systems engineer for a Department of
Defense contractor. He began this employment as a college intern and has worked for
his employer for 13 years. His performance evaluations reflect that he either met or
exceeded his performance standards for the last two years. He has not had any
problems with security issues or classified information.2
GE 1; Tr. 18, 34.3
GE 5; GE 6; AE E; Tr.19-20, 33.4
He believes his wife increased her income with her new job, but since she did not begin her new job until after5
the hearing, this information is not available. Tr. 34.
GE 4; AE D; AE E. Applicant provided a copy of three of his leave and earnings statements, which reflect a6
lower net pay than he listed in his budget and on his personal financial statement. Thus, his discretionary
income is lower than he estimated. Id.
Id.; Tr. 45-48, 62.7
AE I; AE J; AE K; Tr. 20, 37.8
3
Applicant graduated from college in 1999 with a Bachelor of Science degree in
systems engineering. He married in 2003 and has one son, who is six years old. His
wife worked as a job developer for the disabled until August 2011 and now works in
social services.  3
Applicant and his wife purchased their home for $225,000 in 2003. They also
own two cars, a 2001 Isuzu and a 2006 Audi. They have paid the loans in full on both
cars. The credit reports of record indicate that they pay or have paid their credit cards
and credit accounts in a timely manner, and many balances are fully paid.4
Applicant earns $6,402 a month in gross income, and he receives $3,472 a
month in net income. He wife receives approximately $2,100 a month in net income for
a total net monthly household income of $5,572.  His monthly expenses total5
approximately $4,559, including his mortgage of $1,520, utilities of $355, phones, cable,
and internet of $289, food of $700, child care of $500, gasoline of $450, and
miscellaneous expenses of $600. He has a monthly remainder of $1,041.  His employer6
places funds from his earnings into a 401k account each payday. Applicant and his wife
have separate savings accounts. He estimates that he has $2,500 in his savings
account. He does not know how much money his wife has in her savings account. They
carry a positive balance in their joint checking account, and he has a positive balance in
his checking account. He also has approximately $7,000 to $8,000 in a mutual fund.7
In 2006, after several years of discussion, Applicant decided to invest in the real
estate market at the urging of several friends. These friends owned a rent-to-own
business and  a real estate business. They also had access to a mortgage investment
business. Applicant conducted some investigation into his friends’ businesses before he
invested. In 2006, Applicant purchased three homes, one for $185,000, one for
$190,000, and one for $192,350. He financed these purchases for 100% of the
purchase price with a first mortgage and a second mortgage. He provided some money
towards the closing costs of each property.8
Applicant relied upon his friends’ businesses to help with his real estate
purchases and his investment plan. As his friends explained to him, an individual would
Tr. 21, 30-31, 40, 50-51.9
Id. 51-52, 54-55.10
Id. 38, 40-41, 54-56.11
W ith the declining real estate sales market, he anticipated that he would receive less money than his12
purchase price.
4
rent one of his houses for a year. The renter would agree to buy the house by a specific
date in the future, generally within a year of signing the rental lease, and at a certain
price. The renter in each house would pay the rent-to-own company between $3,000
and $5,000 at the time they signed the rental agreement, and this money would be used
as earnest money towards the future purchase of the house. Finally, the renter agreed
to vacate the property and forfeit the earnest money if the renter did not pay the rent,
which was approximately $1,300 a month. Likewise, if the renter did not purchase the
property as agreed, the renter also forfeited the earnest money.9
In 2006, the rent-to-own company placed three renters in Applicant’s three
houses under the above agreement. During the first year he owned the properties, he
believes each property had two renters because the first renters were evicted for
nonpayment of rent. A year after his purchase of the three properties, Applicant realized
that the rent-to-own company was placing unqualified renters into his rental properties.
Because of the conduct of the rent-to-own company, in 2007, Applicant decided to rent
his properties on his own. Initially, he rented the properties, but as the economy started
to decline, his renters moved. By April 2008, he experienced difficulties renting his
property. In addition, the rental income he received declined from the original amount he
received, which increased his monthly costs for operating the rental properties.10
Applicant’s mortgage payments on the rental properties averaged approximately
$1,500 a month, and he received $1,300 a month in rent. Each month, he
supplemented the cost of each property by $200 for a total input of costs by him each
month of $600. He paid this expense with his own money and with his share of the
earnest money (the rent-to-own company took 25% of the earnest money). By April
2008, Applicant could no longer afford the rental properties because he did not have
steady, qualified tenants, and his rental income had reduced by $300 a month on each
property.11
Applicant contacted his mortgage company to discuss his decision to sell the
rental properties through a short sale.  The mortgage company advised that he could12
not short-sell the houses unless he was behind in his mortgage payments. A real estate
agent confirmed this statement. Based on the statement of the mortgage company, the
information from the real estate agent, and his increasing costs, he stopped making his
payments on his mortgages for the rental properties by April 2008. In May 2008, he
listed all three properties for sale. Two properties he listed for $129,900, and one
property he listed for $135,000. He was unable to find a buyer for any of his rental
properties. The mortgage company foreclosed on all three properties in November
GE 5; GE 6; AE I-AE-K; Tr. 22, 62-63.13
GE 3; GE 4; GE 6; AE H; Tr. 24-26, 42.14
Tr. 43-44.15
GE 3; GE 4; Tr. 29, 44-45.16
5
2008. As a result of the foreclosure, the mortgage company considered all his first
mortgages paid and two of the three second mortgages paid. The mortgage company
charged off the remaining $55,000 second mortgage, and the credit reports reflect a
zero balance on this debt. Throughout this time, Applicant continued to pay the
mortgage on his personal residence, which he still owns.13
Applicant and his wife believed that the foreclosure resolved all their financial
issues related to the rental properties. During the security investigation, he learned that
the $55,000 second mortgage on one rental property was charged-off. Even with this
information, he believed that the debt was resolved. In September 2010, Applicant’s
wife spoke with a person employed by the mortgage company about this debt and the
other rental property mortgages. The mortgage company advised her that five of the six
loans showed a zero balance and were closed. After further investigation, two
employees of the mortgage company advised her that an error had occurred and that
the $55,000 debt had a zero balance and was closed. The mortgage company rejected
her offer to work out a payment plan, indicating that no money was owed on the
account.14
After receiving the SOR in February 2011, Applicant contacted a credit repair
agency and a lawyer for assistance with resolving this one debt. The credit repair
company told him that it worked with credit issues related to dollars and cents, not
verbiage on his credit report. Because his credit report reflected a zero balance, the
credit repair company could not help him take legal action against the mortgage
company. A lawyer told his wife that he could not help them with this debt matter and
with Applicant’s security clearance.  15
Since February 2011, Applicant has learned that “charge off” does not
necessarily mean that he does not owe the money, as he previously thought. More
recently, both he and his wife have tried to talk with the mortgage company about this
charged-off debt. The mortgage company has refused to work with them on the grounds
the debt is a zero balance debt, and thus, they do not owe the mortgage company any
money.16
In 2009, the State Attorney General filed a civil complaint against the businesses
with which Applicant worked to finance his real estate investment. The Attorney General
alleged fraud by these individuals in their dealing with investors and rent-to-own buyers.
AE A; AE B; Tr. 50, 58-59.17
6
In 2010, the State filed criminal charges against two owners of the rent-to-own business
that worked with Applicant. The results of these cases are unknown.17
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
7
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
AG ¶ 19 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Appellant developed significant financial problems after investing in real estate in
2006 because he was eventually unable to rent his properties and without the rent, he
could not pay his rental property mortgages. One $55,000 debt has not been resolved.
These two disqualifying conditions apply.
The Financial Considerations guideline also includes examples of conditions that
can mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 20(a) through
20(f), and the following are potentially applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
8
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
After much thought and some investigation, Applicant decided to invest in the
real estate market in 2006. His investments turned sour when the economy declined,
and he could no longer obtain sufficient rent to pay his rental property mortgages. He
learned a valuable lesson because his credit has been harmed. There is little likelihood
that he will make similar investments in the future. The economic downturn impacted his
ability to rent his properties. When he realized the problems he had, he decided to sell
the properties through a short-sale. He contacted the mortgage company, which told
him he needed to default on his mortgages to sell his properties through a short-sale.
He defaulted on his mortgages and unsuccessfully tried to sell his properties.
Eventually, the mortgage company foreclosed on his rental properties and declared five
of his six mortgages paid.
Applicant sought assistance from an attorney, a credit repair company, and the
mortgage company to resolve his remaining debt. All declined to provide any help to
him because his credit report reflected that the last remaining mortgage had a zero
balance even though it is listed as a charge off. His wife offered to establish a payment
plan with the mortgage company, but it declined because, from its perspective,
Applicant does not owe it any money. Except for this one mortgage, Applicant pays all
his bills in a timely manner and has money saved for the future. Applicant has mitigated
the security concerns under Guideline F.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
In assessing whether an Applicant has established mitigation under Guideline F, the Appeal Board18
provided the following guidance in ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008):
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the concept of
“‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 200). However,
an applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 (App. Bd. Jun. 5,
2006). All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan
to resolve his financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can reasonably
consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating the
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is
credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a
determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding
debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for
the payment of such debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.
9
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial.  In18
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
always paid his bills, as shown on his credit reports. When the real estate market
boomed, he decided to invest with a goal of developing income for his future. The
economic boom times ended by 2008, and the real estate market declined sharply,
leaving Applicant with serious financial problems because he could not rent his
properties. Without the rental income, he could not pay his mortgages on his rental
properties, as he lacked sufficient income. He realizes he made a mistake investing as
he did in the real estate market. He did not fully understand the negative impact a
declining economy or market could have, but he has learned this lesson. Except for his
rental property mortgages, Applicant has always paid his debts and continues to live
within his financial means.
At the time he bought the rental properties, Applicant believed he was making a
sound investment, since the rental income paid much of the mortgage, and he could
pay the remaining money due on the mortgages from his income. With the drastic
10
change in the real estate market, his investment was no longer sound from several
perspectives. The property value declined, and his rental income slowly evaporated,
making it impossible for him to pay the mortgages. He tried to sell the property, but
could not. During this time of financial crisis, he paid all his other bills in a timely
manner. 
Applicant manages his monthly income well and has a track record of paying his
expenses. He has savings and is financially sound. The mortgage company refuses to
talk with him on the grounds he does not owe them any money. He can do no more to
fully resolve the debt listed in the SOR. This debt cannot be a source of improper
pressure or duress as the creditor denies Applicant owes it money, and on this basis,
Applicant does not believe he owes the creditor any money. Of course, the issue is not
simply whether all his debts are paid: it is whether his financial circumstances raise
concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. Applicant’s decision to invest in
the real estate market in 2006 was reasonable. When the economy drastically changed,
his investment soured. In light of his overall finances, his decision to invest in the real
estate market is insufficient to raise security concerns. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his finances under
Guideline F.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
