 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02766 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 4, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 28, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 8, 2011. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on August 2, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
August 25, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A and B at the hearing. 
The exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on September 9, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR and those admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings, testimony and 
admitted exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. Applicant is a 34-year-old 
employee of a defense contractor. He is single and has one minor child to whom he 
pays child support. In August 2010, he received an associate’s degree in computer 
hardware installation. He began working for his current defense contractor employer two 
years ago. He installs networks for his company. He does not have any prior military 
service and has not deployed overseas for his company. He has not held a security 
clearance in the past.1  
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts and a judgment totaling approximately 
$20,400. The debts were listed on credit reports obtained on January 27, 2010, 
September 3, 2010, and March 2, 2011.2  
 
 From 2003 through 2005, Applicant experienced sporadic periods of 
unemployment. In 2007, he moved to a new city in a different state. He has been fully 
employed since about 2007 or 2008. In either 2009 or 2010, he began experiencing 
some heart discomfort. Consequently, he underwent medical examinations and testing 
to see if there was a serious issue with his heart. Nothing unusual was discovered and 
he has not had any other heart issues. He did not have medical insurance at the time he 
was undergoing these examinations and testing, and accumulated significant medical 
bills as a result. Additionally, he had an elective medical procedure performed in 
September 2009 incurred at a significant cost for which he did not have insurance. 
These medical debts contributed to his overall financial delinquencies listed in the 
SOR.3 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i are delinquent 
medical debts related to Applicant’s heart examinations. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c 
is for a delinquent medical debt related to an elective procedure. The debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b is for his delinquent utility bill from a former address. The debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.f is a delinquent on-line student loan debt. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j is a 
delinquent car loan he co-signed for on behalf of his ex-girlfriend.4    
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 30-33; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 2, 3, 6. 
 
3 Tr. at 33-34, 59-65; GE 4. 
 
4 Tr. at 33-48; GE 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant provided receipts showing payments made in June (payment of $471) 
and August 2011 (payments of $90 and $41.49) to a collection agency that Applicant 
believes acquired the SOR debt ¶ 1.a. He is not really certain who currently holds his 
medical debts listed in SOR ¶ 1.a. No further payments were presented. He also 
provided a receipt showing one payment ($300) made in July 2011 on the debt listed at 
SOR¶ 1.c. According to Applicant, he was to make $300 monthly payments on this 
debt, but only one is documented. He documented a payment towards the settlement of 
SOR ¶ 1.f (payment of $71.31) in June 2011. However, the terms of the settlement 
agreement with the creditor called for him to make a second payment of the same 
amount in July, but that payment was not made. He also claims to have contacted the 
remaining creditors to work out payment arrangements. No documented payment plans 
were offered as evidence and no evidence of payments was made by Applicant on the 
remaining debts.5  
 
 Applicant’s other financial obligations include his monthly child support payments 
of $404. He is current on those payments. He also splits his current bills with his 
girlfriend. He has approximately $18,000 in deferred student loans. He is unclear when 
his payments will start on this obligation. He thought he was already paying $100 a 
month on this debt, but his bank statements do not support that belief because there are 
no entries for that amount to any student loan creditor. As of the date of the hearing, he 
had $54 in the bank. He has not participated in any credit counseling to assist him with 
his debts.6 
 
 Applicant submitted a character letter from a former instructor. He describes 
Applicant as well organized and someone who would “implement proper work ethics 
and procedures.”7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 33-48; AE A; Applicant’s Answer (Answer). 
 
6 Tr. at 30, 49-50, 54-55, 71, 81. 
 
7 AE B. 
 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to satisfy his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Although Applicant has made some payments, all the debts are still owed. They 
are not infrequent and there is no evidence to support the assertion that they will not 
recur. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant experienced periods of unemployment and sought uninsured medical 
care for a heart condition. These are conditions beyond his control. However, in order 
for this mitigating condition to fully apply, the Applicant must also act responsibly under 
the circumstances. Applicant’s actions do not show responsible behavior. Although he 
made some initial inquires with his creditors in an attempt to resolve his debts, he failed 
to reasonably follow up on these actions by making timely payments. AG ¶ 20(b) is 
partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant did not seek financial counseling to assist with his delinquent debts. He 
recently made payments on some of his medical debts, but he is not sure which 
creditors those payments cover and he has not followed up by making additional 
payments. His remaining debts remain unsettled and unresolved. Therefore, his 
 
6 
 
finances are not being resolved and are not under control. His attempts to reach 
settlements with his creditors are insufficient to support a finding that he has made a 
good-faith effort to pay or otherwise resolve his remaining debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) 
are not applicable. He offered no documentary evidence to dispute any of the debts. AG 
¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite the presence of 
some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the character letter of support for Applicant. I also considered his 
periods of unemployment and his uninsured medical costs. I also found Applicant to be 
honest and candid about his finances. However, he has done very little to resolve his 
debts. He only recently made some settlement payments and failed to follow through 
past the initial payments. His past financial track record reflects a troublesome financial 
history that causes me to question his ability to resolve his debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
