                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-08569 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esq. and Richard Stevens, Esq., 
Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard Paul Steinmann, Personal Representative 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant, 26, illegally used drugs from January 2001 until May 2010. He is 
commended for disclosing his illegal drug use in his security clearance application 
(SCA). Notwithstanding, in light of his age, the period he used drugs, the recency of his 
use, and the little corroborating evidence about a permanent lifestyle change and 
disassociation from his drug-using friends, I find that not enough time has passed to 
establish that Applicant’s use of drugs is unlikely to recur. His recent behavior casts 
doubt on his reliability and judgment. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a SCA on June 24, 2010. After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
On May 5, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), alleging 
security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).2 Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on May 24, 2011, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 5, 2011, 
to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on July 19, 2011, convening a hearing for August 17, 2011. At the hearing, 
the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 24, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the evidence, 
including Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old information technology (IT) security employee working 
for a Government contractor. He has never been married and has no children. Applicant 
started illegally using marijuana with one of his childhood friends while he was in high 
school. He currently has social contact with his childhood friend whenever possible. He 
characterized their contact as infrequent because his childhood friend is serving in the 
U.S. Coast Guard and he is not around.  
 
During high school, Applicant used marijuana approximately once every one to 
three months. He had truancy problems and attended four different high schools, 
including an alternative education center. He did not graduate from high school. He 
received his General Education Development (GED) certificate in 2002. After receipt of 
his GED, Applicant did not attend college. He worked for two years to make money to 
visit his then girlfriend who was living in another country. During this period, he 
continued to use marijuana at approximately the same frequency he used marijuana 
while in high school. 
 
Between August 2005 and May 2010, Applicant attended two universities, and 
substantially increased his use of marijuana. During his sophomore and junior years of 
college, he used marijuana “a lot, sometimes more than once a day.” (Tr. 35) Initially, he 
used part of his father’s monthly allotment to purchase marijuana from friends. His then 
girlfriend (C) would contribute financially to the purchase of marijuana. He dated C for 
approximately three and one-half years. They are no longer dating, but they have social 
contact approximately once a month. (Tr. 60-61) 
 
 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
While in college, Applicant lived at home and cultivated marijuana in a closet. He 
grew marijuana for economic reasons (to satisfy his marijuana habit), and because he 
was embarrassed about using his father’s allotment to purchase marijuana. He smoked 
marijuana at home, and with his girlfriend (C) at her apartment. He claimed he never 
sold marijuana, but shared his crop with his marijuana-using friends. He averred he last 
used marijuana in May 2010. He received a bachelor’s degree in IT with concentration 
in security in May 2010. His college grade percentage average was 3.47. 
 
Applicant also used other illegal drugs. He used cocaine once at a party in 2007, 
with his sister’s then boyfriend. He used and cultivated psilocybin (mushrooms) in about 
2007 or 2008. He used nitrous oxide approximately 10 times with a friend that he met 
online. He used vicodin (for other than its prescribed use, or prescribed to others), with 
varying frequency, from approximately 2008 to about early 2010. His girlfriend (C) 
participated with Applicant in the use of some of the above drugs. 
 
Applicant claimed that he tapered off his use of marijuana during his senior year 
of college because he knew he was going into a field where his use of drugs would not 
be tolerated. He last used marijuana in May 2010, after he had accepted a position with 
his employer, but approximately one month before he started working.  
 
Applicant submitted his first SCA in June 2010, and disclosed his illegal drug 
use. He wanted to be completely forthcoming with the Government at the start of his 
new career. He is passionate about information security and loves his job. Applicant 
claimed that he has changed his lifestyle and circumstances. He claimed he no longer 
associates with his drug-using friends, and that he no longer frequents the same 
environment that led to his use of drugs. He explained that while in college he did not 
have any responsibilities and that led to his experimentation with drugs. Now he has 
important job-related responsibilities, he wants to pursue a career, and his focus in life 
has changed.  
 
Applicant testified he is now a high performing junior-level professional. Because 
of his excellent performance, he received an out of cycle promotion, and a higher than 
average market award that amounts to a 16 percent salary increase. His performance 
and integrity has earned him a position in his company’s IT internal security operations 
center. He is proud of the recognition he received.  
 
Applicant’s references stated that he was a major contributing factor in the 
success of several of his company’s projects. He is considered to be creative, deeply 
conscientious, professional, and a hard-working employee. He is one of the best cyber-
security analysts in his company. His integrity and character are beyond reproach. Both 
references highly recommend Applicant for a security clearance. However, Applicant’s 
references are not aware of Applicant’s long history of illegal drug-use. 
 
Applicant is willing to participate in any type of drug testing to show that he has 
been abstinent. He believes that being candid and forthcoming in his SCA, during his 
background interview, and at his hearing demonstrates his honesty, reliability, and 
 
4 
 
 
trustworthiness. Applicant has not participated in drug counseling or rehabilitation, and 
has not been diagnosed with substance abuse. He presented no evidence of a recent 
diagnosis or prognosis concerning his use of illegal drugs. Since high school, Applicant 
has known that the use of marijuana, mushrooms, cocaine, and the abuse of 
prescription medications was illegal.  
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable, and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana, with varying frequency, from 2001 (age 17) 
until May 2010 (age 25). He also illegally used cocaine in 2007. He used and cultivated 
psilocybin (mushrooms) in about 2007 or 2008. He illegally used nitrous oxide and 
vicodin, with varying frequency, from approximately 2008 until about early 2010. 
 
Applicant stopped using illegal drugs because he wants to pursue a career with a 
Government contractor. He knows that his use of the above drugs was illegal, and his 
continued use of drugs would affect his ability to obtain a security clearance and pursue 
a career. He promised to never use illegal drugs again.  
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Two drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise security concerns in this particular case: AG ¶ 25(a) “any drug abuse”3 
 
3  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
 
6 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
and AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase.”  
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
I find that none of the Guideline H mitigating conditions apply. Applicant used 
illegal drugs from 2001 until May 2010. He used illegal drugs after he was hired by his 
current employer, but stopped one month before he started working. I find his illegal use 
is recent and frequent. Applicant’s prolonged use of drugs spans nine years. His 
favorable evidence is not sufficient to establish that he has implemented permanent 
lifestyle changes to prevent his future use of illegal drugs. He continues to have some 
association with his drug-using friends. Not enough time has passed for me to conclude 
that his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. His behavior still cast doubts on 
Applicant’s reliability and judgment.  
 
  Applicant has not participated in any counseling or aftercare treatment program. 
He presented no evidence of a recent diagnosis or prognosis concerning his illegal drug 
use. In light of Applicant’s age, the period he used drugs, and his recent history of illegal 
 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
7 
 
 
drug use, his promise not to use drugs without corroboration (e.g., clear evidence of 
lifestyle changes, statements from those who know him about his disassociation from 
his drug-using friends, or a competent medical diagnosis and prognosis) is not sufficient 
to show his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
Considering the record evidence as a whole, I find there has not been a sufficient 
period of abstinence. Applicant’s past questionable behavior still casts doubt on his 
reliability, judgment, and willingness and ability to comply with the law. His favorable 
evidence, at this time, is not sufficient to fully mitigate the Guideline H security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for being 
truthful and forthcoming during the security clearance process. He stopped using illegal 
drugs in May 2010, because he wants to develop a career. He did well in college, and 
he seems to be in the correct path to accomplish his rehabilitation. He has outstanding 
endorsements from his character references. He is considered to be a truthful, highly 
competent, and dependable worker. These factors show responsibility, good judgment, 
and some mitigation. 
 
Notwithstanding, in light of Applicant’s age, his nine years of illegal drug use, and 
the recency of his last drug use, his promise to not use illegal drugs in the future without 
corroboration is not sufficient to show his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. At 
this time, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance.  
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
