 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05700 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on March 22, 2010. On April 11, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines H and E. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
On May 20, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the ready-to-proceed notification on July 8, 2011. The 
case was originally assigned to another judge and was reassigned to me on August 9, 
2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 24, 2011, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on September 16, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 
1 through 5 that were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s 
index of exhibits is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. Applicant testified, called no 
witnesses, and offered no exhibits. The record was held open until October 7, 2011, for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted exhibits (AE) A through 
H, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s email 
noting he had no objection to those exhibits was marked HE 2. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 26, 2011. 
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He began working 
for his current employer in November 2005. He received a bachelor’s degree in 2008. 
He has never been married and has no children. This is the first time that he has sought 
a security clearance.1 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 
2003 to at least February 2010 and that he was charged with felony marijuana 
trafficking in 2006, which was later dismissed. It also alleged that he deliberately 
falsified his responses to two questions (Section 22: Police Record and Section 23: 
Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity) on his e-QIP. In his Answer, Applicant admitted all 
of the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact.2 
 
In responding to interrogatories on October 7, 2010, Applicant indicated that he 
used marijuana monthly from 2003 to 2006 and that he last used marijuana in October 
2006. During an earlier interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator in April 2010, however, he stated that his most recent use of marijuana was 
sometime between December 2009 and February 2010. At the hearing, Applicant 
testified that he last used marijuana in February 2010. When asked at the hearing about 
the inconsistencies involving those dates, he stated that he was confused about the 
dates in responding to the interrogatories and wrote down the wrong dates.3  
 
During the OPM interview, Applicant indicated that he used marijuana on 
vacations, which he took about every three months. He used this substance while on 
vacations in Jamaica and Canada. He also used marijuana in his friends’ homes and 
purchased marijuana. In the interview, he also stated that he had no intention of 
stopping his use of marijuana. At that time, he stated that he did not intend to use 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6-7, 28-29,; GE 1.  
2 SOR; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 36-40, GE 2, 3. 
 
3 
 
marijuana for the rest of his life but thought his desire to use this substance would 
naturally fade. At the hearing, he testified that he never intends to use marijuana in the 
future. He also testified that he no longer associated with friends with whom he used 
marijuana, but refused to disclose the identity of those friends during the OPM interview 
and at the hearing. He has had three or four drug tests at work and all had negative 
results. He has never received drug treatment or counseling and has never been 
diagnosed as being a drug abuser or drug dependent.4  
 
On October 9, 2006, Applicant appeared naked and was yelling profanities in the 
parking lot outside his apartment. Employees and tenants of the apartment complex 
observed him engaging in that conduct. The police were called, arrested him, and took 
him to a hospital. Applicant testified that he does not know exactly why he was naked 
outside his apartment. He believed that incident occurred because he had been fasting, 
drinking alcohol, and smoking marijuana. The best reason he could give for that 
behavior was that he was “just drunk and not really in my right mind.” As a result of this 
incident, he was charged with public lewdness and disorderly conduct. On October 10, 
2006, he pled guilty to both charges and was sentenced to five days in jail. He believed 
that he was given a drug while in the hospital and did not have a clear mind when he 
appeared before the judge. He does not have a good recollection of what happened 
when he appeared before the judge.5 
 
During that October 2006 incident, the police found marijuana in boxes on the 
balcony of Applicant’s apartment. Applicant did not have a roommate at that time. 
During the OPM interview, he stated that a staff member of the apartment complex 
reported seeing something suspicious on his balcony. On October 10, 2006, a criminal 
complaint was issued stating that he did “knowingly sell, manufacture, deliver, or bring 
into this state, or knowingly have in actual or constructive possession . . . 60 pounds of 
cannabis, a controlled substance . . . .” He claimed the marijuana was not his property. 
He testified that the marijuana belonged to a friend who asked Applicant to store the 
boxes for him. He stated that the friend never told him what was in the boxes and that 
the boxes were sealed. However, he also stated the police report indicated one of the 
boxes was found open. He refused to disclose the identity of the friend to the police or 
later to the OPM investigator. At the hearing, he also refused to disclose the identity of 
the friend, but indicated the friend had an apartment in the local area and he had 
previously smoked marijuana with that friend. In his testimony, he indicated that he 
placed the boxes on the balcony. On September 30, 2008, the marijuana-related charge 
was dismissed with leave to reindict because an essential state’s witness was in Iraq. At 
the time of this hearing, he had not been reindicted.6 
 
In Section 22 of his e-QIP, Applicant was asked five questions concerning his 
police record. He responded “Yes” to four of those questions indicating he had 
                                                          
4 Tr. 36-42, 47-49; GE 2, 3. 
5 Tr. 29-34; GE 3, 5. 
6 Tr. 29-36, 41-42, 49-54; GE 1, 3, 4. 
 
4 
 
reportable interactions with law enforcement authorities. Specifically, in Section 22b, he 
was asked if he had been arrested by any law enforcement officer in the last seven 
years. He answered “Yes” to Section 22b and listed that he was charged with marijuana 
trafficking in October 2006 and that the charge was dismissed. The same information 
concerning the marijuana trafficking charge was listed for each of his “Yes” answers to 
the other questions in Section 22. In responding to Section 22b, however, he did not 
disclose that he was arrested for public lewdness and disorderly conduct. All of those 
charges, i.e., public lewdness, disorderly conduct, and marijuana trafficking, arose out 
of one arrest in October 2006. At the hearing, he testified that his failure to disclose the 
public lewdness and disorderly conduct charges was an oversight. In filling out Section 
22b, he indicated he was focused on the marijuana trafficking charge, which was the 
most serious offense. He also indicated that he explained the entire situation 
surrounding these offenses during the OPM interview.7 
 
In his e-QIP, Applicant was asked in Section 23a if he had illegally used 
marijuana in the last seven years. He answered “No” to that question. However, he did 
answer “Yes” to Section 23c that asked if he had been involved in the illegal possession 
purchase, manufacture, trafficking, production, shipping, receiving, handling, or sale of 
any controlled substance in the last seven years, and disclosed the following: 
 
Dates of use/activity 
 From (Month/Year): 10/2006 To (Month/Year): 10/2006 
Type of controlled substance(s) 
 marijuana 
Explain (nature of use/activity, frequency of activity and number of times used) 
 I was charged with trafficking marijuana, the case was dismissed. 
Additional comments 
I am answering yes to this question as instructed by Personnnel (sic) 
Security 
Additional Comments 
Answering yes to c as instructed by Personnel Security 
Administrator8 
 
At the hearing, he testified: 
 
As far as count (b) [SOR ¶ 2.b] where I falsified material facts on the 
questionnaire, again that may have been -- I am going to say that that was 
an oversight on my part. That form, 50 pages, was filled out a number of 
times. It was sent to the company’s security department for their review. 
They made some suggestions. I made some changes. It went back and 
forth a couple of times, so I many have just, -- I think that was a check 
box. 
 
                                                          
7 Tr. 24-25, 42-47; GE 1. 
8  GE 1. 
 
5 
 
It may have been checked at one time, and it many have been unchecked 
at another time. I still believe that was just an oversight on my part. I was 
not meant to hide anything or to deliberately just falsify information. Again, 
in the interview, I explained the complete situation verbally, and for me, it’s 
just hard with correspondence and things like that. Things kind of get lost. 
. . . I guess the whole point of everything is to say that filling out the form 
or mis-filling (sic) out the form was not done in an attempt to hide 
anything.9 
 
He stated he did not review the entire form before submitting it. At the hearing, he was 
asked if he disclosed his use of marijuana to the personnel security administrator when 
he was filling out the e-QIP. He stated he did not disclose that information to the 
personnel security administrator.10  
 
 Applicant submitted letters of reference from individuals who recommended him 
for a security clearance. Two of those individuals have known him for over 20 years. 
They describe him as talented and hardworking. One individual indicated that he has 
excellent family values and is trustworthy. Applicant has received a letter of appreciation 
from his employer for his five years of service to that company. His performance 
evaluations reflect that he has received ratings of “exceeds expectations” or 
“consistently meets expectations” in most categories. In 2010, his overall rating was 
“frequently exceeds expectations.” His supervisor described him as an excellent, 
dignified, and trustworthy employee.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. 25-26. 
10 Tr. 42-46; GE 1. 
11 AE A-H. 
 
6 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and  
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;  
 
7 
 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
 The guideline lists several conditions that could raise disqualifying security 
concerns under AG ¶ 25. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
Applicant used marijuana from 2003 to February 2010. From 2003 to 2006, he 
used it monthly. He has purchased marijuana. In October 2006, the police found 60 
pounds of marijuana in boxes on the balcony of his apartment. He was charged with 
trafficking of marijuana, but that charge was eventually dropped because an essential 
witness was in Iraq. He claimed that he was storing the boxes for a friend and was not 
aware that they contained marijuana. Despite his claim of lack of knowledge, sufficient 
circumstantial evidence exists to establish that he knowingly possessed that marijuana. 
For example, he admitted that he placed the boxes on his balcony. He indicated the 
police found one of the boxes open. He was using marijuana before he was arrested. A 
staff member of his apartment complex had enough of a suspicion about the boxes to 
report that concern to the police. Applicant provided no meaningful explanation of why a 
friend would ask him to store the boxes when the friend had an apartment in the local 
area. He refused to disclose the identity of his friend. Based on the record evidence, I 
find that Applicant knowingly possessed the marijuana that was found on his balcony. 
Both AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) are applicable in this case. 
 
Two Drug Involvement mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency for a period of about seven 
years. He last used it approximately 19 months ago when he was 33 years old. His 
long, frequent, and recent use of marijuana casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Moreover, his possession of 60 pounds of 
marijuana in 2006 raises significant security concerns. 
 
8 
 
 
When interviewed in March 2010, Applicant stated he had no intention of 
stopping his use of marijuana. At the hearing, however, he stated that he does not 
intend to use that substance in the future. He also testified that he no longer associates 
with drug-using friends; however, he refused to identify the friends with whom he has 
used marijuana. In light of his refusal to identify those friends, little weight is given to his 
claim that he no longer associates with them. From a review of the entire record 
evidence, I find that a sufficient period of abstinence has not passed to conclude that his 
illegal drug involvement will not recur. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) do not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
For a finding of falsification to be sustainable, an applicant must have had a 
culpable state of mind at the time the information was submitted. A falsification must be 
made deliberately -- knowingly and willfully. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence that an applicant had a culpable state of mind at the time of the submission.12  
                                                          
12 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. 
June 9, 2004)). See also ISCR Case No. 05-03472 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 12, 2007), ISCR Case No. 03-
09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov 17, 2004). 
 
 
9 
 
 
With regard to SOR ¶ 2.a, the e-QIP question at issue is whether Applicant was 
arrested by law enforcement officials in the last seven years. When he submitted his e-
QIP in March 2010, he disclosed that he was arrested for the trafficking of marijuana in 
October 2006 and noted that charge was dismissed. He did not disclose that he was 
initially arrested during that incident for public lewdness and disorderly conduct, the two 
offenses to which he pled guilty. He was only arrested once for all three of those 
offenses. At the hearing, he indicated that in answering that question he was focused on 
reporting the most serious charge, i.e., marijuana trafficking, and failed to list the others 
due to an oversight. His explanation is plausible. The question at issue did not ask 
Applicant about charges, but arrests. He reported that one arrest and, in doing so, 
substantially complied with the reporting requirement. I find for Applicant on the SOR ¶ 
2.a. He did not deliberately falsify his response to Section 22b of the e-QIP.  
 
On the other hand, I find that Applicant deliberately falsified his response to 
Section 23a of his e-QIP. At the time he submitted his e-QIP, he had a long history of 
using marijuana. The month before he submitted the e-QIP he used that substance, but 
failed to disclose such use in the security clearance application. He claimed his failure 
to disclose such illegal drug use was an oversight. He also indicated that he may have 
checked the block that he used a controlled substance and, later during the e-QIP 
review process, it became unchecked. I do not find his explanations credible. In the 
security clearance process, he has made inconsistent statements about his marijuana 
use. During the OPM interview in April 2010, he stated that he last used marijuana 
sometime between December 2009 and February 2010. In responding to interrogatories 
in October 2010, he stated he last used marijuana in October 2006. His failure to 
disclose this marijuana use on his e-QIP was not an oversight. When he was filling out 
that application, he discussed with the personnel security administrator that he had 
been charged with trafficking marijuana, a charge that had been dropped, but also 
indicated that he did not disclose to that individual his use of marijuana. Sufficient 
circumstantial evidence exists to establish that he deliberately failed to disclose his use 
of marijuana in his response to Section 23a of the e-QIP. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to that 
deliberate falsification.  
 
Six personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
10 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
In his e-QIP, Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his use of marijuana over a 
number of years. When applicants intentionally falsify their e-QIPs, they seriously 
undermine the entire security clearance investigation process. At the hearing, Applicant 
claimed the omission of the information concerning his use of marijuana was an 
oversight. He has not accepted responsibility for this misconduct. I find that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply to the security concerns arising under AG ¶ 16(a).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
 
11 
 
comment. For the past six years, Applicant has excelled in his job. His character 
references vouch for his trustworthiness and reliability. Nevertheless, his drug 
involvement and personal conduct raise significant security concerns. All of Applicant’s 
questionable conduct must be viewed as a whole. In doing so, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about his eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug 
Involvement and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
