 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 10-09079
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Phillip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: John F. Mardula, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by her ties to persons and
interests in South Korea. She also mitigated security concerns about outside activities
and about a large past-due debt. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and
transcript, Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted.
On April 8, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for her job with
a defense contractor. After the ensuing background investigation was completed,
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to
Applicant interrogatories  to clarify or augment information obtained in through the1
investigation. After reviewing the results of the background investigation and Applicant’s
responses to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These3
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
2
affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or2
continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. On April 15, 2011,
DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise
security concerns addressed in the adjudicative guidelines (AG)  for foreign influence3
(Guideline B), outside activities (Guideline L), and finances (Guideline F).
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on June 15, 2011. Pursuant to a Notice of Hearing issued on June 29,
2011, I convened a hearing on July 22, 2011. The Government presented two exhibits
that were admitted without objection as Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 and 2. The
Government also provided documents for administrative notice, which are included in
the record as Gx. 3. Applicant testified, presented one witness, and offered 14 exhibits,
which are included as Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - N. DOHA received a transcript (Tr.)
of the hearing on August 1, 2011.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline B, the Government alleged that Applicant has a sister, an uncle,
and two cousins who are citizens of and reside in South Korea (SOR 1.a); that her
brother is a South Korean citizen who lives in the United States (SOR 1.b); that she
maintains a checking account in South Korea (SOR 1.c); that she traveled to North
Korea in 2004 (SOR 1.d); that since 1998 she worked for an independent council that
reports to the South Korean president (SOR 1.e); and that between July 2000 and July
2005, she was a member of another South Korean organization (SOR 1.f). 
Under Guideline L, the Government cross-alleged the SOR 1.e allegation. Under
Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant was delinquent on a  $16,500 debt
for an unpaid civil judgment.
Applicant denied with explanation all of the SOR allegations. However, aside
from her denial of SOR 3.a, her explanations made clear that she admitted the facts
alleged. The facts established through Applicant’s answer are incorporated in my
findings of fact. Having reviewed the pleadings, the transcript, and exhibits, I make the
following additional findings of fact.
Applicant was born and raised in South Korea. She came to the United States in
1974, when she was 21 years old, and she was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in
February 1980. Applicant is now 59 years old and employed by a defense contractor as
an information analyst, a job she has held since January 2010. Applicant fully disclosed
numerous facts in her application for a security clearance that required investigation for
possible foreign influence, adverse financial issues, and outside activities.
3
Applicant and her husband, a U.S.-born American citizen, have been married
since December 1978. They have two grown children, both of whom were born in the
United States. Applicant and her husband have lived in the same house since
September 1989. (Gx. 1)
Applicant has also worked for the sheriff’s department where she lives, and she
has a long record of community activity and volunteer work. She has been active in a
local Kiwanis Club chapter, in civic groups concerned about gang violence and at-risk
youth, and in groups organized for the mutual professional benefit of other Korean-
Americans and their businesses, such as the Korean Women’s Association. 
Applicant’s father died in South Korea in 1974. Her mother came to the United
States in 1980 and is a naturalized U.S. citizen living in the same city as Applicant. (Gx.
1; Gx. 2; Tr. 53) Applicant has four younger siblings – two sisters and two brothers. Both
brothers and one sister live in the United States. One brother is a permanent resident
alien who has been in the United States for at least 25 years. (Tr. 55 - 56) Her other
brother and one sister are naturalized U.S. citizens. All three have been living in the
United States for almost 30 years. (Tr. 59 - 60) 
Applicant’s other sister is a citizen of South Korea and still resides there with her
husband, a shoe manufacturer, and their children. (Tr. 58 - 59) None of Applicant’s
relatives works for the South Korean government. The only such affiliation has been the
two years of mandatory military service in the South Korean Army required of all South
Korean males between age 18 and 35. Applicant’s brothers completed their service in
the 1970s. (Gx. 2)
Applicant also has extended family in South Korea. An uncle and two cousins are
South Korean citizens who reside there, but Applicant has had little contact with them
over the past 20 years. (Gx. 2; Tr. 54 - 55) Applicant’s contact with her siblings over
most of the past 20 years has been sporadic at best. Even her contact with her mother,
who lives nearby, has been irregular. Applicant attributes the lack of regular
communication or personal contact with her family members to each family member,
including Applicant, having their own busy lives to live. The most recent contact she has
had with family members was in preparation for her hearing in this matter when she
contacted her siblings to update their information (occupations, addresses, and so on).
(Tr. 108 - 109) As discussed below, Applicant also enlisted the aid of one of her cousins
in South Korea to close Applicant’s checking account in South Korea. (Ax. C; Ax. D)
After Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1974, she did not return to
South Korea until about 2000. At that time, she made the first of several return trips to
South Korea for various reasons, most related to her participation in the National
Unification Advisory Council (NUAC). Applicant also belonged to the Korean Overseas
Foundation, an international networking and support group for expatriate Koreans.
NUAC is a non-governmental organization of Korean citizens who are working for the
peaceful reunification of the Korean peninsula. (Ax. H - L) There are several chapters in
the United States who meet periodically to discuss issues related to possible
reunification. Each year there are conferences in South Korea, which Applicant has
attended at her own expense. The leadership of these chapters communicates with
4
officials of the South Korean government. Applicant has resigned her position in both
organizations. However, her role in both the NUAC and the Korean Overseas
Foundation was negligible. She was not an officer of either and her activities carried no
weight in the organizational decision making. At no time did her participation in either
organization bring her into contact with officials of the South Korean government. (Tr.
65, 75, 79 - 80. 98 - 99)
Applicant also traveled to South Korea to work as a translator during the 2002
World Cup soccer tournament. At that time, to help with expenses, she opened a
checking account with a South Korean bank. When she traveled to South Korea after
that, she would deposit American currency in that account for conversion to Korean
currency. The account was not intended for major financial transactions in South Korea.
It currently contains the equivalent of about $400. Applicant wants to close the account,
but she must do so in person. Rather than pay $2,000 to fly to South Korea, she has
asked the bank to let her cousin represent her in closing the account. (Tr. 20 - 21)
During a trip to South Korea in 2004 for a NUAC conference, Applicant went on a
group bus tour of Kumgang mountain, a tourist site in North Korea just north of the
Demilitarized Zone (DMZ). Trips to Kumgang became available to tourists in 1998.
Applicant’s trip there was a routine event for tourists arranged by the South Korean
government and heavily controlled by North Korean authorities, who prohibited any
interaction between the tourists and North Korean citizens. Applicant never left the bus
during the 30 minutes the group was actually at the tourist site, and she never had any
contact with North Korean citizens or officials from that country. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. E - G;
Tr. 41, 66 - 70)
The Republic of Korea is a modern, highly developed democratic republic. Its
government is freely elected and modeled after Western democracies consisting of
executive, legislative, and judicial branches. Crime rates are lower there than in the
United States and the Korean government has an excellent human rights record. There
is no indication that the government oppresses or tries to otherwise manipulate its
citizens through force or illegal detention. The United States and South Korea have had
strong ties in financial, diplomatic, and military matters since Korean War hostilities
ended in 1953. Both militaries conduct large-scale joint exercises every year. South
Korea has also been a staunch ally in the Global War on Terror since 2001. However,
despite this close relationship, South Korea is aggressive in its efforts to acquire
information about U.S. information, aerospace, and nuclear technologies. The United
States has implemented restrictions on the export to South Korea of technology related
to missile systems, encryption software, night vision products, and so forth. (Gx. 3)
In 2009, Applicant sold a small business she and her daughter had owned. The
purchaser sued Applicant after the sale and won a civil judgment against Applicant. The
judgment went unpaid until May 2010 when Applicant and the plaintiff reached a
settlement, whereby Applicant paid $16,500 through two payments. (Answer to SOR;
Ax. A; Ax. B; Tr. 81 - 83)
  Applicant has significant financial assets in the United States. Other than the
$400 balance in her Korean bank account, she has no financial or property interests
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 Directive. 6.3.5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
5
overseas. She and her husband have over $400,000 in retirement savings and have
owned their house since 1989. There is no indication that they have ever had any
financial problems. (Gx. 2; Tr. 84 - 88)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies5
in the adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to6
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a
security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  A person who7
has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the
Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
6
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.8
Analysis
Foreign Influence
The Government established that Applicant, who was born and raised in South
Korea, has close relatives who are citizens of that country. Some of them still reside
there. This information raises a security concern about possible foreign influence that is
addressed at AG ¶  6 as follows:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism. 
More specifically, the Government’s information requires consideration of the
disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 7(a) (contact with a foreign family member, business or
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion). The presence of Applicant’s relatives (a sister, and
uncle, and two cousins) in a foreign country is a potential source of concern because of
the possibility that the country’s government or other foreign entities might try to
leverage Applicant’s security clearance through Applicant’s relatives. 
The fact that South Korean society is open and governed in a democratic
fashion, and that there is no indication that the South Korean government oppresses its
citizens, mitigates against a finding of heightened risk here. However, South Korea’s
aggressive approach to collection of U.S. technologies is sufficient to support
application of AG ¶ 7(a).
Nonetheless, despite being actively engaged in efforts to obtain U.S. industrial
information and military technology, the stable character of South Korea’s society and
South Korea’s strong alliance with the United States greatly undermine the probability
that South Korea would try to coerce Applicant through her ties of affection there. Thus,
the record also supports application of the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature
of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
7
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.). The allegations at SOR 1.a and 1.b are resolved for Applicant.
Information about Applicant’s membership in or affiliation with NUAC and the
Korean Overseas Foundation requires consideration of the disqualifying condition at AG
¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a
potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information). However, the record shows that those groups are
not governmental entities, there was no contact with South Korean officials, and that
Applicant’s participation in those groups was negligible. The Government presented
substantial administrative notice materials, but did not provide any information about
NUAC or any of the other Korean-American interest groups in which Applicant has
participated. Thus, it was not established that those groups might present a conflict of
interest should Applicant receive a security clearance, and AG ¶ 7(b) does not apply.
Further, in an abundance of caution, Applicant has resigned from the NUAC.
Available information supports application of the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 8(b) (there
is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to
the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has
such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest). The
allegations at SOR 1.e and 1.f are resolved for the Applicant.
The allegation about Applicant’s South Korean bank account is not disqualifying.
Applicant’s net worth in the United States is several thousand times greater than the
$400 remaining in her account there. Thus, the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 7(e) (a
substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any
foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation) does not apply. The allegation at
SOR 1.c is resolved for Applicant.
Finally, Applicant’s travel to North Korea is not disqualifying. Trips to the
Kumgang tourist site are routine. Also, Applicant was part of a group of tourists whose
trip was tightly controlled by both North and South Korean officials. She had no contact
with anyone from North Korea, and she never left the bus. The allegation at SOR 1.d is
resolved for Applicant.
The totality of information bearing on the whether Applicant’s ties to South Korea
could be used to compromise national security shows that it is not very likely. She has
lived in and been a citizen of the United States longer than she lived in her native land.
All of her personal, professional, and financial interests are in the United States. She
has a significant record of positive community activity where she has lived since 1989.
On balance, she has mitigated the security concerns about possible foreign influence.
8
Outside Activities
The Government’s information about Applicant’s NUAC membership raised
security concerns addressed at AG ¶ 36, as follows:
Involvement in certain types of outside employment or activities is of
security concern if it poses a conflict of interest with an individual's security
responsibilities and could create an increased risk of unauthorized
disclosure of classified information.
Of the specific disqualifying conditions listed under this guideline, the record
requires consideration of AG ¶ 37(a) (any employment or service, whether
compensated or volunteer, with: ...(2) any foreign national, organization, or other entity).
On its face, AG 37(a) applies. Applicant’s participation in NUAC activities was voluntary.
She even paid her own way to South Korea for NUAC conferences. However, it was not
established that the NUAC was a part of the South Korean government. At most,
recommendations discussed at the membership level may be passed up to more senior
levels of the NUAC for discussion with South Korean government officials. But the
record does not show that Applicant was involved with any such discussions or that she
had any contact with South Korean government officials as part of her NUAC activities.
This information, along with the fact that Applicant resigned from the NUAC, supports
application of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶38(a) (evaluation of the outside
employment or activity by the appropriate security or counterintelligence office indicates
that it does not pose a conflict with an individual's security responsibilities or with the
national security interests of the United States) and AG ¶38(b) (the individual terminates
the employment or discontinued the activity upon being notified that it was in conflict
with his or her security responsibilities). Based on the foregoing, and for the same
reasons discussed regarding SOR 1.e and 1.f, above, the allegation at SOR 2.a is
resolved for Applicant. The security concerns about outside activities is mitigated.
Financial Considerations
The Government presented information that showed Applicant owed a $16,500
debt from a civil suit stemming from the sale of Applicant’s business in 2009. At the time
of the SOR, this debt had not been paid. However, with her Answer, Applicant
presented information showing that the debt was paid. Further, a personal financial
statement submitted in response to the DOHA interrogatories showed that Applicant
has a positive monthly cash flow and significant financial assets, but no unpaid or past-
due debts. Insofar as no other adverse financial information was presented, there is no
support for application of this guideline. The allegation at SOR 3.a is resolved for
Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors. I have also reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 59 years old and has been an
upstanding member of her community as an American citizen since arriving in this
9
country. She has lived in and been a citizen of the United States longer than in her
native South Korea. She fully disclosed all of her foreign contacts and activities, some of
which required examination through the adjudicative process. However, the great
weight of her interests and activities is in the United States. Her familial relationships
are close by definition. However, her contacts with those persons is infrequent and do
not put her in a vulnerable position with respect to the interests of a foreign government.
Applicant’s interest in South Korean affairs is understandable. However, the record as a
whole shows that she is not susceptible to pressure from another government and that
her activities do not conflict with her obligations to protect the interests of the United
States. A fair and commonsense assessment of all of the available information shows
that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by the Government’s
information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline L: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Request for security
clearance is granted.
                                         
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
