 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------               )  ISCR Case No. 10-03615 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carolyn H. Jeffries, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) lists five debts totaling $24,910. 
Applicant’s spouse handles the family’s financial matters. On March 28, 2009, she 
placed 10 of the family’s 11 delinquent debts into a 47-month debt-consolidation plan 
(DCP), and she has consistently made monthly $450 payments into their DCP. 
Applicant and his spouse have been making $150 monthly payments on their other 
delinquent debt for 24 months. All debts are in current status. Financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information is granted.   
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 2, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (hereinafter SF-86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On 
June 2, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for him, and it recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
On June 18, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On July 22, 2011, 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed. On August 1, 2011, the case was 
assigned to me. On September 6, 2011, DOHA issued a hearing notice setting the 
hearing for September 27, 2011. (HE 2) The hearing was held as scheduled. At the 
hearing, Department Counsel offered nine exhibits (GE 1-9) (Transcript (Tr.) 18), and 
Applicant offered four exhibits. (Tr. 35-36; AE A-D) There were no objections to the 
admissibility of any documents, and I admitted GE 1-9 and AE A-D. (Tr. 18-19, 36) 
Additionally, I admitted the SOR, response to the SOR, and the hearing notice. (HE 1-3) 
On October 6, 2011, I received the hearing transcript.   
 
Findings of Fact1
 
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.d and 
denied responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e because the debt was paid. (HE 3) His 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of 
the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 62-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who is seeking 
reinstatement of his security clearance to enable him to continue driving sensitive DoD 
cargo in his company’s truck. (Tr. 9, 47-48, 60; GE 1) He began his employment with 
the government contractor in December 2009 as a truck driver. (GE 1 at 13)  
 
Applicant served two years on active duty (1967-1969) in the Air Force. He did 
not serve in Vietnam. (Tr. 7) He served in the Air Force Reserve from 1978 to 2006. (Tr. 
6; GE 1 at 19) His specialty in the Air Force Reserve was heavy equipment operator. 
(Tr. 6) He honorably retired at the grade of master sergeant. (Tr. 6) He held a security 
clearance during his military service.  
 
Applicant married in 1995. (GE 1 at 24) His children were born in 1976, 1977, 
and 1989; and his stepchildren were born in 1962 and 1970. (GE 1 at 29-32) Applicant’s 
21-year-old granddaughter lives with Applicant and his spouse. (Tr. 25) Applicant needs 
five more credits to complete his associate’s degree and his certification as a tool and 
die machinist. (Tr. 5)  
 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or locations 
in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information. 
Unless stated otherwise, the sources for the facts in this section are Applicant’s SF-86 (GE 1) or his 
December 24, 2009 investigative personal subject interview (PSI).  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s family has a proud tradition of service to the United States in peace 
and war. His grandfather served in combat in World War I and II, and his father served 
in the Army during the Korean War. (Tr. 62) His brother was killed in an aircraft accident 
while serving in the U.S. Air Force. (Tr. 63)    
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent debts totaling $24,910 as follows: ¶ 1.a is a 
collection account, alleging a delinquent debt from a bank for $3,490; ¶ 1.b is a 
collection account, alleging a delinquent debt from a bank for a credit card debt for 
$6,407; ¶ 1.c is a charged off account for a credit card debt for $1,663; ¶ 1.d is a 
collection account, alleging a delinquent debt from a bank for $11,000; and ¶ 1.e is a 
judgment entered in February 1999 for $2,350. (HE 1)  
 
 Applicant is away from home driving his truck 27 or 28 days each month. (Tr. 60) 
His wife handles their finances and bills. She provided most of the information about 
their financial status at his hearing. Applicant’s spouse was primarily responsible for his 
debts becoming delinquent because she charged their living expenses on charge cards, 
which resulted in delinquent debt. Applicant was underemployed and they were not able 
to keep their debts out of delinquent status.  
 
On March 28, 2009, Applicant and his spouse enrolled in a 47-month DCP.2
 
 
Under the DCP, they pay $450 per month to an agent, who settles their debts using 
funds paid into the DCP. The DCP was designed to pay ten debts totaling $32,355. 
Applicant’s DCP agent told him not to contact the ten creditors and not to make any 
more payments directly to the ten creditors. (Tr. 29-30) Applicant has not missed any 
payments to the DCP because the payment is made through an allotment from his bank 
account. (Tr. 36-37) Since 2009, the DCP has paid four debts totaling $4,121. The DCP 
is currently making payments to address a $5,741 debt. Their DCP agent indicates the 
DCP is in current status, and the agent provided a list of actions and contacts made on 
Applicant’s behalf over the last four months. (AE C-D)  
 Applicant made monthly $150 payments for 24 months on the $14,643 bank debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.d, which is now being collected by a law firm, and he has reduced this debt 
to $11,381. (Tr. 43-47, 50; AE A, B) This debt is not part of his DCP. Applicant uses his 
Air Force retirement check to pay their mortgage through an automatic allotment. (Tr. 
24) He also generated a personal financial statement (PFS) as part of his response to 
DOHA interrogatories. Applicant has about $500 left at the end of each month to 
address unforeseen financial problems. (Tr. 29) Applicant does not have a car loan, and 
he does not have any open credit cards. (Tr. 30) All of their accounts and bills are 
current. (Tr. 60)  
 
 Applicant’s security officer described him as having a good reputation when he 
came to her company and as being a very conscientious driver. (Tr. 55) He is a problem 
                                            
2 The sources for the facts in this paragraph is Applicant’s August 9, 2011 debt consolidation plan 
(DCP), and his agent’s August 8, 2011 letter providing the status of the DCP. (Tr. 36-41; AE C, D) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
solver who shows initiative and accomplishes his mission. (Tr. 55) She supports 
reinstatement of his security clearance. (Tr. 55) 
 
 Applicant described himself as hard working, loyal, and responsible. (Tr. 58) He 
is financially responsible and will continue to pay his bills and comply with his payment 
plans. (Tr. 58-59)  
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guideline F (financial considerations) with respect to the allegations 
set forth in the SOR. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, his responses to DOHA interrogatories, his SOR response, and the 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
evidence elicited during his hearing. Applicant’s SOR lists five delinquent debts totaling 
$24,910. Actually, Applicant’s financial plight was worse than indicated in his credit 
reports and SOR. On March 28, 2009, he began a DCP that was intended to address 
ten delinquent debts totaling $32,355. Additionally, he had a delinquent debt of over 
$14,000 that was not being resolved. The Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 20(b) 
and 20(c), and partial application of AG ¶ 20(d).3
                                            
3 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 In ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) the Appeal Board addressed a situation where an applicant who had 
been sporadically unemployed lacked the ability to pay his creditors noting that “it will be 
a long time at best before he has paid” all of his creditors. That applicant was living on 
unemployment compensation at the time of his hearing. The Appeal Board explained 
that such a circumstance was not necessarily a bar to having access to classified 
information stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, 
accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a 
serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). The applicant in ISCR Case 
No. 08-06567 used his limited resources to (1) resolve some of his debts; (2) had a 
repayment plan for the remaining debts; and (3) took “reasonable actions to effectuate 
that plan.” Id. The Appeal Board remanded the administrative judge’s decision because 
it did not “articulate a satisfactory explanation for his conclusions,” emphasizing the 
administrative judge did “not explain[] what he believes that applicant could or should 
have done under the circumstances that he has not already done to rectify his poor 
financial condition, or why the approach taken by applicant was not “responsible” in light 
of his limited circumstances.” Id.   
 
Although Applicant did not receive formal financial counseling, he received 
financial advice and counseling through his DCP, which is a program for establishing 
financial responsibility and eliminating delinquent debt. He also generated a PFS as part 
of his response to DOHA interrogatories. His spouse maintains the family budget. 
Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by insufficient income, underemployment, 
and somewhat by his spouse’s use of credit cards in 2008 to maintain the family living 
standard. In March 2009, 10 of their 11 debts were placed into a DCP and they have 
made all of their monthly payments thereafter. Applicant has made $150 monthly 
payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d (currently owed: $11,381). Applicant established 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. Their DCP maintained contact with 
some of his creditors.4
 
 Their DCP is scheduled to complete resolution of the remaining 
five of ten DCP debts in about two years. His financial problem is being resolved or is 
under control. He admitted responsibility for and is taking reasonable actions to resolve 
his SOR debts, showing some good faith. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable.  
                                            
4“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In sum, Applicant’s spouse fell behind on paying the family debts while Applicant 
was away from home 90% of the time driving a truck. In March 2009, she placed ten 
debts into a DCP, and six months later, she started making separate payments to 
address one large debt. It is unlikely that financial problems will recur. Applicant and his 
spouse have paid about $15,000 to address their delinquent debts since March 2009, 
and 5 of 11 debts have been paid. Resolution of each debt permits Applicant to more 
aggressively address his other remaining debts. His efforts are sufficient to fully mitigate 
financial considerations security concerns. Assuming, financial considerations concerns 
are not mitigated under AG ¶ 20, security concerns are mitigated under the whole-
person concept, infra.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under these guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 62 years old, and he is sufficiently mature to understand and comply 
with his security responsibilities. He deserves substantial credit for volunteering to 
support the U.S. Government as an employee of a contractor, and previously during 
more than 30 years of Air Force active and reserve service. There is every indication 
that he is loyal to the United States and his employer. His spouse’s handling of their 
finances before March 2009 contributed to his financial woes. I give Applicant 
substantial credit for admitting responsibility for four of five SOR and for seven non-SOR 
previously delinquent debts. He did not admit one SOR debt because it was paid. 
Applicant used a DCP to pay five debts, one debt is being paid by DCP, and four debts 
will be paid through DCP in the next two years. Applicant has been making payments 
for 24 months on one non-DCP debt. All bills are current. I am confident he will keep his 
promise to continue resolving his previously delinquent debts and avoid future 
delinquent debt. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person 
analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted).  
 
Applicant is an intelligent person, and he understands how to budget and what 
he needs to do to establish and maintain his financial responsibility. He and his spouse 
are using the DCP to resolve their debts and establish their financial responsibility. 
There is simply no reason not to trust Applicant. Moreover, he has established a 
“meaningful track record” of debt re-payment. He is trustworthy, responsible, 
conscientious, and reliable.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    For APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e: For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
