                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
)  ISCR Case No. 10-08415 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Foreign Influence concern. She is close to her 
mother and sister, who are citizens and residents of Russia. This situation raises a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation and potential conflict of interest with Applicant’s 
obligation to safeguard classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On March 22, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made 
a preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information.1 The 
basis for this decision is set forth in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which alleges the 
security concern under Guideline B (Foreign Influence).  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 On April 11, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer). She admitted the 
sole allegation under Guideline B that her mother and sister are citizens and residents 
of Russia. She requested a hearing.  
 
 On May 28, 2011, Department Counsel filed its ready-to-proceed. After 
coordinating with the parties, I scheduled the hearing for July 21, 2011. As a time 
management tool, I issued a prehearing order requiring the parties to serve one another 
and me their anticipated exhibits prior to the hearing.2  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered five exhibits, which were marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. GE 1, 2, and 5 were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant objected to a portion of GE 3 regarding her finances. 
Department Counsel agreed said portion was not relevant and, thus, I sustained the 
objection.3 Applicant also objected to GE 4, which is the Government’s request for 
administrative notice of facts regarding Russia. After the hearing, the Government 
provided the official U.S. source documents referenced in GE 4. These documents are 
marked as GE I through GE XI. Applicant’s objection to GE 4 is overruled. The facts 
administratively noticed are set forth in my findings of fact. Applicant offered four 
exhibits, which were marked and admitted into evidence as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through D.4 The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 1, 2011.5  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old. She is married and has one child, who is seven years 
old. Applicant was born, raised, and educated in Russia. In 1988, when Applicant was 
15 years old, she traveled to the U.S. as part of one of the first student exchange 
programs between the U.S. and the former Soviet Union. Applicant was impressed with 
the U.S. and promised herself that she would return in the future to live in the U.S. 
permanently. Applicant returned to Russia, where she received her undergraduate and 
master’s degrees in applied mathematics, summa cum laude. She also studied English, 
because she knew how valuable such language skills, in addition to her scientific 
background, would be in her “future life in the USA.”6  
  
 Applicant worked in Russia from 1995 to 1999. She met her husband, a U.S. 
citizen, in April 1999. She immigrated to the U.S., and they married in November 1999. 
2 Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
3 Tr. at 29-34. 
 
4 AE D is titled “Answer to Statement of Reasons.” This is Applicant’s personal statement that she 
read from at hearing. Her actual Answer was submitted on April 11, 2011. Tr. at 55-56. 
 
5 I have corrected the following minor typographical errors in the transcript: page 34, line 6, 
inserted “Government Exhibit 4”, for “Hearing Exhibit 3”; page 36, line 24, inserted “and”, for “out of”. 
 
6 AE D; Tr. at 45-47, 57, 60; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant applied to and was accepted to a prestigious U.S. school to continue her 
studies. She attained her PhD in 2007. She worked as a graduate assistant while 
completing her degree and is currently working for a U.S. bank.7 
 
 Applicant lives with her husband in the home they purchased in 2005. All her 
property, personal and real, is in the United States. Applicant was granted U.S. 
citizenship in 2008. As of the hearing, Applicant had surrendered her Russian passport 
and renounced her Russian citizenship.8 
 
Applicant’s mother and sister are citizens and residents of Russia. Applicant’s 
mother worked for the Russian government and retired after about 40 years of service. 
She receives a pension from the Russian government and supplements that income 
through part-time private work. Applicant speaks frequently with her mother. Applicant’s 
mother visits her here in the U.S. at least once a year. Applicant’s sister is 45 years old 
and has a part-time job working for a private company in Russia. Applicant is less close 
to her sister than her mother, but they speak via e-mail at least twice a month. When 
Applicant travels to Russia, she visits with her mother and sister. Applicant has other 
distant relatives living in Russia, but she is not close to them.9 
 
 U.S.-Russian relations have gone through dramatic changes over the past 
century: from military alliance during World War II, to outright hostility during the Cold 
War, to its current state of mutual cooperation in areas of shared interest.10 However, 
several areas of concern regarding Russia remain. One such area of concern is 
Russia’s human rights record, which the U.S. Department of State notes is “uneven and 
poor in some areas.”11 The judiciary is often manipulated by the authorities and the 
Russian government continues to infringe upon its citizen’s rights.12 Another area of 
vital concern is Russia’s intelligence gathering history targeting the United States, which 
remains active and strong.13  
 
 Applicant testified that she would alert U.S. authorities if someone tried to 
leverage her for information through her family in Russia. She testified as follows: 
 
7 Tr. at 47-52, 60; AE A and D. 
 
8 Tr. at 50-51, 73-74; GE 1 and 2; AE D. 
 
9 Answer; Tr. at 62-71; GE 3 at I-56-I57.  
 
10 GE IX and X. 
 
11 GE X at 7. 
 
12 GE X and XI. 
 
13 See, e.g., GE V. See also, GE I and Tr. at 34-35 and 53-54 (Applicant stipulates that Russia is 
hostile to U.S. interests, engages in espionage against U.S., and violates its own citizens’ rights). 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
I do miss my family in Russia, I would say honestly, but I have never 
missed Russia, itself. I don't have any nostalgic feelings. And if in the 
unfortunate event of being blackmailed by stressing my Russian family, I 
strongly believe that my only chance to help them is to ask United States 
for help. And then (follow) the required procedures. First of all, Russia is 
known for violating human rights and treating badly general population. I 
also would never trust anybody who is doing a blackmail. So if I am being 
approached with being danger in my family, it is a horrible event but 
nothing I can do, just trust the United States to help, because Russia will 
definitely not -- sorry. So please consider my loyalty to the United States, 
my honesty and integrity in making this decision. 14 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
14 Tr. at 53-54. 
 
5 
 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence concern is set forth at AG ¶ 6, as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
In light of the Russian government’s human rights record and its intelligence 
gathering history against the United States, Applicant’s strong familial ties to Russia 
raise the above concern. Applicant’s foreign familial ties also establish the following 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 sets forth a number of mitigating conditions that could mitigate the foreign 
influence concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions and find the following 
warrant further discussion:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest 
 
 The Appeal Board recently reversed a favorable decision involving an applicant 
who had familial ties to Russia through his in-laws, because the judge failed to consider 
Russia’s human rights record and intelligence gathering history against the United 
States. ISCR Case No. 09-06831 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2011). The Appeal Board cited 
to facts regarding Russia’s poor human rights and intelligence gathering history, which it 
gleaned from the same official U.S. government documents that were submitted in this 
case. Id.15 At the same time, the Appeal Board has repeatedly made clear that there is 
no per se rule against applicants with familial ties to hostile countries, such as Russia. 
Instead, an applicant with familial ties to a hostile country bears a “heavy burden” in 
mitigating the foreign influence concern raised by such foreign familial ties. See, e.g., 
ISCR Case No. 07-00029 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007).16 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence concern. She clearly has no love 
for the Russian government and has strong ties to the United States, including property 
and her immediate family. She has taken concrete steps to distance herself from Russia 
by surrendering her Russian passport and renouncing her Russian citizenship. 
However, she is close to her mother and sister who still reside in Russia. Both of 
Applicant’s family members, especially her mother who receives a government pension, 
are subject to the whims of the Russian government. In light of the nature of the country 
at issue and Applicant’s relationship with her mother and sister, AG ¶ 8(a) does not 
apply. Further, although Applicant forcefully asserted that she would resolve any 
potential conflict in favor of the United States, I am bound by precedent to give such a 
15 See also, ISCR Case No. 06-26489 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 16, 2009) (“At least since 1997, Russia 
has targeted U.S. technologies and has sought to obtain protected information through industrial 
espionage. The Russian Federal Security Service operates outside Russia by targeting national security 
and environmental researchers. The Russian government conducts electronics surveillance, including the 
monitoring of internet and e-mail traffic.”). 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 01-26893 at 10 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002) (“As a matter of common sense and 
sound risk management under the ‘clearly consistent with the national interest’ standard, an applicant 
with immediate family members living in a country hostile to the United States should not be granted a 
security clearance without a very strong showing that those family ties do not pose a security risk.”).   
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
statement little weight.17 AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply. Applicant’s familial ties to Russia 
remain a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
As noted above, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all the 
relevant circumstances. This is generally referred to as the “whole-person” concept. An 
administrative judge should consider the nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).18 In weighing 
these whole-person factors in a foreign influence case, the Appeal Board has held that: 
 
Evidence of good character and personal integrity is relevant and 
material under the whole person concept. However, a finding that 
an applicant possesses good character and integrity does not 
preclude the government from considering whether the applicant's 
facts and circumstances still pose a security risk. Stated otherwise, 
. . . [e]ven good people can pose a security risk because of facts 
and circumstances not under their control. For example, . . . an 
applicant with good character and personal integrity can pose a 
security risk because the applicant has close relatives in a country 
hostile to the United States.19 
 
 I have considered and given due weight to all the favorable and extenuating 
factors in this case. Applicant fell in love with this country at a young age and has now 
recognized the dreams of her youth by becoming a U.S. citizen. However, this favorable 
evidence, as well as the other mitigating record evidence, does not outweigh the 
security concern at issue. At the same time, this adverse determination is not a 
comment on Applicant’s patriotism, but merely an acknowledgment that people may act 
in unpredictable ways when faced with choices that could be important to a loved-one, 
such as a family member.20 Accordingly, in light of the security risk posed by Applicant’s 
familial ties to Russia, I resolve the concern raised by this situation against Applicant.  
 
17 ISCR Case No. 04-07766 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006)  
 
18 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
19 ISCR Case No. 01-26893 at 9-10 (emphasis added). 
 
20 ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009) 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
