 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-08831 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) lists four delinquent tax liens totaling 
$67,110. His two largest tax liens were in 2002 for $42,547 and in 2003 for $19,681. He 
failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 1999, 2001, and 2005 
through 2010. He did not provide proof of any payments to his SOR creditors. He failed 
to make sufficient progress in resolving his SOR debts, and financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated at this time. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 7, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF-86) (Item 3). On 
June 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) 
and E (personal conduct). (Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On July 14, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
decision without a hearing. (Item 2) A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM), dated August 25, 2011, was provided to him on September 13, 2011. He was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and to submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.1
 
 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on October 25, 2011. 
Findings of Fact2
 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the financial considerations 
concerns in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.f and the personal conduct concerns in SOR ¶ 2.a. (Item 2) 
His admissions are accepted as factual findings.   
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old external pilot employed by a defense contractor.3
 
 From 
January 2000 to July 2009, he was employed as a remodeling contractor, and from July 
2009 to present, he has been employed by a defense contractor. In June 1980, he 
graduated from high school. He has never served in the military. He married his spouse 
in 1985. He has two children, who are ages 24 and 26, and they do not live at home.     
Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists six financial issues: 1.a an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
tax lien entered in 2002 for $42,547; 1.b a state tax lien entered in 2003 for $19,681; 1.c 
a state tax lien entered in 2004 for $4,681; 1.d an IRS tax lien entered in 2005 for $201; 
1.e failure to file Federal income tax return for tax years 1999, 2001, and 2005 through 
2010; and 1.f . failure to file state income tax returns for tax years 1999, 2001, and 2005 
through 2010. SOR ¶ 2.a cross alleged the same concerns under Guideline E that were 
raised under Guideline F. Applicant’s May 19, 2010 and April 26, 2011 credit reports 
and court records of liens corroborate the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.d. (Items 5-8)  
 
                                            
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated September 2, 2011, and Applicant’s receipt is dated 
September 13, 2011. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt 
to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3Unless stated otherwise, the information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s security clearance 
application. (Item 3) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On his May 7, 2010 SF-86, Applicant admitted he was delinquent on at least one 
Federal debt.4
 
 He failed to pay Federal, state, or other taxes or failed to file a tax return.  
He said his personal Federal and state “tax returns are being filed for years 1997 
forward.” He disclosed his state tax lien of $41,867 and his Federal tax lien of $42,547, 
which were filed against his property. In the comments section of his SF-86, he said he 
planned to sell his home and use his equity to satisfy the existing tax liens. He planned 
to start filing his state and Federal income tax returns with the most recent one first. He 
also indicated he is loyal to the United States. He has a son in the Marines and a 
“daughter married to the Army.” He is “highly motivated to retire [his] obligations.”    
On June 2, 2010, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
interviewed Applicant, and he admitted that he most recently filed his taxes in 1996.5
 
 
The family business failed in 1997, and his income did not cover his tax debt. He owed 
about $43,000 in Federal tax and $40,000 in state tax. He planned to sell the property 
where the business was located and use the funds generated to pay the tax liens and 
his back taxes. One reason he did not file his tax returns was because he worried that 
“he would be back on the IRS’ radar.” He plans to meet with an accountant in June 
2010 to develop a plan to resolve his tax debts. He plans to pay his tax debts.  
A letter from Applicant to DOHA was received on March 30, 2011. (Item 4 at 1) It 
indicates Applicant met with an accountant and bankruptcy attorney. Applicant may file 
for bankruptcy and set up a payment plan on his tax debt. All of the tax returns remain 
unfiled; however, Applicant plans to work on his financial and tax issues beginning on 
April 16, 2011. 
  
The file does not include any evidence of payments of any of the state or Federal 
tax debts alleged in the SOR. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he 
had 30 days after his receipt to submit information. Applicant did not provide proof of 
any payment plans or payments to the SOR creditors. He did not provide proof that he 
filed any of the tax returns. There is no evidence of non-tax related reportable criminal 
offenses, drug abuse, or alcohol-related misconduct. There is no evidence of security 
violations or violation of his obligations to his employer. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
                                            
4The information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s SF-86. (Item 1 at 42-49) 
 
5The information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s June 2, 2010 Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI). (Item 4 at 4) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct).  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and “(g) failure to file annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the 
same.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
May 7, 2010 SF-86, credit reports, OPM interview, responses to DOHA interrogatories, 
and SOR response. Applicant’s SOR lists four delinquent tax liens totaling $67,110. His 
two largest liens, which were for $42,547 and $19,681, were filed in 2002 and 2003, 
respectively. He failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for tax years 
1999, 2001, and 2005 through 2010. The Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g), and additional inquiry about the possible 
applicability of mitigating conditions is required.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants very limited application of AG 
¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d).6
 
 He received some financial counseling from his accountant 
and his bankruptcy attorney. He showed some good faith when he admitted 
responsibility for his SOR debts in his May 7, 2010 SF-86, SOR response, to the OPM 
investigator, and in his response to DOHA interrogatories. Applicant’s financial situation 
was damaged by his failed business in the late 1990s, insufficient income to resolve his 
tax debts, and the necessity that he provide financial assistance to support his family. 
However, Applicant’s financial circumstances have been relatively stable for more than 
two years, and he has not provided sufficient information about efforts to start paying his 
tax debts to fully establish any mitigating conditions. He did not explain why he has not 
been using some of his monthly remainder to pay his delinquent debts. He did not 
describe how he is reducing his monthly expenses, which would allow him to have more 
money available each month to start paying his delinquent taxes.  
                                            
6The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant did not establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
The file lacks proof that he maintained contact with his creditors.7
 
 There are no receipts 
or account statements, proving that he made any payments to his SOR creditors. There 
is insufficient evidence that his financial problem is being resolved and is under control. 
The file lacks evidence that he has acted responsibly on any of his SOR debts.   
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern in this 
case: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior . . . ; and (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations . . . ; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
                                            
7“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) do not apply. As indicated under the financial 
considerations guideline, there is credible adverse information that is sufficient for an 
adverse determination under Guideline F. However, AG ¶ 16(e)(1) applies because 
Applicant’s failure to pay his state and Federal taxes creates a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, and such conduct adversely affects Applicant’s 
professional standing as an employee of a Department of Defense contractor. There is 
substantial evidence of this disqualifying condition, and further inquiry about the 
applicability of mitigating conditions is required.   
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(b) do not apply because Applicant has been candid about 
his failure to pay his Federal and state tax returns, and 17(f) does not apply because 
Applicant admitted his failure to pay his Federal and state tax returns. Applicant has met 
his burden of establishing AG ¶ 17(e) and the SOR allegations under Guideline E are 
mitigated. He plans to pay his taxes, and when his taxes are paid, he will have reduced 
or eliminated his vulnerability to exploitation, or duress. I do not believe that anyone 
could use Applicant’s failure to pay his Federal and state tax returns to coerce him into 
compromising classified information. Personal conduct concerns raised under AG ¶ 
16(e)(1) are mitigated under AG ¶ 17(e).   
 
AG ¶ 15 indicates that poor judgment can cause reliability and trustworthiness 
concerns, resulting in disqualification under the personal conduct guideline. Judgment 
issues under the personal conduct guideline are more specifically addressed in this 
case under the financial considerations guideline. I find for Applicant under Guideline E 
because those judgment issues are a duplication of the judgment concerns previously 
discussed under that guideline.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his access to classified information. Applicant is a 49-year-old external pilot 
employed by a defense contractor. In June 1980, he graduated from high school. He 
has never served in the military. He married his spouse in 1985. He has two children, 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
who are ages 24 and 26, and they do not live at home. He is sufficiently mature to 
understand and comply with his security responsibilities. He deserves some credit for 
volunteering to support the U.S. Government as an employee of a Department of 
Defense contractor. There is every indication that he is loyal to the United States and 
his employer. There is no evidence that he abuses alcohol or uses illegal drugs. 
Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by his failed business in the late 1990s, and 
insufficient income to pay his back taxes. I give Applicant substantial credit for admitting 
responsibility for all of his SOR debts. He has been honest about his failure to address 
his financial plight. These factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and 
mitigation. 
 
 The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Applicant’s SOR lists four delinquent tax liens totaling 
$67,110. His two largest tax liens, which were for $42,547 and $19,681, were filed in 
2002 and 2003, respectively. He failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns 
for tax years 1999, 2001, and 2005 through 2010. Applicant’s employment has been 
stable for two years. If he reduced his standard of living and expenses, he could 
increase his net funds available to address his SOR debts. He did not provide any 
documentation showing attempts to establish payment plans. There is no plausible 
rationale for his failure to file his tax returns. There is no evidence that any SOR 
creditors have received any payments, and no convincing evidence is in the file that he 
will successfully address his SOR debts in the near future. Applicant has failed to make 
sufficient progress resolving his delinquent SOR debts to establish his financial 
responsibility.     
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
