 
1 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-08789 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for a position 
with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
interrogatories to Applicant to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying information in 
his background. After reviewing the results of the background investigation and 
Applicant's responses to the interrogatories, DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. DOHA issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), dated May 20, 2011, to Applicant detailing security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. These actions were taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 8, 2011. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 10, 2011. He denied the four allegations 
under Guideline F with an explanation. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on July 6, 2011, and the case was assigned to me on July 25, 2011. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on August 4, 2011, scheduling a hearing for August 23, 2011. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. The Government offered four exhibits that I 
marked and admitted into the record without objection as Government Exhibits (Gov. 
Ex.) 1 through 4. Applicant and one witness testified on his behalf. He offered four 
exhibits that I marked and admitted into the record without objection as Applicant 
Exhibits (App. Ex.) A through D. I kept the record open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. Applicant timely submitted two documents which I marked and admitted to 
the record as Applicant Exhibits E and F. Department Counsel had no objection to 
admission of the documents. (Gov. Ex. 5, dated September 5, 2011) DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 7, 2011. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant does not remember the date he received the Notice of Hearing. He 
discussed the hearing date with Department Counsel prior to the notice being sent on 
August 4, 2011. Applicant is entitled to 15 days advance notice of a hearing. (Directive 
E3.1.8.). Applicant was ready to proceed at the hearing on August 23, 2011, and he had 
sufficient time to prepare. He waived the 15-day notice requirement. (Tr. 5-6) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old high school graduate employed as a security officer for 
a defense contractor since May 2010. He served over 20 years on active duty in the 
U.S. Army retiring in January 2010 with an honorable discharge as a Sergeant First 
Class (E-7). He served overseas in Korea for one year. He also went on two one-year 
deployments to Iraq, and a one-year deployment to Afghanistan. He also served a tour 
away from his family in the United States from February 2008 until November 2009. He 
first married in 1995 and divorced in 1999. He married again in 1999 and is still married. 
He has three stepchildren. Two are at home and the oldest is grown and on his own.  
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement attached to his response to 
interrogatories shows a monthly income of $3,399, with monthly expenses of 
approximately $2,950, leaving approximately $450 in discretionary funds. Applicant’s 
wife is a teacher and she started employment just prior to the hearing. She believes her 
salary will be $24,000 yearly. (Tr. 10-14; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated July 30, 2010; Gov. 
Ex. 2, Response to Interrogatory, dated March 25, 2011: App. Ex. B, DD 214)  
 
3 
 
 
Credit reports (Gov. Ex. 3, dated August 13, 2010, and Gov. Ex. 4, dated April 
21, 2011), and Applicant's response to an interrogatory (Gov. Ex. 2, dated March 25, 
2011) show the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a credit card collection account 
for $1,105 (SOR 1.a); a credit card in collection for $3,089 (SOR 1.b); a charged-off 
home equity account for $14,050 (SOR 1.c); and a credit account in collection for $350 
(SOR 1.d) The total amount of the debt listed on the SOR is approximately $19,000.  
 
Applicant was unaware of the debts listed in the credit reports until he received 
the SOR. After receiving the SOR, he investigated the debts and learned that they were 
opened by his wife while he was either deployed overseas or living apart from the family 
at another military post in the United States. He had been sending an allotment from his 
pay to his wife for her to pay the family debts. He was unaware that she had not been 
paying their bills as they were incurred. His wife has not been honest, truthful, or 
forthcoming with providing him information on the accounts and debts. The debt for 
$1,105 at SOR 1.a is for a credit card his wife opened in both of their names without his 
knowledge or permission. He researched the debt at SOR 1.b and learned that it was a 
credit card his wife used to fund some college courses. She opened the account in both 
of their names using his financial information without his knowledge or permission. (Tr. 
29-32, 35-38) 
 
He and his wife opened the account at SOR 1.c to establish a line of credit to use 
for house repairs and other bills. The original amount of the debt was $10,000. His wife 
was to make payments on the debt from the funds she received from his military 
allotment. She did not pay the debts as required. While he was deployed to another 
location in the United States, his mail was going to his home address and not to his 
address at his deployed location. His wife received an offer to settle the debt for a lump-
sum payment of $2,100. She did not give the settlement offer to Applicant until 
approximately the time he received the Notice of Hearing. His wife made payments of 
approximately $1,600 towards the settlement offer. Since the initial settlement offer was 
for a lump-sum payment, it was not clear if the payments would satisfy the debt. 
Applicant just prior to the hearing received an additional offer from the creditor for 
payment of $300 monthly to satisfy the debt. Applicant will make the payments and 
satisfy the debt. (Tr. 34-37, 39-40; App. Ex. D, Settlement offer and payments, dated 
July 2010; App. Ex. F, Settlement offer, dated September 8, 2011)  
 
Applicant does not know the origin of the debt at SOR 1.d. He researched the 
account but still cannot determine if it is an old account that was paid off or a new 
account opened by his wife without his knowledge. He and his wife have a joint account 
with the bank holding the account but it is a savings and checking account which is 
current. He disputed the debt and the creditor has advised the credit reporting agency to 
remove the account from his credit report. (Tr. 29-34, 40-42; App. Ex. E, E-Mail, dated 
August 26, 2011) 
 
Applicant’s wife testified that she and Applicant have been married for 12 years 
and she has three children from a prior marriage. Two are still at home and one is on 
his own. When they purchased a house in 2004, they opened a joint account to pay 
 
4 
 
 
house bills. Her husband was assigned in another part of the United States, but she 
was unable to accompany him because they could not sell their house. Since they have 
been married, her husband maintained an account in his name but provided her funds 
by allotment from his pay for family expenses. The allotment provided was 
approximately $3,500 monthly. She also worked as a part-time teacher earning about 
$1,000 monthly. She made most of the monthly $800 mortgage payments but did fall a 
month or two behind. After paying her expenses, she had about $400 in monthly 
discretionary funds. (Tr. 44-55) 
 
Applicant’s wife admitted she opened accounts without her husband’s 
knowledge. She was attending school and needed money for tuition, fees, books, and 
other expenses. She specifically admitted opening the accounts at SOR 1.a and 1.b 
without her husband’s permission and knowledge. Since she was not working, she 
opened the accounts in their names providing her husband’s financial information to 
open the accounts so she could continue to go to school. The last account she 
remembers opening was in 2005. She initially felt she could make payments on the 
accounts. She did make some payments but she incurred other expenses and could not 
make the required payments. She did not tell her husband of the account or the debts 
until recently when he applied for a security clearance. She admitted that for a time she 
had the mail to the house stopped and kept at the post office for her to pick up. She did 
not want the bills to come to the house for her husband to see them. Her husband 
provided her funds to pay the account at SOR 1.c but she did not make the payments 
until she received a settlement offer. (Tr. 44-47, 55-58, 60-62) 
 
Applicant’s wife also tried to help her husband get information concerning the 
debts. She thought the debt for $350 (SOR 1.d) was an old debt from before they 
married. She asked for information on the account but has not received a reply. The 
credit information shows the debt was incurred in 2008 and went delinquent in 2010. 
Applicant disputed this debt and it has been removed from his credit report. (Tr. 58-62: 
App. Ex. E, Report, dated August 28, 2011) 
 
Applicant recently took back the responsibility for their finances after learning of 
the debts. He now manages all of their debts. He tried to go to court to have the debts 
transferred only to her but was not successful since they are married. She just started a 
new teaching job that will pay her about $24,000 a year. (Tr. 62-66) 
 
Applicant’s efficiency reports show that while on active duty he was successfully 
responsible for equipment worth over $1,000,000. He received many awards and 
medals and was highly rated. He held a security clearance for almost his entire active 
duty service. He also attended a credit counseling course while on active duty to be a 
command credit counselor. (Tr. 22-29; App. Ex. A, NCO Evaluation Reports, various 
dates; App. Ex. C, Certificate of Command Financial NCO Training, date February 28, 
2003) 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations: 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
 
6 
 
 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations. Applicant's delinquent debts established by credit reports raise Financial 
Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts); and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). Even though 
Applicant denied the debts, the debts create a security concern since they are listed in 
the credit reports. Applicant's testimony concerning his finances was candid and 
forthright. He provided information to establish the he did not know of the debts and has 
taken action since learning of them to resolve them. 
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 20(a) (the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) and AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions 
that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). 
These mitigating conditions apply. Two of the debts were incurred by Applicant’s wife 
without his knowledge or permission. Applicant provided his wife sufficient funds to pay 
another debt but she did not make the payments. He did not know of her failure to pay 
the debt until recently. He successfully disputed a fourth debt since he did not have any 
information on the debt. These debts were incurred under the unusual circumstance of 
his wife’s action and her failure to tell him of the debts. Her actions in incurring debt 
were beyond his control since she took affirmative steps to hide her actions from him. 
Since Applicant has taken control of the family finances, the debts are unlikely to recur. 
He acted reasonably and responsibly under the circumstances by taking control of the 
finances, doing what he could to learn of the debts, paying those that he could, and 
entering a settlement agreement.  
  
 I considered AC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for 
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control). Applicant took a course in financial counseling while on active duty and 
became the command financial counselor. He acted responsibly toward this family 
finances by providing his wife a significant allotment of fund to pay the family expenses 
when he was deployed. His financial problems are being resolved.  
 
7 
 
 
I considered AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For AG ¶ 20(d) to apply, there must 
be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a good-faith 
effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. A systematic method of handling debts 
is needed. Applicant must establish a "meaningful track record" of debt payment. A 
"meaningful track record" of debt payment can be established by evidence of actual 
debt payments or reduction of debt through payment of debts. An applicant is not 
required to establish that he paid each and every debt listed. All that is required is an 
established plan to resolve his financial problems and show he has taken significant 
actions to implement that plan.  
 
Applicant incurred the delinquent debts at SOR 1.a, SOR 1.b, and SOR 1.c only 
because of the improper actions of his wife. He presented information to show his wife 
opened two accounts without his knowledge or permission and failed to pay them. He 
provided her funds to pay a joint account but she did not make the payments. The debts 
that are in his name were not incurred by any of his actions or a failure by him to 
provide funds to pay the accounts. Applicant did what he reasonably was expected to 
do to provide funds for his wife to pay and manage the family finances while he was 
deployed and not at home. The family financial problems stem from her failure to act 
and not any action on his part.  
 
I also considered AG ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute 
the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue). Applicant disputed the debt at SOR 1.d, and the dispute 
was resolved in his favor. 
 
Applicant's reasonable actions and methods to manage the family finances 
provide significant and credible information to establish a good-faith effort to manage 
and resolve family finances. His actions were reasonable and prudent under the 
circumstances and show honesty and an adherence to his financial duties and 
obligations. His reasonable and responsible efforts indicate that the delinquent debts do 
not reflect adversely on his trustworthiness, honesty, and good judgment. He mitigated 
security concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
8 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant's over 20 
years of honorable service in the Army. I considered that he had successfully managed 
and had responsibility for very expensive military equipment. I considered his excellent 
duty performance, and his many deployments away from his family. I considered that he 
was a financial counselor for his unit.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems arose from conditions beyond his control. Three of 
the SOR debts were incurred by his wife’s failure to act responsibly towards the family 
finances. She incurred debt in his name without his knowledge or permission. He 
provided her sufficient funds to pay debts but she did not pay the debts. His actions 
show a good-faith and reasonable attempt at a "meaningful track record" of debt 
payment. He successfully disputed one of the debts. The family financial problems are 
the responsibility of Applicant’s wife and not him. Applicant's actions to manage and pay 
his financial obligations indicate he will be concerned, responsible, and careful 
regarding classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated security concerns arising from 
financial considerations. He is granted access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
