 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-07165 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 7, 2010, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On May 25, 2011, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 14, 2011. Applicant requested 
his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On June 27, 2011, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant on August 16, 2011. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
August 18, 2011. Applicant filed a Response to the FORM on August 30, 2011, within 
the 30 day time allowed that expired on September 17, 2011. The Department Counsel 
had no objection to the admission of the Response into the record. I received the case 
assignment on October 12, 2011. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in the SOR. (Items 1, 4)  
 
 Applicant is 61 years old and married to his fourth wife. He divorced his first three 
wives. He had three sons with his first wife. His sons are 41, 39, and 36 years old. 
Applicant fathered a daughter with his third wife. The daughter is 22 years old. He has 
no relationship with these children. (Items 4, 5, 9-11, Response) 
 
 Applicant did not pay child support to his first wife after their divorce in 1976, 
except for three years in the 1970s and two years in the 1980s. He paid after 1986 
following his arrest for non-payment of child support. He resumed payments in 
December 2009, he claims, after he sought renewal of his security clearance. 
Applicant’s Answer states he can only afford to pay $50 per week on the arrearages. 
Applicant submitted evidence of nine payments totaling $450 since December 2009, 
from November 2010 to February 2011.  
 
 The SOR alleges the amount owed for child support is $40,382.44. The current 
amount owed is $37,424.32 as of July 2011. Applicant’s reason for not paying his child 
support was that his first wife moved and took his sons without giving him an address so 
he could exercise his visitation rights. Applicant claims he hired an attorney in 2010 to 
contest the child support arrearages, but did not submit any documents showing the 
identity of the attorney or the current status of Applicant’s actions against the collection 
of this child support debt. Applicant did not hire an attorney to amend the divorce decree 
when his former wife moved and took the children with her, frustrating his visitation 
rights. (Items 1, 4, 5, 9-11, Response) 
 
 Applicant works for a defense contractor. His personal financial statement as of 
March 2011 shows his gross monthly income is $5,236. His net remaining monthly 
income is $2,061 after expenses, including the $200 monthly he pays on the child 
support. Applicant owes approximately $42,000 on the 2008 and 2010 pickup trucks he 
owns. He owes about $14,000 in credit card debt listed on his personal financial 
statement. (Items 9-11)  
 
 Applicant disclosed his child support debt on his April 2008 security clearance 
application. He also admitted his failure to pay child support in a January 1998 
statement in an earlier clearance application. (Items 6 and 9)   
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant’s payments of $2,400 annually as presently planned by him will repay 
the $37,424.32 in child support arrearages in 16 years. Applicant’s payments might end 
when he is 77 years old. His net remainder income on his personal financial statement 
shows he can afford to pay $800 to $1000 monthly on his child support debt, making the 
debt payable in four years. He did not submit any evidence of credit counseling or 
financial management courses (Items 4, 11)   
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant willfully failed to pay his child support obligations from 1976 to the 
present, except for three years in the 1970s and two years in the 1980s. He paid after 
1986, following his arrest for non-payment of child support. Subsequently he stopped 
paying again. He did not seek a modification of his financial obligations when he 
claimed his former wife moved and denied him child visitation rights. Rather, he simply 
ceased paying child support. Now he owes $37,424.32. His last payment was $50 in 
February 2011.   
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. No mitigating condition applies. 
 
Applicant’s behavior is current, ongoing, and extending over the past three 
decades. His conduct casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s financial conditions were not beyond his control. He deliberately 
decided not to pay his child support for his three children to punish his former wife for 
taking his children where he did not think he could reasonably exercise his visitation 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
privileges. He did not seek a court modification of the divorce decree. Therefore, he did 
not act responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20 (b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not present any proof of counseling, legal or otherwise, for his 
problem, nor are there any indications the child support debt problem is under control or 
being resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has not started or made regular payments in a good-faith effort to 
resolve the child support debt. His $200 monthly payment plan stopped in February 
2011 based on the evidence he submitted. His personal financial statement shows he 
could afford $800 to $1000 monthly and repay this debt in less than the 16 years he 
plans per his current payment plan. AG ¶ 20 (d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has not shown any reasonable basis to dispute the debt. He took no 
action years ago to modify the child support obligation when he claimed his former wife 
interfered with his child visitation privileges. There is no affluence resulting from a legal 
source of income that is at issue here. Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof on 
these issues.  AG ¶ ¶ 20 (e) and (f) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the child support obligations. He has not taken any action to resolve his large 
delinquent child support debt. This inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress based on the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of 
action continues to this day, and is obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
on his past performance. Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the 
debts. Next, he exhibited a continued lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make 
payments on his child support debt despite being arrested for unpaid child support in 
1986, making only small payments late in 2010 and two months in 2011. Applicant is 
not paying a reasonable amount monthly to resolve the debt in five years or less, based 
on his financial condition as he described it in his March 2011 personal financial 
statement.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
