 
 
1 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 10-07613  
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns related to personal conduct. Accordingly, 
his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), signed on September 25, 2009. 
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1
                                                          
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On May 16, 2011, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that 
specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive under 
Guideline E of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2
 
 Applicant signed his notarized Answer 
on June 2, 2011. Applicant admitted the single allegation under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 28, 2011, and the case 
was assigned to me on July 5, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 15, 
2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 8, 2011. The Government 
offered two exhibits, which I admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant 
testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and offered six exhibits, which I 
admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F. At Applicant's request, I held the record 
open to allow him to submit additional documentation. He timely submitted one 
document, which I admitted as AE G. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 
16, 2011. 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admission in response to the SOR is incorporated as a finding of fact. 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 49 years old and married, with two daughters, 24 and 25 years of 
age. He is currently pursuing a master’s degree, which he expects to complete in 2013. 
Following completion of his bachelor’s degree in 1984, he joined the U.S. Army. 
Applicant held a secret security clearance since 1984 and a top secret security clearance 
with sensitive compartmented information (SCI) access since 1989. As a junior officer, 
Applicant worked in intelligence. He served in Operation Desert Shield/Desert Storm in 
Iraq, as well as in Haiti, Kosovo, and a second tour in Iraq. As a civilian federal 
employee, he has worked in Iraq and Afghanistan as part of the war on terror. He 
received the Bronze Star in the first Iraq war and the Defense Meritorious Service Medal. 
He was honorably discharged in 2004. (GE 1, 2; AE F; Tr. 29-31) 
 
Applicant transitioned to civil service employment. From 2004 to 2007, he was a 
division chief at a federal agency. In 2007, he became chief of operations in the same 
agency. He was recognized for exceptional performance in intelligence in 1997 and 
2003, and received the Director’s Award of Excellence in 2008. He was terminated in 
2009 for violating the Hatch Act. He began working for a defense contractor in December 
2009, and currently holds the position of program manager. His 2010-2011 performance 
evaluation shows that he rated “Exceeds” or “Frequently Exceeds” in all performance 
categories. (GE 1; AE F; Tr. 27-29, 45) 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
3 
 
 
 As chief of the office of operations, Applicant held weekly staff meetings with 
numerous people including his subordinates. The group of approximately 20 people 
usually had casual discussions about topics such as sporting events and televised 
talent shows before the meeting started. Applicant had often polled people about who 
they thought would win contests such as the Super Bowl or American Idol. The national 
presidential election was approaching. Applicant’s agency had television sets in most 
rooms, broadcasting information about the upcoming election, and discussions often 
focused on the elections. (GE 2; AE C; Tr. 32-36, 43, 47-51) 
 
 In October 2008, before one meeting began, Applicant began a discussion of the 
upcoming election and candidates. He told the group that he liked candidate A’s vice-
presidential running mate, that he intended to vote for candidate A, and that he did not 
like candidate B’s performance or running mate. He then asked those who intended to 
vote for candidate A to raise their hands, and he also raised his hand. He asked those 
who planned to vote for candidate B to raise their hands, and he did not raise his hand. 
Applicant then told the employees that the agency allowed several hours administrative 
leave to vote, and he encouraged them to take advantage of this leave and to vote for 
whichever candidate they preferred. He testified that he did not tell anyone how to vote. 
His goal was to ensure everyone was aware of the agency’s policy to allow all types of 
employees—federal, military, and contractor—time to vote, and to encourage them to 
do so. (GE 2; AE C; Tr. 32-36, 43, 58) 
 
 An employee who attended the meeting filed a complaint that Applicant had 
violated the Hatch Act.3
 
 The Office of Special Counsel (OSC) found that Applicant had 
violated the Hatch Act. OSC planned to bar Applicant from future employment with 
federal agencies or federal contractors. On his attorney’s advice, Applicant agreed to a 
settlement that barred him from federal employment, but permitted employment with 
defense contractors. (AE G; Tr. 36-39) 
 During his security interview, Applicant stated he made a random comment to no 
one in particular that he might vote for candidate A. He testified that, in his security 
interview, he was summarizing what had happened. Applicant disclosed on his security 
clearance application that he had violated the Hatch Act, and that he had signed a 
settlement with the OSC. (GE 1, 2) 
 
 When Applicant was hired by the federal agency, in approximately September 
2004, he received an ethics briefing that included three slides about the Hatch Act. As 
part of the OSC investigation, Applicant reviewed the training he had during his tenure 
                                                          
3 It appears from a Merit Systems Protection Board decision offered by Applicant (AE G) that one of 
Applicant's subordinates reported Applicant's violation. However, Applicant testified that he was unsure 
who reported the violation. The agency had initiated termination proceedings against the subordinate, and 
he appealed that action, alleging, inter alia, that he was being terminated as reprisal for reporting 
Applicant's Hatch Act violation. I will not consider this exhibit, because I do not consider the identity of the 
person who initiated the charge to be relevant.  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
at the federal agency. He confirmed that between 2004 and 2008, he did receive 
additional ethics training, but no further training about the Hatch Act. (Tr. 44-45, 60-62) 
 
 While the matter with OSC was pending, Applicant was prohibited from 
conversing with some staff members. He testified that, other than those personnel, he 
“apologized verbally to almost everyone on my staff.” After leaving the agency, 
Applicant wrote to the agency director to apologize for his actions. He also testified that, 
since being terminated, he has been careful to “engage in no political discussion 
whatsoever.” Also, as part of a home business helping customers to write resumes for 
federal employment, he advises them about the Hatch Act, and cautions them to be 
conscious of its requirements so they can avoid his mistake. (GE 2; AE E; Tr. 39-41, 54) 
 
 Applicant's first witness has held a top secret clearance with SCI access for 35 
years. He has known him for approximately six years, including while they were both 
division directors at the agency from which Applicant was terminated. He describes 
Applicant as professional and loyal, and recommended him for a security clearance. 
Applicant's second witness was his subordinate at the federal agency where the 
incident occurred. He attended the meeting and remembers that Applicant was talking 
about the election, and stressing the importance of voting. He stated that Applicant had 
mentioned in a light-hearted way who he thought he would vote for, asked who else 
intended to vote for that candidate, and then noted that the rest would probably vote the 
other way. He then again explained the importance of voting, no matter which candidate 
they chose. He testified that Applicant did not tell anyone at the meeting how they 
should vote. He noted that Applicant now refuses to talk about any political matters, 
even with friends. (Tr. 19-25, 63-71) 
 
 Applicant submitted two character reference letters. His current supervisor, the 
company’s vice president and division manager, held high positions in the intelligence 
community for three decades. He describes Applicant as having the highest integrity, 
and notes that he trusts Applicant because of his good judgment and sound decisions. 
An Army general who worked with Applicant noted that he trusted Applicant with the 
most sensitive issues and information. He described Applicant as “one of the finest 
intelligence officers I have worked with in my 33 years in the U.S. Army.” (AE A, B) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4
                                                          
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline E. 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5
 
 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses 
the judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as his or 
her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution 
of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the 
Government.7
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern under the personal conduct guideline is that  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15) 
 
 Applicant violated the Hatch Act when he talked with employees and 
subordinates at his workplace, during duty hours, about an upcoming national election, 
and indicated which candidate he intended to choose. Under the settlement reached 
with OSC, Applicant was terminated from his job, and barred from future federal 
                                                          
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
 
employment. Applicant's behavior demonstrated questionable judgment, and AG ¶ 16 
applies: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of… 
 
 (2) …inappropriate behavior in the workplace…  
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant’s offense was certainly not minor, as he violated a federal law. 
However, it was infrequent, as the evidence shows a single occurrence. Weighing his 
long history of holding a top level security clearance and special access, and the three 
years that have passed without incident since this event, I conclude that the offense 
does not cast doubt on his current trustworthiness or reliability. AG ¶ 17(c) applies. 
Applicant apologized to the staff members at the meeting, and to the director of the 
federal agency where he worked at the time. He also disclosed the termination on his 
security clearance application. He is not subject to exploitation in regard to his 
termination. Applicant acknowledged his violation and is now acutely aware of Hatch 
Act requirements. He has taken the lesson of this event to heart, and foregoes all public 
political discussion. His past conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 17(d) and (e) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
 
 
7 
 
 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the following whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guideline, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
Applicant engaged in a political discussion in the workplace, with co-workers and 
subordinates, which included disclosing his own preference in a national election, and 
asking for their preferences in that election. His conduct is prohibited by law. As a result, 
he was terminated from his position, and barred from future federal employment. As 
Applicant's training regarding the Hatch Act consisted of three slides presented four 
years before the incident, I do not find that his action showed a disregard for rules, but a 
lack of sufficient training, and a display of poor judgment. Applicant was candid in 
admitting his termination in his security clearance application, and apologized to his 
superior and his subordinates. The serious consequences of his acts have impressed 
upon him the care he must take in his interactions with subordinates, and he is now 
committed to avoiding any similar inappropriate political discussions in the future. The 
event occurred three years ago, and there is no record evidence of similar conduct or 
poor judgment since. On the contrary, his performance evaluation, witness testimony, 
and character references indicate outstanding performance.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the cited security 
concern. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has satisfied the doubts raised 
under the guideline for personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to allow 
Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
