 
1 
 
 
                            
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of:  ) 
  ) 
                                                             )  ISCR Case No. 10-06592 
                                                             )                                 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the written record in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                       Statement of Case 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on September 26, 2008. On March 24, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG)  effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 11, 2011. He requested that his case be 
determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. After compiling its File of Relevant 
 
2 
 
 
Material (FORM) on August 8, 2011, the Government provided the FORM to Applicant 
on August 11, 2011, with instructions to submit any additional information or objections 
within 30 days of receipt. The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 
5. In addition, the Government compiled a factual narrative about India from 16 official 
U.S. government publications, provided the narrative to Applicant and to me, and 
requested that I take administrative notice of facts about India in the narrative. The 
Government also compiled a factual narrative about Taiwan from 13 official U.S. 
government publications, provided the narrative to Applicant and to me, and requested 
that I take administrative notice of facts about Taiwan in the narrative. The two factual 
narratives appear at pages 2 through 11 of the FORM.   
 
Applicant received the file on August 23, 2011. His response was due on 
September 22, 2011. Applicant timely submitted additional information. On September 
27, 2011, the case was assigned to me for a decision. I marked Applicant’s submission 
in response to the FORM as Item A and admitted it to the record without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains nine allegations that raise security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.i.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted eight of the Guideline B allegations. He denied SOR ¶ 1.b., which alleged that 
his wife, a naturalized U.S. citizen, held dual citizenship with India. He corrected 
erroneous statements he had made on his e-QIP and in an affidavit that his wife held 
dual citizenship with India, and he reported that she held a lifetime visa for travel to 
India, which did not confer citizenship. He stated that his wife held only U.S. citizenship. 
Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact.  (Item 1; Item 3; Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant, who is 65 years old, was born and educated in India. Applicant 
married in India in 1973. He and his wife are the parents of two adult children. Applicant 
became a U.S. citizen in 1990. His wife became a U.S. citizen in 2005. She is employed 
as a substitute teacher. Both of Applicant’s children are U.S. citizens. (Item 4; Item A.) 
 
 In 1973, Applicant received a Ph.D. from an Indian university. When his 
academic credentials were translated by the Indian university for presentation to 
prospective U.S. employers, Applicant’s surname was misspelled. Applicant did not 
request that the Indian institution issue him new credentials reflecting the proper 
spelling of his surname. Instead, he adopted the misspelled surname and has used it in 
his personal and professional life in the United States. (Item 4; Item 5 at 3.) 
 
 From 1975 to 1977, Applicant carried out post-doctoral research in a European 
country. Later, during his professional career, he was employed by several large private 
U.S. companies. While carrying out his work for these companies, he had contact with 
government officials in European and Asian countries. In about 1997, he founded his 
own company and developed business contacts with Indian and other East Asian 
officials responsible for telecommunications. Applicant was first granted a security 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
clearance in 1994. He seeks a clearance at this time in order to carry out his current 
employment responsibilities. (Item 4; Item 5.)     
 
 From 2008 until the present Applicant has been employed with his current 
employer as the director of advanced technology systems. On his resume, he lists 
professional recognition “for pioneering the development and application of 
semiconductor monolithic microwave integrated circuit (MMIC) subsystems, 
advancements in solar cell technology and for overall leadership in the design of space 
communication satellites.” (Item 4; Item A at 3.) 
 
 In 1986, Applicant met a citizen of Taiwan who was residing in the United States 
and working for the same corporation as he was. The individual returned to Taiwan in   
1990. Since his return, the Taiwanese citizen and Applicant have had telephone contact 
three or four times a year and e-mail contact twelve to fourteen times a year. When the 
Taiwanese citizen visits the United States every two or three years, he and Applicant 
meet. The Taiwanese citizen is now a professor of material science and engineering in 
Taiwan. Applicant’s friendship with the Taiwanese resident and citizen is alleged as a 
Guideline B security concern at SOR ¶ 1.f. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
 
 In 1992, as a personal favor to his Taiwanese friend, Applicant traveled with him 
and his Taiwanese business associates to India. The Taiwanese friend and his 
associates wanted to invest in telecommunications development in India. Applicant 
introduced his Taiwanese friend to Indian government officials who were in a position to 
help the Taiwanese friend achieve his business goals. Applicant was employed by a 
U.S. telecommunications company at the time. However, he used his personal funds to 
pay for his travel.1 (Item 5.)   
 
 In December 1997, after starting his own company, Applicant was approached by 
a person claiming to be an employee of a foreign embassy. The person told Applicant 
he wanted Applicant’s company to design and build a communications radio for his 
government. Applicant, who was working from his home at the time, invited the person 
to come to his home to discuss his interest. He told the individual he would need a radio 
specification and an export license from the U.S. government before any further 
business could be conducted. The individual left and Applicant did not hear from him 
again. (Item 5.) 
 
 One year after Applicant met with the individual, he was visited by federal 
investigators, who asked him about his meeting in detail. The investigators told 
Applicant that the individual who met with him had not represented himself accurately. 
The individual was a person of interest in a federal investigation. Applicant cooperated 
fully with the investigators. (Item 5.) 
 
 
1 The record reflects that Applicant took this action while a citizen of India and before he became a U.S. 
citizen. However, he was employed at the time by a U.S. telecommunications company, and it is not clear 
from the record that his employer knew or approved of his actions on behalf of his Taiwanese friend’s 
interest in investing in telecommunication enterprises in India.  
 
4 
 
 
                                           
  Several members of Applicant’s family are citizens and residents of India. His 
sister and his three brothers are citizens and residents of India. Applicant is in frequent 
contact with his siblings in India either by telephone or e-mail. At least two of his siblings 
know he is under consideration for a security clearance. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law, a retired city government employee, is a citizen and 
resident of India. Applicant speaks with his father-in-law on the telephone three to five 
times a year. The father-in-law also knows that Applicant is under consideration for a 
security clearance. (Item 1; Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant’s brother-in-law, a citizen and resident of India, is an employee of an 
Indian city government. Applicant’s two sisters-in-law are also citizens and residents of 
India. Applicant speaks with these relatives by telephone several times a year. One of 
his sisters-in-law knows that he is under consideration for a security clearance. (Item 1; 
Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant’s nephew, a bank employee, is also a citizen and resident of India. 
Applicant speaks with his nephew three or four times a year by telephone. He 
communicates with the nephew by e-mail five or six times a year. Applicant told his 
nephew that he is under consideration for a security clearance. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife own property in India. In the 1980s, Applicant’s wife and 
her father purchased real property in India. In 2005, Applicant and his wife hired an 
architect to design and construct a home for them on the property. In March 2009, in an 
affidavit, Applicant reported that he and his wife had invested $89,000 in the 
construction of the home. He said he expected construction of the home would be 
completed in late 2009 and 2010. After he retires, Applicant plans to reside in the home 
for three or four months each year. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
 
 In order to pay for the construction of their home in India, Applicant’s wife opened 
a bank account in India in 2007.2 Applicant also owns a certificate of deposit in India, 
valued at between $600 and $700. (Item 5.) 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about India, as provided by the 
Government in the FORM: 
 
According to its [c]onstitution, India is a ‘sovereign, socialist, secular 
democratic republic.’ 
 
India’s political history since it gained independence from Great Britain in 
1947 has included: (a) wars with Pakistan in 1947, 1965, and 1971, and 
the 1999 intrusion of Pakistani-backed forces into Indian-held territory that 
 
2 Applicant stated that his name is not on the bank account. The record does not specify whether money 
earned by Applicant is deposited in the account. (Item 5.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
nearly turned into full-scale war; (b) a 1975 declaration of a state of 
emergency, with the suspension of many civil liberties; (c) the 
assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in October 1984; (d) the 
assassination of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in May 1991 while he was 
campaigning for parliamentary elections; (e) sporadic outbreaks of 
religious riots, in which numerous people have been killed; and (f) violent 
attacks by a variety of separatist and terrorist groups in different parts of 
the country. 
 
In late November 2008, terrorists coordinated attacks in Mumbai, targeting 
areas frequented by Westerners, which highlighted the risk of Americans 
becoming intended or unintended victims of terrorism in India. There is a 
continuing threat from terrorism throughout India, and the U.S. 
Department of State has recently issued a travel warning to U.S. citizens 
of the ongoing security concerns in India and possible threat of attack on 
targets where U.S. citizens or Westerners are known to congregate or 
visit. 
 
According to the U.S. Department of State, the Indian Government, and in 
particular the police and security forces, have engaged in significant 
human rights abuses, including extrajudicial killings of persons in custody, 
killings of protesters, torture and rape. ‘Investigations into individual 
abuses and legal punishment for perpetrators occurred, but for many 
abuses, a lack of accountability due to weak law enforcement, a lack of 
trained police, and an overburdened court system created an atmosphere 
of impunity.’ There were also significant problems related to poor prison 
conditions and lengthy detentions. Also, ‘[c]orruption existed at all levels of 
government and police.’ Crimes against women are common. 
 
The Soviet Union was India’s ‘main foreign benefactor for the first four 
decades of Indian independence.’ After the 1979 Soviet invasion of 
Afghanistan, India ‘implicitly supported the Soviet occupation.’ India had 
long-standing military supply relationships with the Soviet Union, and India 
continues to obtain the bulk of its military supplies from Russia. 
 
Although the United States has sought to strengthen its relationship with 
India, there are some differences between the United States and India, 
including differences over India’s nuclear weapons programs and the pace 
of India’s efforts [in] economic reforms. Furthermore, during 2007, 
members of U.S. Congress . . . expressed concerns at India’s relations 
with Iran, a country with which India ‘launched a bilateral “strategic 
partnership,”’ including concerns about India’s increasing cooperation with 
the Iranian military. In July 2009, however, the United States and India 
issued a joint statement of their intentions to foster bilateral relations by 
establishing working groups to address (1) strategic cooperation, (2) 
energy and climate change, (3) education and development, (4) 
 
6 
 
 
economics, trade, and agriculture, and (5) science and technology, health, 
and innovation. 
 
The 2008 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage lists India, along with seven other countries, as being 
involved in criminal espionage and U.S. export controls enforcement 
cases in 2008. An earlier version of that report specifically lists India as 
being among the most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary 
information and highlights specific incidents wherein India engaged in 
attempts to acquire export-restricted products. 
 
There have been numerous instances of violations of U.S. export laws 
involving India, which evidences India’s desire to acquire U.S. technology 
regardless of the laws protecting that technology. In March 2008, the 
owner of an international electronics business pleaded guilty to conspiracy 
to illegally export controlled technology to government entities in India that 
participate in the development of ballistic missiles, space launch missiles, 
and fighter jets. Furthermore, there have been other cases involving the 
illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual use 
technology to India, including: (1) high-tech testing equipment that posed 
‘an unacceptable risk of being diverted to a weapons of mass destruction 
program;’ (2) equipment ‘which can be used in military and civilian aircraft 
to extract vibration information from engines and to simulate output for 
calibrating, servicing, and testing that equipment;’ (3) ‘equipment that is 
used to manufacture a material that improves the accuracy of strategic 
ballistic missiles with nuclear capabilities;’ (4) an animation system to an 
Indian entity ‘determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to 
programs for the development of weapons of mass destruction or their 
means of delivery;’ (5) nuclear pulse generators to two Indian entities ‘that 
have been determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to 
developing weapons of mass destruction or missiles used to deliver these 
weapons;’ and (6) heat treating containers to an Indian entity ‘determined 
to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to developing weapons of 
mass destruction or missiles used to deliver these weapons.’ ‘The threat 
to the United States from foreign economic intelligence collection and 
industrial espionage has continued unabated’ with foreign collectors 
continuing to ‘target a wide variety of unclassified and classified 
information in a range of sectors.’ 
 
(FORM at 2-8; footnotes and citations omitted.) 
 
 I also take administrative notice of the following facts about Taiwan, as provided 
by the Government in the FORM: 
 
The 2008 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage lists Taiwan, along with seven other countries, as 
 
7 
 
 
being involved in criminal espionage and export controls enforcement 
cases in 2008. The 2000 version of that report specifically lists Taiwan as 
being among the most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary 
information and highlights specific incidents wherein Taiwan engaged in 
attempts to acquire export-restricted products. 
 
There have been various cases involving the illegal export, or attempted 
illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to Taiwan, including: 
classified materials; laser gun aiming devices or sights; measuring probes 
controlled for nuclear non-proliferation and national security reasons; 
centrifugal pumps that are controlled for chemical and biological weapons 
and anti-terrorism reasons; metal organic vapor disposition tools 
controlled for national security and anti-terrorism reasons; fluid control 
valves that are controlled for national security, foreign policy, non-
proliferation or anti-terrorism reasons; [and] radio communication 
encryption modules. 
 
The People’s Republic of China’s (PRC) Ministry of State Security is the 
‘preeminent civilian intelligence collection agency in China,’ and it 
maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan, through a bureau utilizing 
PRC nationals with Taiwan connections. 
   
 (FORM at 8-11; footnotes and citations omitted.) 
 
                                                   Burden of Proof 
 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the 
applicant then bears the burden of persuasion. The "clearly consistent with the national 
interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant's 
suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national security. 
 
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 
8 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
  
 
9 
 
 
                                                      Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 While the governments of India and Taiwan have generally positive relations with 
the United States, both countries are known to be active collectors of U.S. economic 
and proprietary information. In recent years, both India and Taiwan have attempted to 
illegally acquire export-restricted technology products from U.S. companies that are 
federal contractors. Additionally, the PRC maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan.   
 
  In 2008, terrorists attacked areas in Mumbai, India, that were frequented by 
Westerners. Since that time, there has been a continuing threat that U.S. citizens might 
become the intended or unintended victims of terrorism in India. The U.S. Department 
of State has warned U.S. citizens traveling to India of these security concerns and the 
possible threat of attack on targets where U.S. citizens and other Westerners are known 
to congregate.   
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline.  The facts in this case raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e). AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information.” AG ¶ 7(e) reads: “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a 
foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 
 Applicant provided information clarifying that his wife is not a dual citizen of India, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Accordingly, allegation 1.b. is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 
10 
 
 
However, the SOR also alleges that Applicant has nine close relatives who are 
citizens and residents of India. He owns real property in India and intends to live in a 
home he has built there for several months a year after he retires. Applicant is close to 
his family members who are citizens and residents of India, and he communicates with 
them frequently. Several of them know that he is under consideration for a U.S. security 
clearance. He failed to show that his relationships and contacts with these family 
members would not be of security significance. 
  
 Additionally, Applicant has a long-standing friendship with a citizen and resident 
of Taiwan. Applicant met the individual when he was working for a U.S. contractor in the 
1980s. When the individual returned to Taiwan in 1990, Applicant remained in contact 
with him. For the past 20 years, he and the Taiwanese citizen have had telephone 
contact three or four times a year and e-mail contact twelve to fourteen times a year. 
When the Taiwanese citizen visits the United States every two or three years, he and 
Applicant meet. The Taiwanese citizen is now a professor of material science and 
engineering in Taiwan.    
 
 In 1992, Applicant learned that his Taiwanese friend and his Taiwanese business 
associates wanted to invest in telecommunications development in India. Applicant 
voluntarily accompanied his friend and the Taiwanese business group to India and 
introduced them to Indian government officials who were in a position to help them 
achieve their business goals. Applicant was employed by a U.S. telecommunications 
company at the time. However, the trip was of a personal nature to help his friend, and 
he used his personal funds to pay for his travel. 
 
 Applicant and his wife are building a home in India, and, as of March 2009, they 
had spent $89,000 in the construction of the home. Applicant and his wife maintain a 
bank account in India to pay for the construction of his home there. He intends to reside 
in the home for three or four months each year after he retires.    
 
 Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. If “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, 
financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual,” then 
AG ¶ 8(f) might apply. 
 
11 
 
 
 Applicant’s relationships with family members who are citizens and residents of 
India are neither casual nor infrequent, but are based on long-standing family ties of 
affection and obligation. Several of his relatives in India know he is under consideration 
for a U.S. security clearance. Applicant is building a home in India, has a bank account 
there, and plans to live in India after his retirement. Moreover, Applicant’s 30-year 
friendship with a citizen and resident of Taiwan is not casual, nor are his contacts with 
the individual infrequent. Instead, he speaks with the individual by telephone three or 
four times a year, exchanges e-mail communication with him 12 or 14 times a year, and 
sees him every two of three years when he comes to the United States.  
 
 India has a recent history of terrorist activity which exposed U.S. citizens and 
other Westerners to danger and exploitation. Additionally, both India and Taiwan have 
sought to obtain, through illegal means, U.S. technology that could be used for military 
purposes. Applicant has used his associations with Indian government officials to 
advance the interests of his friend who is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. Applicant’s 
actions raise conflict of interest security concerns that remain unmitigated. His contacts 
with and concern for his family members who are Indian residents and citizens and his 
relationship with his friend who is a citizen and resident of Taiwan raise potential 
security vulnerabilities. His loyalties to his family members and his Taiwanese friend 
could expose him to exploitation and coercion.   
 
 Applicant owns a home valued at not less than $89,000 in India. He also has a 
bank account in India. The value of these assets is not inconsequential, and the visible 
connections they provide to India raise unresolved security concerns, for they could 
make Applicant vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or manipulation.  
 
In summary, Applicant’s familial relationships with relatives in India, a country 
where U.S. citizens and other Westerners can be the intended or unintended targets of 
terrorism, raise unresolved security concerns. His relationship with a citizen and 
resident of Taiwan raises unresolved conflict of interest security concerns. Additionally, 
Applicant’s property interests in India expose him to the further risk of exploitation or 
pressure in his work as a federal contractor, and this could raise additional concerns 
that might also threaten U.S. security interests. Applicant failed to provide information to 
rebut or mitigate these security concerns. I conclude that the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), 8(c), and 8(f) are inapplicable. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
 
12 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge must also consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant, who became a U.S. 
citizen in 1999, possesses knowledge and skill that makes him a valued federal 
contractor. He is in frequent contact with his immediate family members who are 
citizens and residents of India. Several of his relatives know he is under consideration 
for a security clearance. Applicant is also in frequent contact with a friend who is a 
citizen and resident of Taiwan. While employed by a U.S. firm, he provided his 
Taiwanese friend and his business associates with access to Indian officials who could 
advance the friend’s desire to invest in telecommunications in India. Additionally, 
Applicant owns a house and a bank account in India and intends to live in India after he 
retires. By these actions, he is vulnerable to foreign influence and exposes himself to 
the risk of exploitation and coercion.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
foreign influence adjudicative guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:             Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c. - 1.i.:  Against Applicant  
 
13 
 
 
                           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                 
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
