 
 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09071 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s extensive marijuana use showed poor judgment and raised security 
concerns. He stopped using marijuana in February 2010. More time is needed without 
illegal drug use to mitigate security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 28, 2010, Applicant submitted an E lectronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (Item 4). On April 
15, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement). (Item 
1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a s ecurity clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On May 31, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
decision without a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM), dated June 8, 2011, was provided to him on June 21, 2011. He was afforded 
an opportunity to file objections and to submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation.1
 
 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on 
September 15, 2011. 
Findings of Fact2
 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted all of the SOR allegations: (1) the police 
arrested him for marijuana possession in September 1995 (SOR ¶ 1 .a); (2) he was 
arrested for prohibited possession of a controlled drug in 1997 (SOR ¶ 1.b); and (3) he 
used marijuana about once each year from June 2000 to February 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.c). 
(Item 3) His admissions are accepted as factual findings.   
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Item 4) In May 
2000, he was awarded a bachelor’s degree. (Item 4 at  15) He began working for his 
current employer in April 2010 as a general manager. (Item 4 at 17) From December 
2003 to March 2010, he w as employed as a s enior account manager in a pr ivate 
company not under contract to the Department of Defense. (Item 4 at 18) He does not 
have any prior military service. (Item 4 at 29-30) He married in October 2006. (Item 4 at 
33) He has one child who is less than one year old. (Item 4 at 34-38; Item 5 at 14) 
  
Drug involvement 
 
On June 28, 2010, Applicant signed his security clearance application. (Item 4) 
On this security clearance application, he responded, “Yes” to Section 22e, which asks 
whether he has ever been charged with any offenses related to alcohol or drugs. (Item 4 
at 46) He disclosed that in September 1995, he w as charged with possession of 
marijuana, and he said the offense was subsequently expunged. (Item 4 at 47) On 
August 5, 2010, he told an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) that he never went to court for this offense, and in response to DOHA 
interrogatories, he said the charged was “dropped.” (Item 5 at 10, 15) In January 1997, 
                                            
1 The DOHA transmittal letter is dated June 15, 2011, and Applicant’s receipt is dated June 21, 
2011. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt to submit 
information.  
 
2 Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
he pleaded no contest to simple possession of marijuana, and the court imposed a fine. 
(Item 4 at 46-47)  
 
Applicant’s August 5, 2010 OPM interview indicates he used marijuana about ten 
times from June 2000 to February 2010 at the rate of about once per year.3
 
 He used 
marijuana at barbecues, concerts, or when traveling for sports. He received the 
marijuana from friends; however, he was unable to recall the names of the friends who 
provided the marijuana. Applicant has not received any diagnosis or treatment for 
marijuana use. He stopped using marijuana at the beginning of 2010 because of his 
commitment to his family (especially his seven-month-old son) and his desire to improve 
his career opportunities. 
In his response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant described his history of 
marijuana use as follows: 
 
I smoked marijuana my senior year in high school and my first year and a 
half of college in 1995-1997 about 20 times, after that period of time I have 
very rarely smoked over the past 10 years, maybe once a year. I haven’t 
smoked marijuana since February of last year when I was making a career 
change and when we started trying for a family. 
    
Item 5 at 18. 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a s ecurity clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
                                            
3 The sources of the information in this paragraph are Applicant’s August 5, 2010 OPM personal 
subject interview (PSI) (Item 5 at  11) and his response to DOHA interrogatories. (Item 5 at  15-16) On 
December 20, 2010, Applicant verified the accuracy of the summary of the OPM interview, except he 
clarified that he knew the friends who were with him when he used marijuana. (Item 5 at  15-19) He 
explained that he did not know the source of the marijuana that he used. Id.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a c ertain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an i ndication the applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a n exus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guideline H (drug involvement).  
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an i ndividual’s reliability and t rustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Two drug involvement disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse”4 and 
“illegal drug possession.” These two disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant 
possessed and used marijuana.5
   
 He admitted his marijuana use on hi s security 
clearance application, to an OPM investigator, and in his SOR response. He possessed 
marijuana before he used it. He was convicted of simple marijuana possession in 1997. 
Applicant’s arrest for marijuana possession in 1995 d oes not establish a s ecurity 
concern because he did not indicate that he committed an offense, and the offense was 
not prosecuted. Accordingly, SOR ¶ 1.a is not substantiated.  
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
                                            
4 AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
5 AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substance. See Drug Enforcement Administration 
listing at http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/21cfr/cfr/1308/1308 11.htm. See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 
U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a pr escribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and a ftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant’s last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 
months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”6
 
 
Applicant’s involvement with marijuana extended over about a 15-year period 
beginning with his marijuana use in high school, his arrest in 1995, his conviction in 
                                            
6 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had dou bts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
1997, and ended in February 2010, when he stopped using marijuana.7 He recognizes 
the adverse impact on his life of drug abuse in connection with access to classified 
information as well as the impact on his family and c areer. Marijuana possession 
violates federal law. He did not indicate that he has ended any association with known 
drug users. AG ¶ 26(a) partially applies to his marijuana-related offenses.8
 
    
Applicant demonstrated his intent not to abuse illegal drugs in the future. He has 
broken his patterns of drug abuse, and he has changed his life with respect to illegal 
drug use. He has abstained from drug abuse for about 20 months. AG ¶ 26(b) partially 
applies.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse 
prescription drugs. Marijuana was never prescribed for him. He did not receive a 
prognosis of low probability of recurrence of drug abuse.   
 
In conclusion, Applicant ended his drug abuse in February 2010, about 20 months 
ago. The motivations to stop using illegal drugs are evident.9
 
 He has shown or 
demonstrated a sufficient track record of no drug abuse to reduce, but not completely 
eliminate drug involvement as a bar to his access to classified information. Drug 
involvement concerns remain and will not be mitigated until more time elapses with no 
marijuana possession or use.   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
                                            
7The SOR did not allege that Applicant used marijuana about 20 times during high school and 
college. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five 
circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an ap plicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3. 
  
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have considered the non-SOR misconduct for the five above purposes, and not for any 
other purpose. 
 
8 In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
9 Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and r ecency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
was relatively young and immature when he beg an using marijuana. He served his 
country as an employee of a G overnment contractor. He stopped using marijuana in 
February 2010. I am confident that he has the ability to abstain from marijuana use. In 
his SOR response and at his hearing, he admitted his history of marijuana use. He 
knows the consequences of marijuana use. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he 
would intentionally violate national security. His character and good work performance 
show some responsibility, rehabilitation and mitigation. I am satisfied that if he continues 
to abstain from marijuana use and avoids future offenses, he will eventually have future 
potential for access to classified information.  
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant is 33 years old, and he was sufficiently mature to be fully 
responsible for his conduct. His marijuana use on approximately 30 occasions over a 
15-year period shows lack of judgment. He risked arrest and prosecution each time he 
possessed and used marijuana. Such judgment lapses raise questions about 
Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. His 
marijuana use under all of the circumstances raises a serious security concern, and a 
security clearance is not warranted at this time.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 ( 1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and t he AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude drug involvement concerns 
are not fully mitigated. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not currently eligible for 
access to classified information.  
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
