                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04991 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Foreign Influence concern raised by his family and 
close friends who are citizens and residents of China. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On January 24, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
made a preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information.1 
The basis for this decision is set forth in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which alleges 
the security concern under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). Applicant responded to the 
SOR on February 5, 2011 (Answer). He admitted all the allegations in the SOR and 
requested a decision on the administrative record. 
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 On March 28, 2011, Department Counsel filed a request, on behalf of the 
Government, for a hearing.2 A hearing in this case was originally scheduled for May 11, 
2011 before another administrative judge. The hearing was canceled and the case was 
re-assigned to me on June 7, 2011. After coordinating with the parties, I re-scheduled 
the hearing for July 21, 2011. As a time management tool, I issued a prehearing order 
requiring the parties to serve one another and me their anticipated exhibits prior to the 
hearing.3  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits, which were marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. GE 1, 2, and 4 were admitted into evidence.4 
GE 3 is the Government’s request for administrative notice as to China. After the 
hearing, the Government provided the official U.S. source documents referenced in GE 
3. These documents are marked as GE I through GE XVI. GE XVII and GE XVIII, which 
were also provided by Department Counsel, are the current versions of two of the 
source documents referenced in GE 3. The facts administratively noticed are set forth in 
my findings of fact. Applicant did not offer any documents, but did testify at the hearing. 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I granted the Government’s motion to amend the SOR 
to add allegation 1.e.5 The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 2, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He was born and raised in China. In 1986, he 
immigrated to the United States on a student visa. He attended a prestigious U.S. 
university and received his master’s degree in 1989. He then moved to New York where 
he spent over 19 years working as a high school teacher. He was granted U.S. 
citizenship in 2000 and currently works on a part-time basis for a government contractor 
as a translator.6  
 
 Applicant married his wife in China in 1981. They have one adult child. 
Applicant’s wife and child are both U.S. citizens. Applicant has lived at the same 
address since 1993.7 
 
2 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
3 HE II. 
 
4 GE 2 contains information relating to Applicant taking and failing a polygraph examination as 
part of a background investigation for another government agency. The Government averred that I could 
“disregard” such evidence. Accordingly, I have not considered such information.  
 
5 “You have two brother-in-laws and one sister-in-law, who are citizens and residents of the 
People’s Republic of China.” I made a pen-and-ink change to the SOR to annotate this amendment. 
Applicant admitted this additional allegation. Tr. at 59-60, 67.  
 
6 GE 1; GE 2; Tr. at 62-64. 
 
7 GE 1 and 2.  
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s mother, brother, and one of his sisters are citizens and residents of 
China. Applicant’s mother is in her mid-eighties and in poor health. Applicant speaks 
frequently to his sister, who cares for their mother, in order to check on his mother’s 
condition. Applicant’s mother-in-law, brothers-in-law, and sister-in-law are also citizens 
and residents of China. He has several close friends who are citizens and residents of 
China, including two that he listed as references on his security clearance application 
(SCA). He travels to China once every other year to visit his family and friends. 
Applicant fully disclosed his foreign family members, friends, and visits to China on his 
SCA.8 
 
 China is “undergoing profound economic and social change.”9 However, China 
remains an authoritarian state controlled by the Chinese Communist Party.10 “The 
Chinese constitution and laws provide for fundamental human rights, including due 
process, [ ] these are often ignored in practice.”11 Chinese security personnel conduct 
surveillance of those who visit China, including searching personal possessions left in 
hotel rooms, such as computers, without consent.12 China and the United States work 
closely together in areas of mutual interest, including threats to global security posed by 
rogue states.13 However, intelligence gathering efforts targeting sensitive U.S. 
technologies emanating from China remains robust.14  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
8 Answer; GE 1; GE 2; Tr. at 59-60.  
 
9 GE XVII at 1. 
 
10 GE I at 7-8; GE XVII at 1; GE XVIII at 1. 
 
11 Id. at 8-9. See generally, GE XVIII. 
 
12 GE XVII at 4. 
 
13 GE I at 20-21. 
 
14 See generally, GE IV and GE V 
 
 
4 
 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence concern is set forth at AG ¶ 6, as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Applicant’s strong ties to China, through his family and friends, raise the above 
concern. These ties also raise the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7:  
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 In light of China’s abysmal human rights record and robust espionage efforts 
directed against the United States, there is a heightened risk that Applicant could be 
subjected to foreign pressure or influence through his family and friends in China. 
Applicant and his spouse are clearly close to their family members, who are citizens and 
residents of China. Applicant also maintains to the present day lifelong friendships with 
former co-workers and classmates who are citizens and residents of China. 
Consequently, these strong foreign ties, combined with the country at issue, establish 
AG ¶ 7(a), (b), and (d). 
 
 AG ¶ 8 sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the foreign influence 
concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions and find the following warrant 
further discussion:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest. 
 
 The Appeal Board has repeatedly made clear that there is no per se rule against 
applicants with familial ties to hostile countries, such as China. Instead, an applicant 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
with familial ties to a hostile country bears a “heavy burden” in mitigating the foreign 
influence concern raised by such foreign ties.15 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign influence concern. His ties to the United 
States are self-evident. He has lived and worked in the United States since 1986, he 
worked as a teacher in the United States for over 19 years, and has been a citizen for 
over a decade. However, Applicant is still extremely close to his family and friends in 
China. Further, his wife is close to her family in China.16 These family members and 
friends are subject to the whims of a government that does not place great value on the 
individual freedoms of its citizens and craves sensitive U.S. technology. The confluence 
of these factors raises the potential of Applicant being placed in a position of having to 
choose between his foreign family members and friends and his obligation to protect 
national security. Applicant failed to establish that his ties to the United States negate 
this risk completely. Accordingly, Applicant failed to meet his burden to establish AG ¶ 
8(a) and (b). His connections to China remain a security concern. See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 07-00029 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) (favorable decision for applicant, who emigrated 
from China in 1986 and became U.S. citizen in 2002, reversed because applicant’s 
parents and siblings lived in China). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
As noted above, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all the 
relevant circumstances. This is generally referred to as the “whole-person” concept. An 
administrative judge should consider the nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).17 In weighing 
these whole-person factors in a foreign influence case, the Appeal Board has held that: 
 
Evidence of good character and personal integrity is relevant and 
material under the whole person concept. However, a finding that 
an applicant possesses good character and integrity does not 
preclude the government from considering whether the applicant's 
15 ISCR Case No. 01-26893 at 10 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002) (“As a matter of common sense and 
sound risk management under the ‘clearly consistent with the national interest’ standard, an applicant 
with immediate family members living in a country hostile to the United States should not be granted a 
security clearance without a very strong showing that those family ties do not pose a security risk.”).   
 
16 ISCR Case No. 09-06831 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2011) (“In-laws represent a class of persons 
who are contemplated by the Directive as presenting a potential security risk. As a matter of common 
sense and human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.”). 
 
17 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
facts and circumstances still pose a security risk. Stated otherwise, 
. . . [e]ven good people can pose a security risk because of facts 
and circumstances not under their control. For example, . . . an 
applicant with good character and personal integrity can pose a 
security risk because the applicant has close relatives in a country 
hostile to the United States.18 
 
 I have considered and given due weight to all the favorable and extenuating 
factors in this case. Applicant has lived in this country since 1986. He worked the vast 
majority of his adult life as a teacher in the United States. He raised a son, with his wife, 
in the United States and has lived at the same address since 1993. However, in light of 
the substantial risk posed by Applicant’s connections to China, I am required by the 
Directive to resolve the doubt created by this risk in favor of national security.19 At the 
same time, I wish to make abundantly clear that this was an exceedingly close case. 
Further, this adverse determination is not a comment on Applicant’s patriotism, but 
merely an acknowledgment that people may act in unpredictable ways when faced with 
choices that could be important to a loved-one, such as a family member.20  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
18 ISCR Case No. 01-26893 at 9-10 (emphasis added). 
 
19 AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
20 ISCR Case No. 08-10025 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 3, 2009). 
