 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 10-08838 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carolyn H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 On November 28, 2008 in a public park, Applicant solicited sexual activity from 
an undercover police officer, and he exposed his genitals to the police officer. He 
received a citation for soliciting a lewd act from the police officer. He failed to disclose 
this citation on his May 17, 2010 security clearance application. Personal conduct 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 17, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF-86) (GE 1). On 
May 5, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct). 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked (HE 2). 
 
On May 24, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. (HE 
3) On July 22, 2011, Department Counsel announced she was ready to proceed. On 
August 1, 2011, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On September 7, 2011, DOHA 
issued a hearing notice setting the hearing for September 29, 2011. Applicant’s hearing 
was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits (GE 
1-3) (Tr. 14), and Applicant offered one exhibit. (Tr. 15; AE A) There were no objections, 
and I admitted GE 1-3 and AE A. (Tr. 14, 15-16) Additionally, I admitted the hearing 
notice, SOR, and Applicant’s response to the SOR as hearing exhibits. (HE 1-3) On 
October 12, 2011, I received the hearing transcript.   
 
Findings of Fact1
 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a and denied the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b. (HE 3) His admissions are accepted as factual findings. 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old painter working for a defense contractor. (Tr. 5) He is 
responsible for the contractor’s paint department, and he is his company’s unit 
environmental coordinator for hazardous materials. (Tr. 6) In 1984, he earned a 
graduate equivalency diploma (GED), and in 1986, he completed one year of college. 
(Tr. 5) He has never served in the military. (Tr. 6) He was married from March 2004 to 
April 2009. (Tr. 18, 26-27) He does not have any children. (Tr. 27) He has held a 
security clearance for about 11 years. (Tr. 6, 16-17) There is no evidence of security 
violations.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 From about 2005 to November 28, 2008, Applicant went to a local park on 
several occasions to meet men. (Tr. 17-18, 26) He held a security clearance during this 
same time period. (Tr. 18) His sexual behavior was “a very private matter,” and he did 
not disclose his sexual behavior to friends and family. (Tr. 18-19) 
 
 On November 28, 2008, Applicant was in the public park. An undercover, male 
police officer walked up to Applicant and Applicant asked what the man liked. (Tr. 22) 
The police officer responded that he liked everything. (Tr. 22) Applicant said he liked 
bottoms, and then Applicant pulled his trousers down to his knees. (Tr. 23) Applicant 
exposed his penis to the police officer. (Tr. 23) He asked the police officer, “Can you 
handle this?” (Tr. 23) 
 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 The first page and the comments section of the police report discussing the 
November 28, 2008 incident indicate that the police arrested Applicant. (GE 3 at 1, 4) It 
also states he was taken “into custody without incident.” (GE 3 at 4) Applicant waived 
his rights and made a statement about wanting to meet men in the park. (Tr. 24) He 
admitted that he knew it was illegal to expose his genitals in the park. (Tr. 24; GE 3) At 
his hearing, Applicant said he did not remember being advised of his rights or making a 
statement. (Tr. 24) He remembered being searched; however, he did not remember 
being handcuffed. (Tr. 24) He said the police did not take him to the police station or 
take his picture for a “mug shot.” (Tr. 25)   
 
Applicant’s May 17, 2010 SF-86 in Section 22a and 22b provides: 
 
Section 22: Police Record 
 
For this item, report information regardless of whether the record in your 
case has been sealed, expunged, or otherwise stricken from the court 
record, or the charge was dismissed. You need not report convictions 
under the Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 
3607. Be sure to include all incidents whether occurring in the U.S. or 
abroad.  
 
For questions a and b, respond for the timeframe of the last 7 years (if an 
SSBI go back 10 years). Exclude any fines of less than $300 for traffic 
offenses that do not involve alcohol or drugs. 
 
a. Have you been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in court 
in a criminal proceeding against you; are you on trial or awaiting a trial on 
criminal charges; or are you currently awaiting sentencing for a criminal 
offense? 
 
b. Have you been arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshal, or any 
other type of law enforcement officer? 
  
Applicant answered, “No” to Sections 22a and 22b. (GE 1) He explained that he 
received a citation for the criminal case from the incident on November 28, 2008, with a 
court date on it; however, he never actually went to trial on the incident. (Tr. 19-20) He 
called the court, and the court staff said that the court did not have any record of the 
citation, “it just disappeared.”2
 
 (Tr. 19-20, 25, 31) He went to court on the day indicated 
on his citation, and his case did not appear on the docket. (Tr. 31) He decided the 
citation was a warning. (Tr. 20, 25) The case has never been resolved. (Tr. 31) 
                                            
2 The police report indicates that the police officer could not find the citation when he returned to 
the station. (GE 3 at 4) The police report cited Applicant for solicitation of a lewd act. Id. A misdemeanor, 
non-traffic, police-issued citation for Applicant’s conduct on November 28, 2008, is included in the file. 
(GE 3 at 6) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On July 21, 2010, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
confronted Applicant with the information about the police report. (Tr. 20-21; GE 2 at 3) 
He admitted the incident on November 28, 2008, and said he had engaged in similar 
conduct about five times previously. (Tr. 28; GE 2 at 4) At his hearing, he said a more 
accurate number was two or three times. (Tr. 28) Applicant told the OPM investigator 
that he did not reveal the lewd conduct on his SF-86 because he misread the question. 
(GE 2 at 3) 
 
Department Counsel argued that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the 
incident on his SF-86 because he was embarrassed by what happened, and he did not 
want anyone to know about it. (Tr. 30) Applicant responded that the incident was “a very 
private matter to me. Yeah, it is somewhat embarrassing. And I tried to keep it to 
myself, yes.” (Tr. 30)  
 
Applicant regretted the incident in the park. (Tr. 27) He promised that the incident 
in the park would not occur in the future. (Tr. 27)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s general manager has known Applicant since January 2009.3
 
 He 
describes Applicant as a conscientious, punctual, reliable, and responsible employee. 
Applicant does an outstanding job, and he recommends reinstatement of Applicant’s 
security clearance.  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
                                            
3 The source for the facts in this paragraph is an August 10, 2011 letter from the general manager 
of the government contractor employing Applicant. (AE A)  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guideline E (personal conduct).  
 
Personal conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes five conditions that could raise a security concern in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior . . . ; and (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations . . . ; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, 
professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another country, engaging in 
any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that country but illegal in 
the United States and may serve as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the 
foreign security or intelligence service or other group. 
 
All five disqualifying conditions apply. On November 28, 2008, Applicant exposed 
his penis to an undercover police officer after soliciting sexual conduct in a public park. 
He received a citation for soliciting a lewd act from the police, and the police generated 
a police report. When he completed his SF-86 on May 17, 2010, he falsely denied that 
he had a reportable citation. He deliberately failed to disclose the citation because he 
was embarrassed, and he did not want anyone to know about the incident in the park.     
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(b), 17(d), 17(e), 17(f), and 17(g) do not apply to a sufficient 
degree to mitigate any SOR allegations. AG ¶ 17(c) applies to the information in SOR ¶ 
1.a. Applicant committed a single lewd act on November 28, 2008, almost three years 
ago. The only victim of his exposure of his genitals was a police officer. Although he 
sought sexual encounters in the park on other occasions before November 28, 2008, 
there is no evidence he exposed his genitals in the park on those other occasions. He is 
truly ashamed and embarrassed about his lewd act. This offense no longer casts doubt 
on Applicant’s trustworthiness. He sincerely stated that he would not commit such an 
offense in the future.  
 
Applicant’s deliberately false statement on his May 17, 2010 SF-86 about having 
a citation from the police for soliciting a lewd act on November 28, 2008 is recent and 
serious. He was not credible at his hearing about believing the citation was not 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
reportable on his SF-86 because it was a warning. No one misled him into thinking this 
information should not be reported on his SF-86. The question is clear, and his 
background and hearing statement show that he is an intelligent person. At his hearing, 
he said he could not remember whether the police handcuffed him on November 28, 
2010. Being handcuffed by the police is the type of event that is memorable. He did not 
want to admit at his hearing that he knew he was arrested because he did not disclose 
the arrest on his May 17, 2010 SF-86 as required by Section 22b.4
 
 He was not being 
fully candid and forthright at his hearing. Personal conduct concerns are not mitigated.   
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his access to classified information. He is a 46-year-old painter, who is 
                                            
4 The SOR did not allege Applicant failed to disclose on Section 22b of his May 17, 2010 SF-86 
that the police arrested him on November 28, 2008 for solicitation of a lewd act. In ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not 
alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have limited my consideration of this non-SOR allegation to the five purposes listed 
above. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
responsible for a defense contractor’s paint department. He is also his company’s unit 
environmental coordinator for hazardous materials. He has held a security clearance 
without security violations for 11 years. His director describes him as conscientious, 
punctual, reliable, and responsible. Applicant does an outstanding job, and he 
recommends reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance. There is every indication 
that he is loyal to the United States and his employer. These factors show some 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
 The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial. He has not mitigated his deliberate and intentional falsification of his 
May 17, 2010, SF-86. He knew he should have disclosed his citation on November 28, 
2008 on his SF-86, and he chose not to do so. He did not disclose the citation because 
he was embarrassed, and he wanted to keep the information private about exposing his 
genitals in the park. His explanation that he believed the citation was a warning and not 
reportable on his May 17, 2010 SF-86 is not credible. He was not credible at his hearing 
when he stated he did not remember whether the police placed handcuffs on him. His 
falsification of his May 17, 2010 SF-86 is recent, serious and cannot be mitigated.     
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude personal conduct concerns 
are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
