 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09659 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Daniel C. Lemley, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under Guidelines G 
(Alcohol Consumption), H (Drug Involvement), and J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
G, H, and J. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On June 7, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing if his 
response did not provide a basis for a favorable resolution. Department Counsel 
submitted the ready-to-proceed notification on July 8, 2011. The case was originally 
 
2 
 
assigned to another judge and was reassigned to me on August 9, 2011. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on August 24, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
September 14, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked 
as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. Applicant testified, called one witness to testify on his behalf, 
and offered exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted into evidence without objection. The 
record was held open until September 21, 2011, for Applicant to submit additional 
information. Applicant timely submitted AE B, which was admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 21, 2011.  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 21-year-old software intern who works for a defense contractor. He 
started working for the defense contractor as a summer intern in 2009 and now works 
there on a part-time basis. He graduated from high school in 2008. He has completed 
two years of college and is currently taking college courses on a part-time basis. He has 
never been married and has no children. This is the first time that he has sought a 
security clearance.1 
 
 The SOR contained three Guideline G allegations. These allegations asserted 
that Applicant consumed alcohol, at times while underage and to excess, from 2005 to 
March 2011; that he was arrested for Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol (DUI) and 
for Possession of Alcohol by a Minor in April 2009; and that he was arrested for DUI in 
January 2010. The SOR contained two Guideline H allegations that asserted Applicant 
used marijuana from January 2009 to January 2010 and that he was also arrested for 
Possession of Marijuana during his DUI arrest in January 2010. The underage 
possession/consumption of alcohol, two DUIs, and marijuana-related offenses were 
cross-alleged in one allegation under Guideline J. In his Answer, Applicant admitted all 
of the SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact.2 
 
Applicant began consuming alcohol while in high school. He lived at his parents’ 
home until he started college in August 2008. The first college he attended was located 
in a city that was about a three-and-a-half-hour drive from his parents’ home. His 
consumption of alcohol increased after he started college. Until about March or April 
2010, he would regularly drink to the point of intoxication on weekends at college and 
conceded such consumption of alcohol constituted habitual or binge drinking.3 
 
In April 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI and Possession of 
Alcohol by a Minor. The police stopped him because of an illegal lane change. At the 
time of his arrest, his blood alcohol level was .22%. In June 2009, he was found guilty of 
the DUI offense and was sentenced to a pretrial diversion program that included six to 
                                                          
1 Tr. 19, 35-36, 48, 59; GE 1; AE A.  
2 SOR; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 18, 29-30, 39-40, 48-49, 55; GE 2. 
 
3 
 
eight weeks of education classes, four Alcohol Anonymous (AA) meetings, six months 
of probation, and 90 days suspension of his driver’s license. Upon completion of the 
pretrial diversion program, the charges were dismissed. After completing the required 
AA meetings, he did not attend any additional meetings. He violated his probation by 
consuming alcohol while he was in that status.4 
 
In January 2010, Applicant was arrested and charged with DUI and Possession 
of Marijuana. He was sleeping behind the steering wheel of his car when the police 
approached him. At that hearing, he admitted that he drove before falling asleep in the 
car. At the time of his arrest, his blood alcohol level was .09%, which exceeded the legal 
limit. In February 2010, he pled guilty to being a Youthful Offender on the underlying 
charges of DUI and Possession of Drug Paraphernalia and was ordered to complete a 
Court Referral Program. His sentence included six months in jail (suspended), fine, and 
probation for 90 days. His driver’s license was also suspended for 90 days. Adjudication 
as a youthful offender in this state does not constitute conviction of a crime.5 
 
Applicant used marijuana once or twice in high school but did not like it. He 
began using it again in college. He estimated that he used it approximately five times a 
week from January 2009 to January 2010. When he was arrested in January 2010, he 
had about half an ounce of marijuana in a plastic bag in his pants and a marijuana bong 
in his car. He purchased marijuana for his own use and shared it with others. The last 
time that he possessed or used marijuana was in January 2010. He has never been 
evaluated by a medical professional as being an alcohol or drug abuser or as being 
alcohol or drug dependent. He has not used any illegal drugs other than marijuana. In 
his current job, he passed a pre-employment drug test and is subject to random drug 
tests.6 
 
In May 2010, Applicant moved back to his parents’ home. He disenrolled from his 
first college and enrolled in another college near his parent’s home. He no longer 
associates with his classmates from his first college. Since returning home, his 
consumption of alcohol has decreased. The last time he became intoxicated was at his 
cousin’s wedding reception in June 2010, and he did not drive on that occasion. He 
stated he now consumes alcohol occasionally when he goes out to dinner. The last time 
he consumed alcohol was about one month before the hearing when he drank one beer 
at dinner. He has joined a fishing club since returning home. He now spends his 
weekends and free time fishing. The consumption of alcohol while fishing is prohibited. 
He has been elected vice president of the fishing club.7  
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 20, 30-31, 36-47, 50, 73-74; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1, 2, 3. 
5 Tr. 20, 30-31, 40-45, 50, 63-68, 73-74; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1, 2, 3. 
6 Tr. 30-31, 40, 44-47, 51-54, 60-68; GE 2. 
7 Tr. 21-27, 31-35, 38, 45-51; GE 1; AE A. 
 
4 
 
Applicant admitted that he has made mistakes and is ashamed of his 
misconduct. He has accepted responsibility for his wrongdoing. He attributed his 
misconduct to being “young and dumb” and peer pressure. He provided records of his 
court proceedings even though those records were sealed. At the hearing, Applicant 
testified in an open and forthcoming manner. I found him to be a credible witness.8  
 
Applicant is an only child. His mother testified that he advised her of each of his 
arrests soon after they occurred. She indicated that he has always been honest. She 
has noticed a definite change in him since he returned home from his first college 
experience. His life now appears to be redirected. He has slowed down on his 
consumption of alcohol. He does not drink at home and may have one or two beers 
when they go out to eat. He attended three months of family counseling. She indicated 
that he now fishes every weekend.9  
  
As his post-hearing submission, Applicant provided a signed letter stating: 
 
I, [Applicant], understand the serious nature of having security information. 
I understand that drug use and alcohol abuse can jeopardize any secure 
information I may have. I intend to abstain from any drug use and alcohol 
abuse. I understand that any drug use or alcohol use would subject my 
security clearance to automatic revocation.10 
 
Applicant submitted seven letters of reference. In general, these letters describe 
him as an honest, reliable, hardworking individual who has respect for authority. A 
security officer stated that she is confident that Applicant would handle classified 
information in a completely trustworthy manner. His supervisor stated that his 
performance reflects great credit upon him, the company, and their U.S. Government 
customer.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
                                                          
8 Tr. 45-47; GE 2, 3. 
9 Tr. 17-27, 44-45, 46; GE 1; AE A. 
10 AE B. 
11 AE A. 
 
5 
 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
 
6 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
While away at college from August 2008 to April 2010, Applicant would regularly 
consume alcohol to the point of intoxication on weekends and conceded such 
consumption constituted habitual or binge drinking. He was found guilty of DUI in June 
2009 and in February 2010. His blood alcohol level was .22% for the 2009 DUI and 
.09% for the 2010 DUI. AG ¶ 22(a) and 22(c) apply.  
 
Two alcohol consumption mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).  
 
Applicant acknowledges that his drinking and driving was irresponsible behavior, 
and he is ashamed of that conduct. He was under the legal drinking age when he 
committed both DUIs. Those offenses and his excessive consumption of alcohol 
occurred while he was away from home attending college. He attributes his 
irresponsible behavior to being “young and dumb” and peer pressure. Since engaging in 
that behavior, he has changed his lifestyle considerably. In May 2010, he disenrolled 
from his first college and moved back home. He no longer associates with the friends he 
had at his first college. He attended three months of family counseling. At present, he 
attends college part-time and works part-time. He has proven to be a hard-working, 
reliable employee. He has joined a fishing club and spends his free time fishing. He has 
significantly reduced his consumption of alcohol. Since his January 2010 DUI, he 
consumed alcohol to excess on one occasion. This happened in July 2010 when he 
attended a cousin’s wedding. He did not drive on that occasion and was with his parents 
and other family members. Since returning home from college, his mother has seen a 
substantial change in his behavior. He does not consume alcohol at home and 
occasionally has one or two beers when they go out to dinner. The last time he 
consumed alcohol was about one month before the hearing when he drank one beer at 
dinner. In short, he has acknowledged his alcohol-related issues, taken action to resolve 
them, and established a pattern of responsible use. His misuse of alcohol is unlikely to 
recur. I find that AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) apply. 
 
7 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and  
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;  
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
 (a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
Applicant used marijuana once or twice in high school. While at college in 2009 
and 2010, he used marijuana as much as five times a week. In February 2010, he was 
found guilty as a Youthful Offender of Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. When he was 
arrested, he had about half an ounce of marijuana and a marijuana bong in his 
possession. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Two drug involvement mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
 
8 
 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant has been open and forthcoming about his marijuana use. He last used 
that substance about 20 months ago when he was 19 years old. He denied ever using 
any other illegal drugs. 
 
Except for using marijuana once or twice in high school, Applicant’s drug use 
occurred while he was attending his first college, which is located about a three-and-a-
half-hour drive from his parents’ home. As discussed above under Guideline G, 
Applicant has significantly changed his lifestyle since his last use of marijuana. These 
changes have included moving back home, disassociating with drug users, obtaining 
part-time employment, and becoming involved actively with a hobby. He signed a 
statement that he will abstain from any illegal drug use and acknowledged that failure to 
do so would result in revocation of his security clearance.  
 
Applicant’s use of marijuana was a youthful indiscretion. He is now well aware of 
its negative consequences. He has made changes that have taken him away from the 
college drug scene. A significant period of abstinence has elapsed that demonstrates he 
put the illegal use of marijuana behind him. I find that AG ¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
Several conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 31 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete court-mandated 
rehabilitation program. 
 
As addressed above, Applicant has been found guilty twice of DUI and once of 
Possession of Drug Paraphernalia. He has consumed alcohol as a minor and has 
possessed and used marijuana. In about 2009, he violated his probation by consuming 
alcohol while he was in that status. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  
 
9 
 
 Two criminal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct has already been addressed under Guidelines G 
and H. During the security clearance adjudication process, he has been forthcoming 
about his illegal marijuana use and alcohol consumption. He has acknowledged that he 
has made mistakes and is remorseful for his wrongdoing. He has disassociated himself 
from drug users and has not used marijuana for the past 20 months. He now works 
part-time and attends school part-time. As discussed above, he has made changes to 
his lifestyle that removes peer pressure. In short, he has matured, stopped using 
marijuana, and established a pattern of responsible alcohol use. His criminal conduct is 
unlikely to recur. I find that AG 32(a) and 32(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines G, H, and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
 
10 
 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s age and that his use of marijuana was a youthful 
indiscretion. At the hearing, Applicant was open and forthcoming about his marijuana 
use and alcohol consumption. His last use of marijuana occurred about 20 months ago. 
Since engaging in his misconduct, he has made significant lifestyle changes. He is 
subject to random urinalysis tests in his job. He has matured and realizes the 
consequences of future use of illegal drugs or alcohol-related misconduct. He has put 
his irresponsible behavior behind him. I find that he has provided sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the security concerns. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Alcohol Consumption, Drug Involvement, and 
Criminal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:  For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 3.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
