 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00450 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Duffy, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 9, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
On March 21, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted a notification that the Government was ready to proceed 
on April 4, 2011. The case was originally assigned to another judge and was reassigned 
to me on June 2, 2011. It was initially scheduled for a hearing on June 2, 2011, but that 
hearing was postponed. DOHA issued another notice of hearing on July 13, 2011, and 
 
2 
 
the hearing was convened as rescheduled on August 3, 2011. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s list of exhibits was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Department 
Counsel requested that administrative notice be taken of Hearing Exhibits (HE) II and 
III. Applicant had no objection to the administrative notice requests, and those requests 
were granted. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through M that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant’s Counsel requested that 
administrative notice be taken of HE IV. Department Counsel had no objection to 
Applicant’s administrative notice request, and that request was granted. The record was 
held open until August 17, 2011, for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant 
timely submitted AE N through R that were admitted into evidence without objection. HE 
V is Department Counsel’s email indicating he had no objection to the post-hearing 
submission. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 9, 2011.1 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
In the SOR, two allegations were identified as ¶ 1.c. To correct this administrative 
error, the second of those allegations was re-lettered as ¶ 1.d and the remaining two 
allegations were re-lettered as ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f, respectively. Applicant had no objection to 
the re-lettering of the allegations. 
 
Findings of Facts 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the SOR allegations. Her 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant’s background 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old program analyst. She has been working for her current 
employer since June 2011. She has a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree from a 
major U.S. university. She is married and has four children, ages 7, 8, and twins who 
are 12. This is the first time that she has applied for a security clearance.2 
 
Applicant was born in the West Bank of the Palestinian territories. She was a 
Jordanian citizen by birth. A few months after her birth, her family moved to Kuwait. She 
was raised in Kuwait until 1990 when her family moved to Jordan. She completed high 
school in Jordan. In 1995, she came to the United States at the age of 20 to attend 
college. She became a U.S. citizen in November 2003. She has never lived in Saudi 
Arabia.3 
 
                                                          
1 GE 3 was originally offered as HE III. At the hearing, however, it was converted to a government 
exhibit. 
 
2 Tr. 23-26; GE 1; AE J, K, l. 
3 Tr. 23, 40-43, 62-63; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s husband was born in Bangladesh and is a U.S. citizen. They met and 
married in the United States. He has owned businesses in the United States and 
currently works as a car dealer. His parents passed away before he came to the United 
States, and he has no brothers or sisters. All of Applicant’s children were born in the 
United States. Her children only speak English. She has not registered her children with 
the Government of Jordan. She owns no property outside the United States. She has 
about $70,000 of equity in her home in the United States and has about $35,000 in 
savings accounts in the United States.4 
 
Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant has only used her U.S. passport to 
travel overseas. Her Jordanian passport expired in 2002. After departing the Palestinian 
territories as an infant, she has only returned there on one occasion for a short period in 
2001. In the last seven years, she traveled twice outside the United States. On both of 
those occasions, she traveled to Jordan. Her first trip to Jordan was in 2006 for 70 days. 
Her second trip was in 2009 for 40 days. The purpose of both trips was to visit family. 
She stayed in rented apartments during those trips. During her trip in 2009, she also 
attended her youngest brother’s wedding.5 
 
Applicant’s mother and father are citizens of Jordan and reside in both Jordan 
and the West Bank. They have residences in both places. She indicated that they reside 
in the West Bank for a few months of the year and in Jordan for the remainder of the 
year. Her mother never worked outside the home. Her father is a retired middle-school 
math teacher. He does not receive a pension. He now operates a small bookstore in the 
West Bank. She talks to her parents on the telephone about once every two or three 
months. She neither provides financial support to her parents nor receives financial 
support from them. In July 2011, she applied for her parents to immigrate to the United 
States. She expects those applications to be approved in the next six months.6 
 
Applicant has two brothers. Her oldest brother is a citizen of Jordan and resides 
in the West Bank. He is a doctor who has a private medical practice. He received his 
medical training in Russia. Her youngest brother is a citizen of Jordan who resides in 
Saudi Arabia. He is a telecommunications engineer who works for a Swedish company. 
In 2010, her youngest brother gave her a gift of $20,000 to assist in purchasing her 
home in the United States. Both of her brothers are married to Jordanian citizens who 
are housewives. She speaks to each of her brothers about once or twice a month. She 
does not have contact with her sister-in-laws because she does not know them well.7 
 
Applicant has two living sisters. Both of her sisters are citizens of Jordan and 
reside in the West Bank. Her oldest sister is an elementary school teacher. She is 
                                                          
4 Tr. 24, 27, 34, 39, 42-43, 54-55, 60, 66-67; GE 1. 
5 Tr. 26-27, 33-34, 55-59; GE 1. 
6 Tr. 27-29, 39-40, 43-45, 56-59, 61-62, 65-66; GE 1; AE P, Q. 
7 Tr. 30-31, 45-49, 60, 65; GE 1, 2; AE R. 
 
4 
 
married to a Canadian citizen who works for an international bank. Applicant’s younger 
sister is a student at a university in the West Bank. Her younger sister lived in the 
United States for about three and half years when her husband was attending a U.S. 
university for a doctorate degree. While they resided in the United States, she was a 
housewife. Her brother-in-law is now a professor at a university in the West Bank. She 
has contact with her sisters about two or three times a year.8 
 
Applicant’s uncle is a citizen and resident of Jordan. Her last contact with him 
was in 2009 when she attended her brother’s wedding in Jordan. She does not know 
whether he works or is retired. She does not know whether he ever served in the 
Jordanian military or worked for the Jordanian government. Applicant has a friend that is 
a citizen of Jordan. She met her friend in the United States. Her friend returned to 
Jordan for a couple of years. While her friend was in Jordan, she had contact with her 
about once a year. Her friend now resides in the United States.9 
 
In responding to interrogatories in August 2010, Applicant stated, 
 
After becoming a U.S. citizen, my allegiance and loyalty is to the U.S., the 
country that has honored me with its citizenship and gave me the chance 
to have a higher education and improve my financial situation. I has (sic) 
been here long enough to assimilate American values and culture. And I 
have no conflict with this allegiance. I have no benefits, rights or privileges 
from Jordan. I did not maintain my Jordanian citizenship. Traveling to 
Jordan has been for family visits and family occasion (sic) such as my 
brother wedding last year. I have no problem with no (sic) traveling to 
Jordan since my parents have a valid VISA to enter the U.S. any time and 
they already visited me three times. And I’m trying to apply for U.S. 
resident for my family to be able to live with me the rest of their life.10  
 
At the hearing, Applicant indicated that she was willing to renounce her 
Jordanian citizenship. In her post-hearing submission, Applicant submitted a letter that 
was sent to the Jordanian Embassy renouncing her Jordanian citizenship. None of her 
family members have ever been employed by a foreign government or served in a 
foreign military. To her knowledge, her family members have never been involved with 
any terrorist group and never have been the victims of any violence.11 
 
Applicant’s performance evaluations for the past three years indicated that she 
“meets and may exceed some goals.” Her friends indicated that she is reliable, 
trustworthy, and a person of high moral character. She has been a Girl Scout volunteer 
                                                          
8 Tr. 31-32, 34-36, 49-51; GE 1, 2. 
9 Tr. 36-37, 51-53; GE 1. 
10 GE 2 at 156. 
11 Tr. 34, 40, 59, 61, 63-64, 66; GE 1, 2; AE O. 
 
5 
 
for over five years. She has 30 girls in a scout troop. Another Girl Scout volunteer 
described her as conscientious, honest, and trustworthy. The other volunteer indicated 
that she has led many successful projects during her work with the Girl Scouts.12 
 
Jordan13 
 
Jordan’s government is a constitutional monarchy. It is ruled by a King, has a 
Council of Ministers selected by the King, and has a partially elected bicameral National 
Assembly. It has followed a pro-western foreign policy and has had close ties with the 
U.S. for decades. The Jordanian government also provides political and material 
support to the Palestinian Authority and its president. 
 
Jordan’s human rights record continues to reflect problems. Issues include 
torture, arbitrary arrests, prolonged detention, denial of due process, infringement of 
privacy rights, political detainees, and restrictions on freedom of speech, press, 
assembly, and movement. Torture by the police and security forces is widespread.  
 
Jordan aggressively pursues terrorists. It has enacted counter-terrorism 
legislation; prosecuted terrorism cases, including both Al-Qaida and non-Al-Qaida 
defendants; and investigated and disrupted terrorists’ plots. Nevertheless, support for 
extremist and terrorist groups in Jordan remains high. Despite the government’s 
determination to battle radicalization, the extremists’ messages still find a receptive 
audience with a small but significant proportion of the total population. 
 
Saudi Arabia14 
 
Saudi Arabia is a monarchy ruled by the Al Saud Family. The government is the 
monarchy and there are no political parties or national elections. There are significant 
human rights problems, including severe restrictions on freedom of speech, press, 
peaceful assembly, and religion. Some prisoners are subjected to torture, abuse, 
violence, and forced confessions. 
 
The U.S. and Saudi Arabia share a common concern about security, oil exports 
and imports, and sustainable developments. In addition to economic ties, the United 
States and Saudi Arabia have a longstanding security relationship. The U.S. military 
provides training and support in the use of weapons and other security-related services 
to the Saudi armed forces. The Department of State has issued travel warnings 
indicating there are ongoing security threats to Americans traveling in Saudi Arabia due 
to the continued presence of terrorist groups. The Saudi government has been active in 
confronting terrorism and extremist ideologies, which has included freezing assets and 
enforcing travel bans on certain of their citizens. 
                                                          
12 Tr. 37-38, 53, 59; AE A through D and F through H. 
13  HE III.  
14 HE III. 
 
6 
 
 
Israel and the West Bank15 
 
Israel is a parliamentary democracy whose prime minister heads the government 
and exercises executive power. Israel occupied the West Bank, Gaza Strip, Golan 
Heights, and East Jerusalem as a result of the 1967 War. Pursuant to negotiations 
between Israel and the Palestinians, the Palestinian Authority (PA) was established in 
the Gaza Strip and West Bank in 1994. The division of responsibilities and jurisdiction in 
the West Bank between Israel and PA is complex and subject to change. PA security 
forces are responsible for keeping order in certain areas, and the PA exercises a range 
of civil functions in those areas of the West Bank.  
 
The Government of Israel may consider as Palestinian anyone who has a 
Palestinian identification number, was born in the West Bank or Gaza, or was born in 
the United States but has parents or grandparents who were born or lived in the West 
Bank or Gaza. Any such U.S. citizen may be required to use a PA passport when 
traveling to Israel using a PA passport. Without the PA passport, such Americans may 
be barred from entering or exiting Israel, the West Bank, or Gaza, or they may face 
serious delays at the ports of entry.  
 
The United States and Israel have a close friendship based on common 
democratic values, religious affinities, and security interests. However, they have 
different policies on other important issues. The United States is concerned with Israeli 
military sales, inadequate Israeli protection of U.S. intellectual property, and espionage-
related cases. They have regularly discussed Israel’s sale of sensitive security 
equipment and technology to various countries, including China. Israel reportedly is 
China’s second major arms supplier, after Russia.  
 
The National Counterintelligence Center’s Report to Congress of Foreign 
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage for 2000 and 2005, lists Israel as one of 
the active collectors of U.S. proprietary information. Israeli military officers have been 
implicated in this type of technology collection in the United States. There have also 
been cases involving illegal export, or attempted illegal export of U.S. restricted and 
dual technology to Israel. 
 
Several groups operating in Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza have been 
designated as Foreign Terrorist Organizations by the Department of State. U.S. citizens, 
including tourist, students, residents and U.S. Government personnel, have been 
injured or killed by terrorists while in Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza. In the past, 
armed gunmen have kidnapped foreigners, including Americans, in Gaza and the West 
Bank. For safety and security reasons, U.S. Government personnel and dependents are 
restricted from traveling to many areas of the West Bank. 
 
 
 
                                                          
15 HE II, III, IV. 
 
7 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two are potentially applicable here: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk of greater than the normal risk inherent in having a 
family member living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign 
country. The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”16 
 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
9 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.”17 Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, 
the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its 
human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerability to coercion from the government, terrorist organizations, or 
other groups.18 
 
 Applicant has close family ties in Jordan, the West Bank, and Saudi Arabia. Her 
parents are citizens of Jordan and reside in both Jordan and the West Bank. She has 
two sisters and a brother who are citizens of Jordan and reside in the West Bank. She 
has a brother who is a citizen of Jordan and resident of Saudi Arabia. Considering the 
terrorist threats that exist in Jordan, the West Bank and Saudi Arabia and human rights 
concerns in Jordan and Saudi Arabia, Applicant’s close family members in those places 
create a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Her 
family contacts in Jordan, the West Bank, and Saudi Arabia could also create a 
potential conflict of interest with her obligation to protect sensitive information. I find that 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Three are potentially applicable in this case. 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
No evidence has been presented to show that Applicant’s relatives in Jordan, the 
West Bank, and Saudi Arabia work for any of those governmental entities. 
Nevertheless, because the risk of terrorism against her immediate family members 
                                                          
17 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
18 See generally, ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where family members resided.) 
 
10 
 
could place Applicant in a position of having to choose between the interests of those 
family members and the interests of the United States, AG ¶ 8 (a) does not apply to her 
immediately family members. 
 
Sixteen years ago, Applicant came to the United States at the age of 20. She 
became a U.S. citizen in 2003. She met and married her husband in the United States. 
Her husband has no contacts or interests in Jordan, the West Bank, or Saudi Arabia. 
Her husband and all of her children are U.S. citizens. Her children speak only English. 
Her professional future and all of her property interests, including her home, are in the 
United States. She is actively involved in the local community. She has submitted 
paperwork to renounce her Jordanian citizenship and for her parents to immigrate to the 
United States. Based on Applicant’s deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties 
in the United States, she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States. AG 8(b) is applicable to all of Applicant’s foreign contacts and 
interests.  
 
Applicant’s contact and communication with her uncle is casual and infrequent. 
She last communicated with him in 2009. Such casual and infrequent contact is unlikely 
to create a risk of foreign influence or exploitation. AG 8(c) is applicable to her contact 
with her uncle. Applicant’s Jordanian friend is now a resident of the United States. 
Considering the present residence of her friend, it is unlikely Applicant would be placed 
into a position of having to choose between the interests of her friend and the interests 
of the United States. AG 8(a) is applicable to the relationship with her friend.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
 
11 
 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant has developed deep roots in the United States. Her friends attest to her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and high moral character. One reference letter refers to her 
as “a pillar in the community.” Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant has only used 
her U.S. passport to travel overseas. She has taken steps to renounce her Jordanian 
citizenship and to have her parents immigrate to the United States. Whatever potential 
conflicts that may arise from her having family members in Jordan, the West Bank, and 
Saudi Arabia are more than counterbalanced by her interests, responsibilities, and 
loyalties in the United States. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions 
or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Considering 
all the evidence, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under 
the guideline for Foreign Influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
