  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07416 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had 11 collection and past-due accounts, which totaled approximately  
$23,000. She has paid or is making monthly payments on the accounts except for two 
small accounts that together total approximately $350. Applicant has rebutted or 
mitigated the security concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 2, 2011, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
1 
  
 On June 1, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
August 17, 2011, I was assigned the case. On August 17, 2011, DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing for the hearing held on August 31, 2011. At the hearing, the Government 
offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted exhibits A through I, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. On September 9, 2011, DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted owing the medical debt listed at 
SOR ¶ 1.b and denied owing the remaining debts. I incorporate Applicant’s admission to 
the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old computer software analyst who has worked for a 
defense contractor since November 2000, and seeks to maintain a security clearance. 
Her supervisor states Applicant has superior duty performance, is trustworthy, and 
performs every job expertly and on time. (Ex. J) 
 
 In 2009, Applicant and her husband divorced after a five-year marriage. (Tr. 24) 
A number of her medical bills were incurred when she changed health insurance 
companies and the new insurance company was slow in paying. (Ex. 3) When the 
divorce occurred, the majority of the household debts were in her name. (Tr. 16, 24) 
She continued to pay the $1,300 monthly mortgage and the utilities on the house, which 
made it difficult for her to address her other debts. (Tr. 25) After the house was sold, 
she moved into a condominium her parents owned.  
 
 As of December 2010, Applicant’s and her new husband’s monthly net income 
was approximately $4,500. Their monthly expenses were approximately $3,800 with 
$500 being paid monthly on debts. Their monthly net remainder was approximately 
$200. (Ex. 4) She drives a 2004 Toyota Camry. (Tr. 31) She is current on her credit 
cards and utility bills. (Tr. 32) In Applicant’s 1994 divorce, her ex-husband was ordered 
to pay child support for their two children, who are now teenagers. He has failed to do 
this and owes approximately $72,000 in back child support. (Tr. 34)  
 
 In June 2010, when Applicant completed her Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), she indicated she had been in default on a loan; had 
debts turned over to a collection agency; had an account charged off, suspended, or 
cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; and that she had been more than 180 delinquent 
on a debt. She also listed ten accounts that were past due or delinquent. (Ex. 1) 
 
 She is making $25 monthly payments on a hospital bill (SOR b, $1,300). The 
status of the other SOR debts follows: 
 
 
2 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Credit card collection 
account.  
 
$4,183 Paid. Creditor offered to settle this 
account for $2,850, which Applicant 
accepted and paid. (Ex. A) 
b Medical Account. 
 
 
$1,650 
 
Paying. Applicant pays $25 monthly by 
automatic withdrawal on this debt. (Ex. 
B) She provided documents showing 
her monthly payments started in May 
2011. (Ex. B, B-1, B-2) 
c Collection account for a 
medical service. 
$100 
 
Paid. (Ex. C, Ex. D) 
d Collection account for a 
medical service. 
$80 Paid. (Ex. D) 
e Collection account for a 
medical service. 
$58 Paid. (Ex. D) 
f Department store 
charged-off account. 
 
$1,425 Paid. Applicant made $166.33 monthly 
payments until the debt was paid. The 
account has a zero balance. (Ex. E) 
g Collection account for a 
medical service. 
$190 Paid. (Ex. F) 
h Medical account. $73 Paid. (Ex. G) 
i Medical account. $200 Applicant denies this debt. There is no 
listed creditor to contact. (Tr. 36 
j Collection account for a 
medical service. 
$165 Applicant has been unable to locate this 
account. She contacted the collection 
agency and provided her social security 
number. The agency could find no debt 
in her name. (Tr. 28) 
k Collection account for a 
bank account. 
 
$6,651 Paid. Creditor offered to settle this 
account for $2,660.47, which Applicant 
accepted and paid. (Ex. H) 
l Collection account for 
central air condition. 
$8,780 Paid. (Ex. I) 
 Total debt listed in SOR $23,205  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
 
3 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
4 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had eleven charged-off or 
collection accounts totaling in excess of $23,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
5 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant is making monthly payments on one debt; cannot locate two additional 
accounts, which total approximately $350; and has paid all the other SOR delinquent 
accounts. Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by her 
2009 divorce in which the majority of the debts were in her name. After she sold the 
house and moved into a condominium owned by her parents, she was able to address 
her past due obligations. Her ability to pay her debts was made more difficult because 
she has two teenagers and receives no child support, although her 2004 divorce decree 
awarded her child support. Since the delinquent accounts have now been addressed, 
they do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) applies. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant experienced divorce along with the financial burden 
associated with it. She has acted responsibly in addressing her delinquent accounts. 
AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
Under AG & 20(c) and & 20(d), there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control. Applicant has paid eight of the eleven debts and has 
an agreement paying $25 per month on another debt. She has made a good-faith effort 
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve her debts. AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) 
apply. The two remaining debts together totaling less than $400 do not raise concern 
about her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
6 
 
7 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The debts set forth in the SOR were 
not incurred on luxuries, but were mainly for medical treatment and central air 
conditioning installed in a home she owned. She has only one outstanding debt on 
which she makes monthly payments. She is not living beyond her means, as evidenced 
by the 2004 Toyota automobile she owns, and she is current on her utility bills and 
credit card accounts.  
 
Of course, the issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts are paid—it is 
whether her financial circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security 
clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a–1.l:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
