 
 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-05937 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 30, 2009, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On March 7, 2011, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant received the SOR on March 14, 2011. Applicant answered the SOR in 
writing on April 4, 2011. Applicant requested his case be decided on the written record 
in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
On June 7, 2011, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case. 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant 
on June 9, 2011. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on June 20, 2011. 
Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed that 
would have expired on July 20, 2011. I received the case assignment on September 13, 
2011. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the Sudan. (FORM) The request and the attached documents 
were admitted into evidence. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. (Item 4) His admissions are 
incorporated herein and accepted as factual findings.  
 
Applicant is 27 years old, unmarried, and works for a defense contractor as an 
electrical contractor. He was born and raised in the Sudan. He became a United States 
citizen on October 16, 2002. Applicant obtained his U.S. passport in 2004. He is a dual 
citizen with the Sudan. Applicant does not want to renounce his Sudanese citizenship 
because it is his country of birth and he may want to return there to live. Applicant told 
the government investigator in May 2009 that he would not renounce his Sudanese 
citizenship even to obtain a security clearance. Applicant stated he was loyal equally to 
the United States and the Sudan. (Items 4-7) 
 
Applicant traveled to the Sudan in May 2005 for a visit lasting 50 days. While 
there he resided with an aunt. In July 2006 he traveled again to the Sudan for a 40-day 
stay and stayed with another aunt. Applicant traveled for a third time to the Sudan in 
December 2008 for 45 days and resided with his aunts again. He has not traveled to the 
Sudan since 2008. (Items 4-7) 
 
Applicant has daily, weekly, or monthly personal or telephone contact with his 
parents, siblings, and other relatives in and outside of the Sudan before and after he 
immigrated to the United States. (Items 4-7) 
 
Applicant has an aunt who lives in the Sudan and is a citizen of that country. She 
works for the Women’s Rights Ministry of the Sudanese government. Another aunt is a 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
citizen and resident of the Sudan. She works for the United Nations in the Sudan. (Items 
4-7) 
 
Applicant’s father came to the United States in the 1960’s to obtain a college 
degree. He returned to the Sudan when he finished his degree. Applicant’s father 
returned to the United States in 1985. He became a U.S. citizen in 1985. His father then 
sponsored Applicant to move to the United States in 2001 when he was 17 years old. 
Applicant had a Sudanese passport when he came to the United States. It has now 
expired and his father kept it for the past decade. Applicant would be willing to 
surrender it. (Item 6) 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts pertaining to the Sudan. The 
Sudan is a country on the eastern side of Africa, south of Egypt. It was once part of the 
British Empire and gained its independence in 1956. The northern and southern 
sections of the country are split ethnically and religiously. The northern part is inhabited 
by persons of Arab lineage and is Muslim. The southern part of the Sudan is mainly 
Christian or other religions.  
 
These two portions of the Sudan have been engaged in a civil war from 1956 to 
the present. In January 2005 the two warring factions signed a cease-fire agreement 
that also provided for a vote on future status for the southern portion of the Sudan. The 
United Nations supported this resolution of the civil war. In the Darfur region of the 
Sudan a rebellion erupted in 2003. The Sudanese government provided weapons and 
support to local tribes and militia. Many thousands of persons died in that conflict.  
 
The United States, under both the Clinton and Bush administrations, determined 
the ongoing conflict in the Sudan was a threat to peace and security in the area and to 
the United States. Two executive orders signed by both Presidents Clinton and Bush 
prohibited transactions with the Sudan.  
 
In January 2011 a referendum in the southern portion of the country voted to 
separate from the Sudan and form a new country. The United States recognized the 
new country in July 2011. Since 1993 the Sudan has been designated by the U.S. State 
Department as a state sponsor of terrorism.  
 
There is a history of human rights violations in the Sudan, including torture and 
other forms of abuse. The Sudanese Government monitors the internet and reads email 
messages sent to and from the Sudan.  
 
In January 2008 two U.S. Embassy employees were murdered in Khartoum, the 
capital, by men in alliance with al-Qaida, the international terrorist organization. The 
attackers were arrested, convicted and sentenced to death in the Sudan. They later 
escaped from custody. In May 2010 a U.S. citizen employed by a humanitarian 
organization operating in Darfur was held for several months until being released.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of travel in the Sudan, 
particularly in Darfur. Anti-western sentiment is wide-spread in the country. Terrorists 
operate in the Sudan and the threat remains critical. (U.S. State Department 
background notes of 2008 to 2011; Executive Orders 13067 and 13412; Congressional 
Research Service report on the Sudan dated December 16, 2010; The White House 
Press Office statement of February 7, 2011 on the intent to recognize Southern Sudan) 
(Source documents) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes nine conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying.  The following two disqualifying conditions are applicable to this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant has strong connections with his family in and from the Sudan, a country 
that has active terrorists operating within it, a civil war of long duration between the 
northern and southern parts of the country, and is the subject of international concern 
about the refugees and massacres in the Darfur region. Applicant has weekly to 
monthly telephone contact with his parents, siblings, and other relatives. These 
connections create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion, particularly because of Applicant’s stated intention to return to the 
Sudan in the future and live there.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 AG ¶ 8 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns.  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and, 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 None of the mitigating conditions are applicable because of Applicant’s strong 
immediate family connections, his strong attachment to his aunts in the Sudan, and his 
own connection to the country of his birth. He told the government investigator he would 
not renounce his dual citizenship because he might want to return to the Sudan later in 
life to live there. Applicant placed his loyalty to both countries on an equal basis. 
Applicant has returned to the Sudan three times between 2005 and 2008 for extensive 
visits. There is nothing to indicate he will not return again in the future, particularly after 
he stated he might go to the Sudan to live at some time in the future.   
   
 In particular, the following two mitigating conditions would not apply and 
strengthen the concern about him. Applicant’s relationship with his family living in the 
Sudan is close.  Terrorism remains a concern.  Applicant could be placed in a position 
of having to choose between his family’s interests and the interests of the United States.  
This concern is heightened because Applicant intends to return to live in the Sudan.  AG 
¶ 8 (a) does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 Applicant has a conflict of interest between his loyalty to family and his loyalty to 
the United States. He has only been in the United States for 10 years, compared to 17 
years in Sudan. He has not established significant financial and personal connections to 
the United States to balance his strong connections to the Sudan. Applicant also has 
close familial connections to his numerous relatives in the Sudan, speaking with them 
frequently. It is not clear that Applicant will resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States.  AG ¶ 8 (b) would not apply. 
 
 The Directive clearly states any doubt in security clearance cases must be 
resolved in favor of national security. I have great doubts about Applicant based on his 
statements to the government investigator. These comments strengthen the doubt 
about him under AG ¶ 2(b) and it clearly applies here.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an adult. He lives in the 
United States but does not exhibit a strong and overwhelming connection to this 
country. His comments about his equal attachment to the Sudan and the United States 
raise a great potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress caused by his 
attachments to the Sudan, which has a history of terrorism, civil war of long duration, 
and continuous civil and human rights violations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Foreign Influence. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a to 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
