 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-09065 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 28, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 6, 2011, and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 12, 2011. The FORM was mailed to Applicant, 
 
2 
 
 
and proof of receipt was received by DOHA on July 27, 2011. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant sought an extension to respond to the FORM, which was granted. She 
submitted her FORM Response (FR), containing 16 attachments, on September 3, 
2011.1 Department Counsel submitted a supplemental reply (SR) to Applicants FR on 
September 16, 2011. The case was assigned to me on September 27, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i. She 
admitted parts of 1.b and 1.c and denied of other parts of those allegations. She denied 
1.d, 1.g, and 1.j.2 After a thorough and careful review of the written record, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Before working for 
her current employer, she worked in the private sector from 1994 through 2010. She is 
married and has two children ages 15 and 13. She has a high school diploma. Her 
husband is currently employed, but he went through a period of unemployment in 
January 2007. He was making over $100,000 at the time. He is currently working and 
earning approximately $62,000 a year.3  
 
 The SOR alleges a mortgage loan foreclosure, failure to file and pay federal and 
state taxes for certain years, and seven delinquent debts, including a tax lien, totaling 
about $57,000. The debts are supported by credit reports, dated May 17, 2010, October 
6, 2010, and October 26, 2010. By her own admission, her financial difficulties were 
caused by her family living above their means. They did so by refinancing their home 
approximately 15 times. The home was originally purchased for about $117,000 in 
1995. At the time it was foreclosed upon, they owed approximately $325,000. During 
the ensuing time, Applicant and her husband used the acquired money to purchase cars 
and dirt bikes for their children, pay some bills, make home improvements, and to 
purchase “anything else they desired.”4 
 
 In 2007, Applicant’s husband lost her job and their overall financial wellbeing was 
jeopardized. Applicant remained employed, but her yearly income at that time was 
                                                          
1 In Applicant’s FR, she refers to her attached documents by “Item” numbers. In order to distinguish these 
Items from the “Items” attached to the Government’s FORM, I will use the terms FORM Item # and FR 
Item # respectively. 
 
2 Department counsel concedes the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.j are duplicative. Only SOR ¶ 1.j will 
be considered. 
 
3 FORM Items 4 and 8. 
 
4 FORM Items 6, 8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
about $39,000. In addition to the delinquent debt listed in the SOR, Applicant currently 
makes payments on two car loans totaling about $1,600 per month.5  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is a delinquent mortgage loan. The amount of the 
debt was approximately $325,000. The mortgage holder foreclosed on the debt. 
Applicant admits this debt. She provided a FORM 1099-A, Acquisition or Abandonment 
of Secured Property concerning this property. She did not provide any documentation 
supporting a cancellation of the debt. This debt is unresolved.6 
 
 The allegations listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c state Applicant failed to file and pay 
her federal tax returns for years 2007, 2008, and 2009, and her state tax returns for 
2008 and 2009, as required. Applicant presented letters from her tax preparer 
addressing this subject. The first, dated January 5, 2010, indicated her 2007 federal tax 
return was ready for her signature. It also indicated she owed $8,419 for that year. A 
second letter, also dated January 5, 2010, indicated both her 2008 federal and state tax 
returns were ready for filing. She owed $1,649 on her federal return, but was due a 
refund of $143 on her state return. In a letter dated April 27, 2011, her tax preparer 
indicated her 2009 federal and state tax returns (for two states) were ready for filing. 
She would receive refunds for her federal and one state tax returns, but owed $173 on 
her other state tax return. The last letter from her tax preparer, dated April 28, 2011, 
indicated that her 2010 federal and state tax returns were ready for filing. She was due 
a refund on her federal return, but owed on her state return. Applicant presented 
documentary evidence of payment for her federal taxes for 2007 and 2008 in the 
amount of $7,773.96, dated in September 2011. This evidence was a copy of a check; 
however, it was not a cancelled check showing any endorsements. She has included 
two copies of checks showing payments of state taxes for the years 2007 and 2009 in 
the amounts of $7,548.55 and $255.65, dated in August 2011. These were not 
cancelled checks showing endorsements. There is no evidence from the IRS or the 
state tax authority verifying receipt of payment. Applicant gave no reason why her 
returns were filed late, whether extensions were sought, or why payments were not 
made when they were due.7 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is a delinquent credit card debt for $3,148. 
Applicant reached a settlement agreement with the creditor to make five installment 
payments. Applicant made one installment payment in April 2009. Thereafter, a 
successor bought the debt and refused to honor the installment settlement agreement 
Applicant reached with the prior creditor. This debt is unresolved.8 
 
                                                          
5 FORM Items 4, 6, 8. 
 
6 FORM Item 6; FR Item 11. 
 
7 FR Items 1-4, 6-8. 
 
8 FORM Item 3; FR Items 14-16. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is a state tax lien for $2,015. Applicant admits this 
debt, but failed to present any evidence of resolution. This debt is unresolved.9 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is the same debt as SOR ¶ 1.j.10 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is a delinquent second mortgage loan for $33,043. 
Applicant claimed that the foreclosure on her first mortgage negated her obligated to 
pay the debt owed on the second mortgage. She presented no documentation 
supporting her position. This debt is unresolved.11  
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i are delinquent consumer debts for 
$13,453 and $319. Applicant admitted she has not been in a position to do anything 
about these debts. These debts are unresolved.12 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j is a delinquent credit card debt for $5,637. 
Applicant failed to present documentary evidence concerning a payment plan or other 
attempts to resolve this debt. This debt is unresolved.13 
 
 Applicant has net income of about $5,264 with monthly expenses of about 
$3,090 and debt payments of $2,070. She has a net remainder of $104. There is no 
evidence of Applicant receiving financial counseling.14  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
9 FORM Item 3; FR Item 10. 
 
10 FORM Item 3. 
 
11 FR. 
 
12 Id. 
 
13 Id. 
 
14 FORM Item 8. 
 
5 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has numerous past-due debts that she was unable or unwilling to 
satisfy. Both disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20, including the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence that she has paid or resolved any of 
her delinquent debts. Even giving her the benefit of the doubt concerning her 
submission of checks to the tax authorities, the remainder of her debts remain unpaid. 
Therefore, her behavior is recent and the delinquent debts remain a concern. I find 
mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s debts remain owed 
and unresolved.  
 
 Although Applicant’s husband experienced a period of unemployment, she 
acknowledged her financial hardships were caused primarily by her choice of 
purchasing whatever the family wanted or needed with the proceeds of her multiple 
 
7 
 
 
refinancing actions. This is not a condition beyond her control. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does 
not apply.  
 
 There is no evidence Applicant sought financial counseling. There is no clear 
evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or under control. 
Although she documented payments to federal and state tax authorities, the remaining 
debts remain unpaid. Additionally, her tax filings for years 2007, 2008, and 2009 were 
delinquent. Under these circumstances, I find she has not made a good-faith effort to 
pay her delinquent debts or attempt to resolve them, other than SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. I 
find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, but not to the remainder of the 
SOR debts.  
 
 Applicant failed to document her dispute of any debts. The failure of a successor 
creditor to honor a settlement agreement does not invalidate the underlying debt. I find 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has made some progress 
on her federal and state tax liability; however, the remainder of her debt is unresolved 
with no viable plan in place to address it. She does not have a track record of financial 
stability. She failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b - 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d - 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g - 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
