 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02194 
          ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the record in this case, I conclude that Applicant failed 
to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
        Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on December 18, 2009. On January 20, 2010, she was interviewed 
by an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management and provided 
information about her financial obligations. On April 4, 2011, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
  
 Applicant responded to the SOR on May 23, 2011, declined a hearing, and 
requested that her case be adjudicated on the written record. The Government 
compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 13, 2011. The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 8. By letter dated June 17, 2011, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on 
July 10, 2011. Her response was due on August 9, 2011. She submitted additional 
information within the required time period. On September 20, 2011, the case was 
assigned to me for a decision. I marked the material Applicant submitted in response to 
the FORM as Item A and admitted it to the record without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains ten allegations of financial delinquency under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.j.). In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied 
all ten allegations.  (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 The facts in this case are established by the record submitted by the Government 
and by information provided by Applicant. The record evidence includes Applicant’s 
Answer to the SOR; her 2009 e-QIP; her personal subject interview, dated January 20, 
2010; her responses to DOHA interrogatories;1 her credit reports of February 25, 2011 
and January 5, 2010; and her response to the FORM. (See Items 4 through 8; Item A.) 
 
 Applicant is 51 years old, widowed, and the mother of four children, aged 27, 22, 
14, and 13. She is employed by a federal contractor as a supply technician, and she 
seeks renewal of a security clearance. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant served in the U.S. military from 1980 to 1995. She received an 
honorable discharge at the completion of her military service. She was first awarded a 
security clearance in 1983. Since leaving the military, she has served several tours as a 
government contractor in a war zone. Her service in this capacity began around 2007 
and has continued to the present. During this time, she has also had brief periods of 
unemployment. (Item 5.) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is responsible for ten delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $17,041. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the ten debts and 
asserted that they had all been resolved. All of the delinquent debts are reported on 
Applicant’s credit reports of February 25, 2011 or January 5, 2010. On her e-QIP, 
Applicant reported that she had had property repossessed, wages garnished to satisfy a 
debt in 2008, and accounts or credit cards suspended, charged-off or cancelled for 
failure to pay as agreed. (Item 4; Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
1Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on January 20, 2010. On February 9, 2010, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant signed 
a notarized statement affirming that she had read the summary of the interview and found it to be true 
and correct.  (Item 6.) 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 
 In her interview with an authorized investigator, Applicant stated that a $4,100 
credit card debt, later alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f., went into collection status in 2004. She told 
the investigator that the debt was satisfied when the creditor took possession of her 
federal tax refund for an unspecified year, and she then wrote a check to the creditor for 
remainder due. Applicant told the investigator that she could provide documentation to 
corroborate payment in full. Applicant failed to provide documentation to corroborate 
payment. Her credit report of January 5, 2010 showed the debt in collection status. Her 
credit report of February 25, 2011 showed the account with a zero balance, with the 
notation that it had been transferred or sold. (Item 6; Item 7; Item 8.)    
 
 In her Answer to the SOR and in her response to the FORM, Applicant provided 
documentation establishing that the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. ($980),2 1.d. ($9,006), 
and 1.g. ($854) had been resolved. While she asserted that the remaining seven 
delinquent debts alleged on the SOR had also been resolved, she failed to provide 
documentation to corroborate her assertions. (Item 4; Item A.) 
 
 In her response to the FORM, Applicant stated that because she had paid all of 
the accounts alleged in the SOR, her financial delinquencies should have no bearing on 
her eligibility for a security clearance. She attributed some of her delinquent debts to her 
generosity in co-signing the financial obligations of others, who then failed to pay their 
debts. (Item A.)   
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided a personal financial 
statement. Applicant listed a $6,208 net monthly income from her salary as a contractor. 
She also reported that she received $861 in military retirement pay each month. 
Applicant listed the following monthly fixed expenses: rent, $1,275; groceries, $150; 
clothing, $150; utilities, $640; life and other insurance, $31; and child care, $800. 
Applicant’s fixed monthly expenses total $3,046. Her net monthly remainder is $4,203. 
She listed no assets and no debt payments.  (Item 6 at 3.) 
 
 In January 2010, when she was interviewed by an OPM investigator, Applicant 
stated that her financial problems began in 2003 when she left a job in an unsafe 
neighborhood and was then unable to find full-time work. She stated that she had been 
unable to recover financial stability since that time. She told the investigator that she 
had never received any debt counseling and had about $25,000 in savings. She also 
told the investigator that she intended to contact all of her creditors immediately to make 
payment arrangements. (Item 6 at 12-13.)  
 
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
 
2 This debt was identified as a medical bill on Applicant’s credit report of February 25, 2011. (Item 7.) 
 
4 
 
 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
5 
 
 
                                           
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant denied allegations of financial delinquency and claimed to 
have satisfied all ten delinquent debts alleged on the SOR. She provided documentation 
to corroborate payment of the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.d., and 1.g. Those three 
debts are concluded for Applicant. 
 
However, Applicant failed to establish that the remaining seven unsatisfied debts 
were not hers. Moreover, she denied all of the debts, even though they were listed on 
her credit reports, and she provided no evidence to show she had resolved them.3  
 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
 
3 When SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence 
sufficient to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, 
the Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR 
indeed took place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the 
established facts and events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 18, 2009), (concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a 
nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case 
No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2009). 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted.) Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her 
credit reports, her e-QIP, her interview with the OPM investigator, and her SOR 
response. The evidence is sufficient to raise financial considerations disqualifying 
conditions identified at AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, [such as] loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that the person “has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c); that “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)); or that “the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20(e)). 4 
 
Applicant merits credit for resolving three of the ten delinquent debts alleged on 
the SOR. At the same time, the record reflects that she has a history of financial 
delinquencies which are recent, on-going, and occurred under circumstances that are 
likely to recur. She told the OPM investigator that her financial problems began in 2003, 
and, since that time, she had been unable to recover her financial stability. However, 
she failed to provide documentation that her unresolved financial delinquencies were 
the result of conditions or circumstances beyond her control. On her personal financial 
statement, she reported no debt payment despite a net monthly remainder of over 
$4,200. She failed to provide documentation to establish that she had paid or had active 
payment plans for seven of the ten delinquent debts alleged on the SOR. 
 
In her January 2010 interview with an OPM investigator, Applicant stated that 
she would contact all of her creditors immediately and make payment arrangements. 
However, over eighteen months later, she failed to provide documentation that seven of 
her ten debts had been resolved. In determining an individual's security worthiness, the 
Government cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant might resolve his or her 
 
4A sixth possible mitigating circumstance applies when “the affluence resulted from a legal source of 
income.” (AG ¶ 20(f)). This mitigating circumstance is not relevant in this case. 
 
7 
 
 
outstanding debts at some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 
1999). 
 
The record does not reflect that Applicant has sought consumer credit counseling 
that could provide her with strategies for managing her income and resolving her 
delinquent debts. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) applies in part in mitigation to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. I also conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(e) do not apply 
in mitigation to the security concerns raised by the facts in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult who has 
a substantial income and a net monthly remainder of over $4,000. Her financial 
statement reflects that she does not allocate any income to debt repayment. While she 
asserted that she had paid all of the delinquent debts alleged on the SOR, she failed to 
provide documentation to establish that she had paid or otherwise resolved seven of her 
delinquent debts. The record does not reflect that she has sought consumer credit 
counseling. She attributed some of her financial problems to voluntarily assuming 
financial responsibility for others, who then failed to honor the debts she co-signed with 
them. Her current financial situation raises security concerns about her judgment and 
reliability. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her 
financial delinquencies. If her employer concurs, Applicant can reapply for a security 
 
8 
 
 
clearance one year after the date that this decision becomes final. If she wishes, she 
can produce new evidence that addresses the Government’s current security concerns.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b. - 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.e. - 1.f.:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.h. - 1.j.:  Against Applicant 
 
                           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
__________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
