 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  ISCR Case No. 10-03200    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant is a naturalized citizen of 
the United States originally from Afghanistan. He maintains relationships with his father-
in-law, brother, and sister who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Ultimately, he 
failed to mitigate the foreign influence concerns raised in this case. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on February 23, 
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replaces the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.     
 
 
2 
 
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR detailed the factual basis for 
the action under the security guideline known as Guideline B for foreign influence. 
  
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on June 2, 2011. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on July 31, 2011. He 
did not object to the items appended to the Government’s brief. These items are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. In turn, Applicant submitted a 
response dated August 1, 2011. This response is admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE 
A), without objection from Department Counsel. The case was assigned to me on 
August 16, 2011. 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Afghanistan. Applicant did not object to the request, and it was 
approved. The request is admitted to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old linguist who is employed by a defense contractor. He 
supports a mentoring program between a U.S. government agency and an Afghan 
government agency. He has held this position since 2008. According to his employer, 
Applicant’s job performance exceeds expectations. The agency he supports lauds his 
skills as a linguist, in particular, his ability to understand complex concepts and translate 
them effectively.2   
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1987 from Afghanistan and became 
a naturalized citizen in 1993. Married since 1989, his wife is also a naturalized citizen of 
the United States from Afghanistan. He is the father of four children, ages 7 to 17, all of 
whom were born in the United States. Applicant has owned his home in the U.S. since 
December 1998. He does not own property in any other country.3   
 
 Applicant has three relatives with whom he maintains regular contact who are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. His father-in-law, age 95, retired as a colonel from 
the Afghan Army. Applicant’s brother, formerly a resident alien of the U.S., was 
deported to Afghanistan in 2005 after serving a nine- to ten-year sentence in a U.S. 
prison for robbing a fast-food restaurant. Applicant and his brother immigrated to the 
U.S. together and lived together until his brother went to prison. His sister is a member 
                                                          
2 GE 4 - GE 6. 
 
3 GE 6. 
 
3 
 
of the Afghan Parliament. She has held public office from at least January 2006 to 
October 2010, the date Applicant signed a set of interrogatories issued to him by DOHA 
to gain more information about his relatives in Afghanistan. In his Answer, he denies 
that his sister is currently a member of the Afghan parliament. During his investigation, 
he has provided inconsistent statements about his family in Afghanistan and the amount 
of contact he has with them.4   
  
Afghanistan is located in southwestern Asia. Pakistan borders it on the east and 
the south. Iran borders it on the west and Russia on the north. It is a rugged and 
mountainous country, which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. It 
has about 18 million people. Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic that has had a 
turbulent political history, including an invasion by the Russians in 1979. After an Accord 
was reached in 1989 and Russia withdrew from the country, fighting continued among 
the various ethnic, clan and religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to 
power and controlled 90% of the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies. 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
Government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists 
and the Taliban continue to assert power and intimidation within the country. 5 
 
The country’s human rights record remains poor. Problems include: extrajudicial 
killings; widespread official impunity; official corruption; violence and societal 
discrimination against women. Violence is rampant. According to recent reports from the 
U.S. Department of State, insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of 
Americans and other Western nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of 
Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence.6   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
4 GE 4, GE 6-GE 9; AE A. 
 
5 HE 1. 
 
6 HE 1. 
 
4 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 7 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Department Counsel raised three that are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.  
 
Of these, only AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b), apply. 
 
 Applicant has three relatives who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan: his 
father-in-law, his brother, and his sister, who is an Afghan congresswoman. The mere 
possession of close ties with family members living in Afghanistan is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a close relationship 
with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is sufficient to create 
the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. The evidence supports a finding that Applicant has maintained 
close relationships with his relatives living in Afghanistan. Given the perilous conditions 
in the country caused by the operation of the Taliban, the wide-spread corruption within 
the government, and the poor human rights record -- particularly towards women -- a 
heightened risk exists. Applicant’s relationship with his sister creates a potential conflict 
of interest. 
 
 AG ¶ 7(d) does not apply because Applicant and his brother have not shared a 
residence since approximately 1995, when Applicant’s brother went to prison. 
Furthermore, Applicant’s brother has been living in Afghanistan since 2005. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S., 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
 
6 
 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest, and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 None of these mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has provided sparse 
information about his family in Afghanistan. He has also failed to elucidate, beyond the 
citizenship status of his wife and children reported in his security clearance application, 
his ties to the United States in a manner that make it possible for me to find mitigation 
under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (c). He also failed to provide any evidence to merit a favorable 
finding under AG ¶8(c). Applicant did not present any evidence to rebut the presumption 
that his relationships with his siblings and father-in-law are not casual. Furthermore, his 
inconsistent statements regarding the frequency of his contact with these relatives 
prevent a finding that his contact with them is an infrequent as he claims.  
   
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also 
considered the whole-person concept. Applicant has resided in the United States for 24 
years and has held U.S. citizenship for the past 18 years. He and his wife have 
established a home and raised their family in the United States. While this is strong 
evidence of Applicant’s ties to the United States, these facts alone are not sufficient to 
mitigate the foreign influence concerns raised in this case. His inconsistent statements 
about his family and the frequency of his contact with them do not allow a favorable 
credibility assessment. Under the “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard, 
an applicant has a heavy burden of demonstrating extenuation or mitigation of facts with 
negative security significance. Because he failed to meet his burden, I have no choice 
but to resolve any doubt about Applicant’s security worthiness in favor of the national 
security.7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c.:  Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 99-0601at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 30, 2001);  ISCR Case No. 99-0511at 8-9 (App. Bd. Dec. 
19, 2000); ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 7 (App. Bd. Sept. 15, 1999); Dorfmont v. Brown, 914 F.2d 1399, 
1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991)(no presumption in favor of granting or continuing a 
security clearance); Directive, Item E2.2.2. (any doubt must be resolved in favor of national security). 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
