                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10482 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid Williams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
D, Sexual Behavior, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 8, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
D and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 29, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 4, 2011. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on August 12, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
September 7, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
admitted into evidence without objections. Applicant and one witness testified on his 
behalf. He offered Exhibit (AE) A which was admitted into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 15, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR except ¶ 2(a). I incorporated his 
admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old. He married in 2009 and has no children. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 2003 and a master’s degree in 2011. He worked for a federal 
contractor from 2003 to 2006. During this time, he held a top secret security clearance 
with access to sensitive compartmented information until it was revoked in 2006.1 
 
In 1997, as a teenager, Applicant began viewing pornography on his home 
computer. He admitted that he downloaded 500 to 600 files a day. He continued 
downloading and viewing pornography from 1997 to 2006. He downloaded and viewed 
all different genres of pornography. He downloaded some type of pornography every 
single day during this time period. He admitted that he was aware when he was 
downloading pornography that some of it was child pornography. In the beginning, he 
was not targeting or searching for child pornography. However, he admitted that about 
every eight to ten months he specifically used search words to find child pornography. 
He did not have a specific interest in children, but it was just another aspect of 
pornography that he viewed. He admitted he viewed the child pornography files he 
downloaded. He explained that the quantity of child pornography he downloaded and 
viewed was small compared to the total number of other pornographic files he was 
downloading and viewing. Although he knew his conduct was wrong and illegal, he did 
not consider it serious.2 He was not aware it was a felony. He admitted that he 
downloaded hundreds of thousands of pornographic files that included movies. He 
estimated that from 1997 to 2006, he downloaded about 50 to 100 pornographic files 
that included children ages 10 to 13 and 15 to 30 pornographic files that included 
children ages 4 to 5. He estimated that he viewed about 30 to 40 pornographic files of 
the 10-to 13-year-old children and 10 to 20 pornographic files of 4-to 5-year-old 
children. He admitted he became sexually aroused by the content.3  
 
 Applicant held a top secret security clearance and worked for a government 
contractor from 2003 to 2006. In 2006, prior to taking a polygraph for a security 
clearance upgrade, Applicant disclosed to the government investigator that he viewed 
all types of pornography. He wanted the investigator to understand that his pornography 
1 Tr. 38-40. 
 
2 Tr. 33-38, 40-53, 66, 72-73. 
 
3 Tr. 26-27, 30-32, 46-53, 75-83. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
was not limited to one particular genre. He did not explicitly tell the investigator that he 
accessed, downloaded, and viewed child pornography. He told the investigator that his 
actions occurred from 1997 to 2006.4  
 
 It is alleged that Applicant failed to disclose to the investigator that in 2006 his 
security clearance was revoked because he had accessed, downloaded, and viewed 
child pornography. I find Applicant was aware that his security clearance was revoked 
as a result of that conduct. He received a letter from the government agency that was 
conducting the polygraph and it specifically noted the concerns about the child 
pornography files that he downloaded and viewed. However, I find that Applicant did 
disclose he was involved in “all” types of pornography. I found Applicant’s testimony 
credible that he did not deliberately conceal that his security clearance was revoked due 
to viewing child pornography. I find that stating “all” types of pornography logically 
includes child pornography. The government was on notice that Applicant admitted he 
viewed “all” types of pornography. After Applicant’s pre-polygraph interview, he 
disclosed his past pornography issues to his wife. She was unaware of his activities 
before then.5  
 
Applicant’s security clearance was revoked in 2006. He stated he sought therapy 
from a doctor in October 2006. He was unaware of the doctor’s credentials, but believed 
he was a psychologist. He saw the doctor twice a month for three to four months and 
then once a month until he discontinued therapy in June 2007. The doctor helped him 
humanize and personify the people he viewed in the pornographic movies and images 
and see them as victims. He stated he was told by the doctor that they had talked 
through the issues and that he could continue to see the doctor if Applicant felt he 
needed to. Applicant was not provided a diagnosis and he discontinued seeing the 
doctor. He did not provide any medical documents or specific information or credentials 
from his doctor.6 
 
 Applicant has not told his parents about his history of downloading, accessing, 
and viewing all types of pornography, including child pornography. He used their home 
computer to access the pornography, and deleted the files so his parents would not 
discover his behavior. His sister is four years younger than him and she was living at 
home when he was downloading the files. He stated he has no hesitation about telling 
his parents about downloading pornography. Applicant stated he no longer downloads 
illegal files. He stated it has been more than five years since he last downloaded illegal 
files. He does not intend to download or view child pornography or any pornography in 
the future.7 
 
4 Tr. 53-65. 
 
5 Tr. 25-26, 29-32, 87-96, 102-105; GE 3, 4. 
 
6 Tr. 24-25, 28, 83-87, 106-109. 
 
7 Tr. 28, 67-69, 97. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s wife testified on his behalf. After his interview with the polygrapher, 
Applicant told his wife about downloading and viewing all types of pornography, 
including child pornography. She was shocked and surprised when he confessed his 
past habits of viewing pornography, including child pornography. It was before they 
were married. She told him they needed to see a therapist because she did not know if 
she could trust him. She attended one counseling session with Applicant. She stated 
Applicant went to see the therapist upon her request. She stated she was told by the 
doctor that Applicant did not have a problem. She explained that the doctor told her 
Applicant was not personalizing the people in the pornography. She discussed the 
issues with her mother and decided to forgive Applicant. She believes Applicant is a 
good man. She was concerned about the issue recurring. She explained that Applicant 
no longer downloads any illegal files from the internet. Applicant has been devoted to 
her even when she went through brain surgery before they were married. She believes 
in her heart that his behavior will not be an issue. She holds a top secret security 
clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information.8  
 
Applicant provided a character letter from his supervisor. He is aware that 
Applicant downloaded and viewed child pornography. He does not condone his actions, 
but commented that Applicant was forthright in admitting his conduct. He provided 
information that Applicant is a top-notch performer, who has not demonstrated any 
behavior that would cause him to question his loyalty to his employer or country.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
8 Tr. 28-29, 98, 109-122. 
 
9 AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant told the government investigator that his security clearance was 
revoked because he accessed and downloaded all types of pornography. Although he 
did not specifically state that this included child pornography, I find it is a reasonable 
inference and he did not deliberately conceal material facts from the investigator. I find 
disqualifying condition AG¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) do not apply with regard to SOR ¶ 2.b. 
Applicant’s long and involved history of accessing, downloading, and viewing child 
pornography from 1997 to 2006 is a personal conduct concern and creates a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. I find AG ¶ 16(e) applies to the 
facts of this case. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal conduct of accessing, downloading, and viewing child 
pornography on his home computer from 1997 to 2006 is serious criminal and personal 
conduct that raised a security concern. He testified that his conduct ceased in 2006. He 
stated he sought counseling from a doctor, but he did not provide sufficient evidence to 
document his treatment, therapy, or prognosis. He did not provide sufficient evidence of 
the qualifications of the therapist. He stated it has been five years since his last offense. 
Due to the duration and excessiveness of Applicant’s conduct and his disregard for the 
illegalities of his actions, I cannot find his conduct occurred under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. I find his actions cast serious doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Therefore, AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s parents are unaware of his illegal activity, as was his wife before their 
marriage. Although he acknowledged his conduct, stated he obtained counseling to 
change his behavior, and no longer downloads any type of pornography, there is 
insufficient independent evidence to corroborate his assertions. Absent such evidence, I 
cannot find that his conduct is unlikely to recur or that he has reduced his vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) do not apply. 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern pertaining to sexual behavior. 
 
Sexual Behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment, or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
 AG ¶ 13 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered the following as potentially applicable:  
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted;  
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk behavior that the 
person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a personality 
disorder; and 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. 
 
Applicant estimated that from 1997 to 2006, he downloaded between 50 and 100 
pornographic files that included children, ages 10 to 13, and 15 to 30 pornographic files 
that included children, ages 4 to 5. He estimated that he viewed about 30 to 40 
pornographic files of the 10-to 13-year-old children and 10 to 20 pornographic files of 4-
to 5-year-old children. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising under the sexual behavior guideline. The following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶14 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature;  
 
 
8 
 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet.  
 
 Applicant’s behavior of downloading and viewing child pornography extended 
from adolescence into adulthood. He was aware that his conduct was wrong and illegal. 
The frequency and seriousness of his conduct casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. His repeated behavior was criminal, but not 
prosecuted. However, it still serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, and duress. I 
find AG ¶¶ 14(a), 14(b), and 14(c) do not apply. Although it appears Applicant’s conduct 
was strictly private, it was criminal and therefore AG ¶ 14(d) is not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines D and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant was 
candid in disclosing that he downloaded and viewed child pornography. He told his wife 
about his past conduct, but has not told his parents. Applicant’s conduct spanned a 
nine-year period. He was aware that his conduct was criminal, but did not realize his 
offenses could be prosecuted as felonies. He stated he sought treatment, and he does 
 
9 
 
 
not need further therapy. He did not provide any evidence to substantiate his treatment 
or assertions that he does not pose a risk of repeating similar behavior. There is no 
evidence to document the qualifications of his therapist. It is clear Applicant had a 
pornography addiction which included child pornography. Although he stated he has 
learned to humanize the people in the photos he viewed, he lacks an understanding of 
the gravity of the seriousness of his behavior. I find that his repeated and extensive 
behavior is not mitigated by the passage of time, by his assertion that he has changed 
and no longer views any type of pornography, or by his contention that the issues have 
been resolved. Applicant was entrusted with a security clearance from 2003 to 2006. 
During that time, he repeatedly downloaded and viewed child pornography. He stated 
he stopped his misconduct, but it was not until he had to take a polygraph. I find 
Applicant did not meet his burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with substantial questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guidelines for Sexual Behavior and Personal 
Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
