 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10713    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a security 
clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant, a naturalized U.S. citizen, was 
born in Pakistan. He mitigated the alleged financial concerns by resolving the delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR. However, he failed to mitigate the foreign influence concerns 
raised by his close familial relationships with individuals who are residents and citizens 
of Pakistan. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on April 5, 2011, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replaces the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.     
 
 
2 
 
(SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant access to classified information. The SOR detailed the factual bases for the 
action under Guideline B (foreign influence) and Guideline F (financial considerations).  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was 
assigned to me on June 3, 2011. The hearing proceeded as scheduled on July 13, 
2011. At hearing, Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 were admitted without 
objection. I admitted as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2 a demonstrative exhibit prepared by 
Department Counsel. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through H, which were also admitted without objection. I received the Transcript (Tr.) on 
July 21, 2011. 
 
At the end of the hearing, I left the record open for the Applicant to submit 
additional documentation. He timely submitted five documents, identified as AE I 
through L, which were admitted without objection from Department Counsel. 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Pakistan. Without objection from Applicant, I approved the 
request. The request and the attached documents have been included in the record as 
HE 1. Applicant also submitted documents about Pakistan, which are included in the 
record, without objection from Department Counsel, as HE A. The pertinent facts are set 
out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old naturalized citizen of the United States originally from 
Pakistan. Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1997 and became a citizen in 
2003. He does not hold dual citizenship with any other country. Initially, he worked at a 
casino and then at a convenience store while taking English classes. In 2003, he was 
hired as a linguist for government contractor. In 2010, he worked as a translator 
supporting the United States military abroad.2  
 
 Married since 2004, Applicant’s wife is also a citizen of Pakistan. She has been 
living in the United States as a permanent resident alien since 2007. She submitted an 
application for U.S. citizenship in June 2011. The couple has a three-year-old daughter 
who was born in the United States. Applicant’s parents, four brothers, sister, and their 
families, as well as his wife’s father and seven siblings are citizens and residents of 
Pakistan. None of Applicant’s or his wife’s relatives work for the government. Nor is 
there any indication that any of Applicant’s or his wife’s relatives receive benefits from 
the government. Applicant provides $200 to $300 in financial support for his parents 
each month, giving more if unexpected expenses arise. He does not provide financial 
                                                          
2 Tr. 19, 22 – 23; GE 3. 
 
3 
 
support for any other family members. He speaks to his parents and siblings at least 
once per month by telephone, but he has not seen them since 2007. Applicant’s wife 
maintains frequent contact with her family in Pakistan. She talks to her father and 
siblings at least once every three months. Applicant speaks to his in-laws infrequently 
during these conversations. Applicant’s wife returned to Pakistan in 2010 to care for her 
dying mother. She returned to the U.S. shortly after her mother’s funeral.3 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began when he first arrived in the U.S. Without 
fully understanding how credit cards worked in the United States, he used them to help 
make ends meet. Eventually, he accumulated six delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $23,379. After he began working as a translator in 2010, he hired an 
attorney to help him address his delinquent debt. As a result, Applicant has resolved the 
six debts alleged in the SOR and he has not accumulated any additional debt. He does 
not have any financial interests in Pakistan. Although he does not own any property in 
the United States, he has $56,000 in cash savings.4 
 
Applicant is highly esteemed by his coworkers. His evaluations indicate that he 
exceeds performance expectations. He has received awards and accommodations from 
the military and his employer for his work. His team leader considers him a 
“tremendously valuable member of [the] organization [who will be] very difficult to 
replace upon redeployment.” According to his team leader Applicant was “consistently 
included in analysis and mission planning due to his subject matter expertise and his 
ability to balance the needs of local nationals with the needs of the military members he 
supports.” Because of his skill, Applicant was selected to go on two long-term missions, 
which were considered dangerous. According to Applicant’s testimony, his team was 
attacked three times though he was not injured.5 
 
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic in Southwest Asia. It is a low-income 
country, with a population that is 97 percent Muslim. Pakistan was one of only three 
countries to recognize the Taliban regime of Afghanistan, after September 11, 2001. 
However, Pakistan reassessed its relations with the Taliban and pledged support to the 
United States and the international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom, which 
aimed at removing the Taliban from power. Despite this support, members of the 
Taliban are known to be in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan 
and in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Afghanistan. The leaders of the 
Taliban operate openly in Pakistan. Extremists led by the Pakistani Taliban (Tehrik-i-
Taliban “TTP”) commander and other Al-Qaida extremists have re-exerted their hold 
over areas in the FATA and the North West Frontier Province (NWFP). Taliban 
financing, which crosses the border of Pakistan to Afghanistan, has allowed the 
insurgency in Afghanistan to strengthen its military and technical capabilities.  
                                                          
3 Tr. 23 – 43. 
 
4 Tr. 21, 52 – 55, AE  A – L. 
 
5 AE G – H. 
 
4 
 
 
The security situation in Afghanistan worsened in 2008, including an increase in 
Al-Qaida’s presence to levels unseen since 2001-2002, driven in part by insurgent 
access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous Afghan-Pakistan border. 
Although Al-Qaida’s core organization in the tribal areas of Pakistan was under greater 
pressure in 2009 than in 2008, it remained the most dangerous component of the larger 
Al-Qaida network. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide vital 
sanctuary to Al-Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups. 
Al-Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the Afghan 
insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and Western interests 
in Pakistan and worldwide. Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremist 
groups, Al-Qaida uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare 
regional and transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and 
supplies. 
 
The Pakistani government has a poor human rights record. Reported human 
rights violations include extrajudicial killings, torture and rape by security forces, lack of 
judicial independence, arbitrary arrest, widespread corruption, disappearance and 
imprisonment of political opponents, and trafficking in women and children. As of 
February 2009, the government maintained domestic intelligence services that 
monitored political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
intelligence agents. The Department of State warns U.S. citizens of the risks of travel to 
Pakistan in light of threats of terrorist activity. Since 2007, American citizens have been 
kidnapped for ransom or other reasons. Credible reports indicated that authorities 
routinely intercepted and opened mail without requisite court approval, and monitored 
mobile phones and electronic messages.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
6 HE 1; HE 2. 
 
5 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Both disqualifying conditions apply here. Applicant experienced financial problems when 
he first immigrated to the United States 14 years ago. His low income and his lack of 
understanding U.S. financial practices related to credit cards caused him to accumulate 
delinquent debt.  
 
 
6 
 
Two of the following mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 20 are applicable 
to this case:  
20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts. 
 Upon recognizing he needed help navigating the financial waters, Applicant hired 
a lawyer to contact his creditors and facilitate the payment of his delinquent debt. 
Working with his attorney, Applicant has resolved each of the delinquent debts alleged 
in the SOR. According to the most recent credit report available he has not accumulated 
any new consumer debt. He lives within his means and has been able to save a 
significant sum of money. Based on the evidence, I conclude that Applicant has 
mitigated the Guideline F concerns. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under this guideline, “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if 
the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not 
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”7  
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that are disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion 
 
 Applicant’s parents, his five siblings, his father-in-law, and his wife’s seven 
siblings are residents and citizens of Pakistan. Applicant’s wife is also a citizen of 
Pakistan, albeit a permanent resident alien of the United States.  
 
                                                          
7 AG ¶ 6.  
 
 
7 
 
 The mere possession of close ties with family members living in Pakistan is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has a close 
relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of Pakistan with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his relatives living in Pakistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist his relatives living in Pakistan who might be coerced by 
terrorists or other Governmental entities in Pakistan. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”8 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields. 
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or his 
relatives living in Pakistan, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
Although Applicant has not seen his family in over four years, he continues to feel an 
obligation to them and affection for them. Applicant’s concern for his relatives is a 
positive character trait that increases his trustworthiness; however, it also increases the 
concern about potential foreign influence. Department Counsel produced substantial 
evidence to raise the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
 
8 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Family contacts and ties with persons in a foreign country are not automatically 
disqualifying, but require the applicant to present evidence in mitigation and extenuation 
that he qualifies for access to classified information. Given the large number of ongoing 
contacts with his immediate family in Pakistan, Applicant failed to meet his burden 
showing there is “little likelihood that he could create a risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation” under AG ¶ 8(a). The evidence supports a finding that Applicant feels an 
obligation to his relatives’ welfare.  
 
 In determining the applicability of AG ¶ 8(b), Applicant’s relationships in the 
United States must be weighed against the potential conflict of interested created by his 
relationships with his relatives who live in Pakistan. Applicant decided to make the 
United States his home. In the 14 years Applicant has lived in the U.S., he has returned 
to Pakistan twice. On each occasion, the main purpose of his visit involved his wife. In 
2004, Applicant went to Pakistan to marry. In 2007, he returned to escort her to the 
United States when she received green card. He has not seen his parents or siblings 
since 2007. Applicant and his wife have made a home in the U.S. and their daughter is 
a U.S. citizen by birth. Furthermore, the nature of his job also demonstrates his 
commitment to the U.S. As a translator in a war zone, Applicant has placed himself in 
danger to support the mission of the U.S. in the region. On three occasions he has been 
in combat situations.  
 
Conversely, Applicant has at least 15 relatives to whom he is bound by ties of 
obligation and affection who are residents and citizens of Pakistan. There is no 
evidence that terrorist, criminals, the Pakistan government, or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his relatives in Pakistan to 
coerce Applicant or his relatives for classified information. While the Government does 
not have any burden to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence 
was present, Applicant would have a heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate 
foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ 
recent relationship with Pakistan, and especially Pakistan’s systematic human rights 
violations and most of the ever present danger from terrorists and those who seek to 
damage U.S. interests. The conduct of terrorists in Pakistan makes it more likely that 
terrorists would attempt to coerce Applicant through his relatives living in Pakistan, if the 
terrorists determined it as advantageous to do so. When weighed together, the risk 
posed by Applicant’s relatives in Pakistan is greater than his ties to the United States. 
As such AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply here. 
 
 
9 
 
While Applicant’s contacts and communications with his parents and siblings 
cannot be considered casual or infrequent under AG ¶ 8(c), this description describes 
his communication with his in-laws. There is no evidence in the record to suggest that 
he has close ties to them. Applicant met his in-laws once in 2004 at his wedding and 
since then he has spoken to them on the phone occasionally during one of his wife’s 
calls to her family. However, Applicant’s wife’s close ties to her family cannot be ignored 
and prevent the full application of the mitigating condition to this case. 
 
 In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant’s relationships with his 
relatives, who live in Pakistan. These relatives are readily available for coercion. 
Although the Pakistan Government’s failure to follow the rule of law further increases 
the risk of coercion, the major cause of concern is the prevalence of terrorists in 
Pakistan. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered 
the whole-person concept. In his efforts to support the United States in its missions 
abroad, Applicant has placed his own safety in jeopardy. The level of commitment he 
shows to his work as a translator is indicative of his loyalty to the United States. 
However, the circumstances tending to support denial of Applicant’s clearance are more 
significant than the factors weighing towards approval of his clearance at this time. 
Applicant’s relatives live in Pakistan. Terrorists have killed hundreds of Pakistani 
citizens in the last two years, and would not hesitate to coerce Applicant through his 
relatives to obtain classified information. Therefore, he failed to provide sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the security concerns. 
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline B, 
foreign influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.f.:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.                     
  
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
