 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10338 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Rick B. Levinson, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Sexual Behavior security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 27, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline D, 
Sexual Behavior. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 21, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 20, 2011. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on August 2, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
August 24, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were 
 
2 
 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. He also offered a demonstrative exhibit that was marked as HE II. 
Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and submitted exhibit (AE) A at the hearing. 
The exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open 
and Applicant submitted AE B through F that were admitted into evidence with no 
objection. Department Counsel’s forwarding document is marked as HE III. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 9, 2011. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to withdraw the allegations 
contained in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.g. The motion was granted and the remaining SOR 
allegations were renumbered ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i accordingly.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR, except for the diagnosis 
of “mild schizoid and obsessive features” contained in SOR ¶ 1.i, and those admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings, testimony and 
admitted exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. Applicant is a 54-year-old 
employee of a defense contractor. He has been married 34 years and has two adult 
children. He has a master’s of business administration (MBA) degree. He spent 20 
years in the Air Force, retiring in 1995. He held a security clearance while he was in the 
Air Force. He has worked for his current employer since 2004.2  
 
 In January 2009, Applicant was using his home computer to chat with, what he 
thought at the time was, a 14-year old girl. He thought this because she told him she 
was 14 years old. He was also using a web-camera at the time. He sent nude web-
camera images of himself to the girl. It turned out that the underage girl was really an 
undercover detective working for the local district attorney’s office. After Applicant sent 
the photos, the detective identified herself and requested that he turn himself into 
authorities. Applicant complied with that request and was arrested for internet 
exploitation of a child, a felony, among other charges. He ultimately pleaded guilty to the 
misdemeanor offense of indecent exposure and the remaining charges were dismissed. 
He was placed on supervised probation for three years. His probation is scheduled to 
end in June 2012. He was also required to attend court ordered counseling, although he 
started attending the counseling before it was mandated by the court. He was also 
required to register as a sex offender.3  
 
 During the course of his counseling, he was required to supply treatment intake 
information to include his sexual history. He disclosed that he engaged in exhibitionism 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 8. 
 
2 Tr. at 106, 121, 130; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 118, 142; GE 4. 
 
 
3 
 
as a youth by riding his bike to deliver newspapers while he was naked (being covered 
only by the newspaper bag). He was about 13 years old at the time and engaged in this 
action about five times. More recently, in 2008, he walked outside of his house while 
naked to take his dog out. A neighbor saw him as he was naked outside, to whom he 
later apologized. He further disclosed that he had an extra-marital affair in 1999. The 
affair was with a coworker and lasted six to eight months. He disclosed that he 
masturbated at work one time (in a bathroom stall) in 1999 and about eight times while 
driving between 2000 and 2008. He disclosed that between 2007 and 2009 he engaged 
in sexually oriented computer internet chat and web-camera activities with people who 
could have been under 15 years old on about 50 occasions. He started out chatting 
about sexual-related topics and progressed to masturbating while on-line. In late 2007 
or early 2008, he was chatting with a person on-line when that person began sending 
him what he believed was child pornography. He claims he had not requested this child 
pornography and immediately stopped his chatting with this person upon receipt of it. 
He also insured his computer did not retain those pictures. Prior to his arrest, he had not 
disclosed this information to anyone (other than the extra-marital affair). He later 
admitted, during his security clearance interview, he had struggled with an internet 
pornography addiction for about 18 months prior to his arrest in January 2009.4 
 Applicant’s court-ordered therapist (JM) testified about the treatment Applicant 
has received. JM is a full level treatment provider under the Sex Offender Management 
Board of the state. His organization specializes in the treatment of sex offenders. The 
treatment program length is between four and eight years. The treatment is done 
through a community supervision team (CST) and polygraphs are used to verify sexual 
histories and specific areas of concern to insure full disclosure by the patient. Applicant 
started treatment in April 2009 and was seen once or twice a week. JM related that 
Applicant initially struggled with program restrictions, but soon became a leader for 
other group members. JM believes Applicant fully disclosed all of his past aberrant 
sexual behavior because he passed polygraphs concerning his answers. Testing 
showed no current deviant sexual arousal patterns by Applicant. JM reported that 
Applicant has been compliant with his treatment plan. There have been no issues 
concerning inappropriate computer uses over the past two years. JM believes the four 
to eight years for program completion is the appropriate time for Applicant to be in the 
program. He also believes treatment is necessary for the Applicant at this time. Once 
Applicant’s probation ends, JM’s organization has no control over whether he continues 
treatment. Applicant indicated that further voluntary treatment after his probation ended 
would be dependent on his finances. The treatment costs $400 per month.5    
 Applicant’s probation officer (DH) testified about Applicant’s probation status. DH 
has been a probation officer for over four years and has specifically worked in sex 
offender probation for two years. He is also a former service member who held a 
security clearance. It is DH’s opinion that Applicant should retain his security clearance. 
DH described Applicant as cooperative and forthcoming. He initially saw Applicant 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 115, 126, 133-134, 136; GE 4, GE 8. 
 
5 Tr. at 35-36, 38-40, 45, 49-50, 56, 60; 69, 124; GE 8. 
 
 
4 
 
about every week, but now only sees him every six weeks. DH described two probation 
violations that were not serious enough for him to report to the court. One violation was 
when Applicant was naked in his outdoor hot tub. DH specifically told Applicant not to 
engage in this behavior. The other violation happened when Applicant watched some 
pornography on a hotel television. Applicant reported both violations to DH. DH 
recommended approval for allowing Applicant to travel out of the country for work 
purposes. At this time, DH has no reason to seek an extension of Applicant’s probation 
beyond June 2012.6  
 
 Applicant’s wife testified that she has known Applicant for 38 years. She has held 
a security clearance when she worked for a government contractor in the past. She was 
not aware of Applicant’s sexual activities until he was arrested. She believes that his 
treatment has helped him change for the better.7 
 
 Applicant submitted letter from a psychologist who opined the Applicant “does 
not appear to meet the diagnostic criteria for schizoid personality disorder.” Applicant 
also presented three certificates of appreciation for his work related accomplishments. 
He also presented a letter from his work supervisor who describes applicant as a 
trusted subordinate and top performer.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 73-74, 78-83, 98-99; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 106-111. 
 
8 AE B-F. 
 
 
5 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
GUIDELINE D, SEXUAL BEHAVIOR 
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern: 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
I have considered all the Sexual Behavior disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 13 
and have determined the following are relevant: 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
6 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and, 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
Applicant engaged in criminal activity when he used the internet to contact 
minors. He then conducted sexually related chats and masturbated on numerous 
occasions. He also masturbated in public places, including in the workplace, on more 
than one occasion. Applicant’s actions were not revealed until he was arrested for 
having illegal internet sexual contact with an undercover detective posing as a 14-year 
old girl. All the disqualifying conditions listed above are triggered by Applicant’s conduct.  
I have considered all the mitigating conditions contained in AG ¶ 14 and 
determined the following are relevant: 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and,  
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
Although most of Applicant’s exhibitionism was when he was an adolescent, his 
most recent incident was in 2008. Additionally, he had numerous internet sexually-
related contacts with minors. AG ¶ 14(a) does not apply. Applicant has a history of 
sexually deviant behavior that ranges from his adolescent years through his arrest for 
internet sexual conduct with a minor in 2009. His behavior was frequent and at this 
juncture it is too early to determine whether his behavior is likely to recur. He is still on 
probation and the completion of his sexual therapy treatment is still two to six years 
away. AG ¶ 14(b) does not apply. Because of Applicant’s complete disclosure of his 
sexual history during the course of his treatment, there is no longer a concern that his 
past behavior could be used to coerce or exploit him. AG ¶ 14(c) applies. Applicant’s 
use of the internet to chat with minors about sexual matters and masturbate while doing 
so was not private or discreet. AG ¶ 14(d) does not apply. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline D in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the serious nature of Applicant’s secret internet sexual activities that 
only came to light when he was arrested while sexually chatting with a detective who 
was posing as a 14-year old girl. He engaged in this behavior numerous times. 
Applicant was in his late forties and fifties when he acted in this manner. I have also 
considered the progress he has made through his sexual therapy treatment and the 
positive recommendation from his probation officer. However, despite those positive 
factors, there are other troublesome facts that come into play. One is that despite a 
specific direction by his probation officer not to engage in nude hot tub use in his back 
yard, Applicant did so anyway. Additionally, his counselor feels that Applicant needs 
further treatment at this time and that a full treatment program should last between four 
and eight years for the Applicant. He is now in his second year of treatment. At this 
time, Applicant has not established that his behavior will not reoccur in the future and 
thereby create a security concern. Although some mitigation is present, it is too soon to 
tell whether Applicant has changed his behavior in these areas of concern.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Sexual Behavior security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.i:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
