                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-11079 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations concern. He established that his 
financial problems were due to matters outside of his control and he has resolved his 
past indebtedness in a responsible manner. Clearance is granted. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On April 4, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made a 
preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information.1 The basis 
for this decision is set forth in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which alleges the security 
concern under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR 
on April 27, 2011 (Answer). He requested a determination on the administrative record.  
 
 On June 9, 2011, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM contains Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
which are admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant filed his Response to the 
FORM on July 15, 2011 (Response).2 With his Response, Applicant attached a copy of 
a mortgage loan modification agreement and payment history. These documents have 
been marked as Applicant’s Exhibits A and B, and are admitted into evidence without 
objection.3 I was assigned the case on August 8, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He worked as a corrections officer for a major 
metropolitan city from 1989 to 2009, when he retired. He has been married since 1982 
and has two adult children. He has lived at the same address since 1990 and one of his 
children still lives with him. He has been working as a security officer for a government 
contractor since July 2010.4  
 
 In 2004, Applicant’s son was severely injured in a car accident that resulted in his 
hospitalization for nearly a month and left him requiring round-the-clock care. Applicant 
converted his house to make it accessible for his son and his wife left her job to care for 
their son fulltime. Applicant had to switch to the overnight shift and was unable to make 
extra money working overtime because he needed to be home to help care for his son. 
As a result, Applicant’s expenses increased sharply and his income decreased. 
Applicant was able to meet his financial obligations, but “the financial stress spilled over 
for several years.”5 
 
 By April 2009 Applicant’s wife was working again. Applicant retired from his state 
corrections job and planned on supplementing his retirement income with a job in the 
security field. Applicant expected that between his wife’s pay and his retirement income 
that he could pay the family’s bills until he found a fulltime job. Unfortunately, Applicant’s 
wife suffered a devastating back injury that left her disabled and required her to take a 
leave of absence from her job in about June 2009. Applicant was forced to set aside his 
own job hunt and stay home to care for his ailing wife. Applicant’s wife was able to 
receive corrective back surgery in the fall of 2009 and returned to work in January 2010. 
Applicant’s income during this period was about $2,000 less than before he had to stay 
home to care for his wife. He started a part-time job in January 2010, but his income 
was still $800 less than when he was working fulltime. He did not secure a fulltime job 
until he was hired by his current employer. By that point, he had accumulated some 
past due debt, including falling behind on his mortgage.6 
2 DOHA did not receive Applicant’s Response until on or about August 16, 2011.  
 
3 The Government did not object to AE A and B, but did submit a Reply, dated August 18, 2011. 
As the Reply does not contain any indication on the face of the document that it was served on the 
Applicant and there is no other proof of service in the file, I will not consider the Reply.  
 
4 GE 3; GE 4 at 124, 127, and 131. 
 
5 GE 2 at 2-3; GE 4 at 127. 
 
6 GE 2 at 3; GE 4 at 124-125 and 127-132. 
 
3 
 
 
R.  
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 Applicant revealed his financial problems on the security clearance application he 
submitted in August 2010.7 He then discussed his debts in detail during his subsequent 
background interview.8 When DOHA inquired about the status of seven delinquent 
debts in February 2011, Applicant provided documentary proof that he had either 
resolved the debts or was working with his creditors to resolve them, to include his past-
due mortgage account.9 
 
 By the time the SOR was issued in April 2011, Applicant’s delinquent debts were 
down to three. Applicant has resolved the three delinquent debts listed in the SOR. He 
settled the credit card debt alleged in ¶ 1.a in April 2011. He provided documentary 
proof of his efforts to resolve this debt prior to the issuance of the SOR and that the debt 
was paid.10 He also satisfied the judgment debt alleged in ¶ 1.c and provided 
documentary proof that this debt was satisfied.11 The debt in ¶ 1.c was originally for a 
past due amount owed for the family’s cell phone service and additional fees that the 
wireless carrier wanted to charge. Applicant and his wife disputed the additional fees 
the wireless carrier was proposing to charge. The wireless company forwarded their 
claim to a collection company, which was able to procure a judgment against Applicant 
and his wife. They settled the judgment for the amount that was past due,12 and the 
debt was satisfied prior to the issuance of the SO 13
 
 Applicant’s only remaining bad debt was his delinquent mortgage account, as 
alleged in ¶ 1.b. Applicant fell behind on his mortgage when he was unemployed and 
underemployed from April 2009 to July 2010. He was initially able to enter into a 
deferred payment arrangement with the lender where the lender agreed to take less 
than the monthly mortgage amount owed. From August 2009 to August 2010, Applicant 
made the partial payments agreed to by the lender. The lender then stopped accepting 
Applicant’s partial payments while it reviewed his application for a loan modification 
through the Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP). Applicant hired a 
professional to assist in the process, because the lender had a significant backlog of 
applications. He also set aside about $10,000 to eventually satisfy any delinquency 
owed to the lender. He has $23,000 in savings and $150,000 in equity in his home to 
 
 
7 GE 3 at 39-44. 
 
8 GE 4 at 127-132. 
 
9 See GE 4 at 94-106, 114, 117 – 120 (2/11 credit report notes that second mortgage on home, 
which was previously delinquent, was current). 
 
10 GE 2, attached statement from creditor, dated April 21, 2011 (noting that debt was settled in 
full); GE 4 at 104 (settlement offer, dated February 14, 2011).  
 
11 See GE 2, attached Satisfaction of Judgment, dated February 24, 2011.  
 
12 GE 4 at 129.  
 
13 GE 2, attached Satisfaction of Judgment, dated February 24, 2011.  
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
satisfy the approximate $28,000 that was past due on the mortgage. The lender 
approved the loan modification application in May 2011. Applicant submitted proof of 
payment per said agreement and this debt is no longer past due.14 Applicant also 
submitted documentary proof of his efforts to resolve this debt, the loan modification 
approval, and payments made towards this debt over the past two years.15  
 
 Applicant and his family are now financially stable. He has not taken a vacation 
outside of the country in the past seven years and there was no evidence that he has 
been financially irresponsible. Applicant’s personal financial statement and recent credit 
report reveal that Applicant and his family do not live beyond their means.16 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
14 GE 4 at 95, 120-121, 124-125, 127-132; Response.  
 
15 GE 4 at 102-103 (lender acknowledges receipt of loan modification application on 11/3/10); GE 
2, attached consultant agreement (loan modification professional hired on 3/14/11 to help with process); 
AE A (acceptance into HAMP on 5/6/11); AE B (partial payments made from 8/09 – 8/10 per prior 
modification agreement and proof of payment during HAMP trial period).  
 
16 GE 4 at 107-121. See also GE 5 (only derogatory accounts are those that have been paid). 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially irresponsible 
may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s past indebtedness raises this concern 
and establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 However, Applicant’s past indebtedness is not the end of the analysis, because 
“[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”17 Accordingly, Applicant may mitigate the 
financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions 
listed under AG ¶ 20. I have considered all the mitigating conditions, and find that the 
following warrant discussion: 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems were due to matters beyond his control. Namely, 
his son’s medical issues due to a horrific car accident and, most recently, his wife’s 
disability. Applicant’s income decreased dramatically starting in the summer of 2009 
when he was forced to stay home to care for his ailing wife. Even after his wife was able 
to return to work in January 2010, Applicant was unable to secure fulltime employment. 
Applicant’s financial problems were not self-inflicted because he retired from his well-
paying job prior to his wife’s disability.18 This is also not a case where an applicant 
simply walks away from his/her financial obligation.19 Instead, Applicant paid his 
delinquent debts and tirelessly worked with his lender to modify his loan so he could 
satisfy his mortgage obligation. He made partial payments for a year as agreed to with 
his lender and afterwards saved a significant amount of money to satisfy any 
delinquency owed. The delay in processing his modification application was not 
Applicant’s fault. Through his tireless efforts, Applicant was able to save his home and 
bring his mortgage account current. Applicant’s past debts no longer cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) apply.  
 
 Applicant’s financial situation is under control. He satisfied multiple delinquent 
debts prior to the issuance of the SOR. As for the two non-mortgage related debts listed 
in the SOR, one was satisfied even before the SOR was issued (¶ 1.c). As for the other 
debt (¶ 1.a), Applicant entered into a payment arrangement with the creditor prior to the 
issuance of the SOR, and fully satisfied the debt shortly after the SOR was issued. 
18 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 09-08108 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2011) (The applicant’s decision to 
change jobs, which resulted in financial problems, was not a matter beyond his control. Further, Applicant 
in this case did far more than merely stay in contact with his overdue creditors, he actually paid his past 
due debts and resolved his delinquent mortgage account).  
 
19 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 10-01978 (App. Bd. Aug. 24, 2011) (The applicant purchased 
multiple homes obligating himself to mortgages well beyond his means and, when he was unable to pay, 
simply walked away from his mortgage debts). 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant was working to resolve his delinquent mortgage account well before DOHA 
questioned him about his financial problems.20 He paid his mortgage on a consistent 
basis for a year per the terms of a prior temporary modification agreement. He has now 
secured a modification of his mortgage through HAMP, and provided proof of payment 
per the terms of the modification agreement.21 Although there was no evidence 
presented that Applicant received financial counseling, he has put his financial house in 
order by repaying overdue creditors and negotiating his past due debts in good-faith. 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) apply. Applicant mitigated the financial considerations concern and 
his financial problems no longer raise a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).22 I incorporate my Guideline F analysis herein and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors. Applicant worked as a corrections 
officer in one of this nation’s busiest and most dangerous corrections facility for over 20 
years. He has also lived in the same home, where he raised a family, for over 20 years. 
Applicant’s financial problems are due to his family’s medical issues that severely 
impacted his finances. When faced with such financial hardship, Applicant exhibited the 
20 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 10-0780 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2011) (The applicant failed to 
demonstrate that he acted responsibly under the circumstances because, after years of inactivity, he 
decided to resolve his delinquent debts only after the SOR was issued); ISCR Case No. 10-01209 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 28, 2011) (The applicant took remedial efforts to resolve her delinquent debts only to placate 
security concerns versus a true commitment to pay her financial obligations). 
 
21 Infra. n. 15. See generally Making Home Affordable.gov website available at 
http://www.makinghomeaffordable.gov/programs/lower-payments/Pages/hamp.aspx (general information 
on the eligibility requirements for HAMP); Treasury.gov, August 2011 Making Home Affordable Reports, 
available at http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/financial-stability/results/MHA Reports/Documents/ 
August%202011%20MHA%20Report%20FINAL.PDF (76% of those entering HAMP trial program through 
Applicant’s lender received a permanent modification); Treasury Department, Office of Financial Stability, 
Citizens Report on the Troubled Asset Relief Program for FY 2010 at 10-11 available at 
http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/financial-stability/briefingroom/reports/agency_reports/Documents/ 
OFS%20CR_2010_Feb11_last.pdf (discussing origins of HAMP and 85% success rate of homeowners in 
the HAMP modification program); KnowYourOptions.com available at http://www.knowyouroptions.com/ 
options-to-stay-in-your-home/modification-option (official website by Fannie Mae explaining some of the 
benefits of HAMP, including “adding any past-due amounts . . . to the unpaid principal balance, which is 
then reamortized over the new term” of the loan). See also Warren v. Bank of America, et al., 2011 U.S. 
Dist. LEXIS 55777 (S.D. Ga. May 24, 2011) (providing background information on HAMP); Min’gate v. 
Bank of America, et al., 2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 114026 (D. Minn. Sept. 20, 2011) (no private cause of 
action authorized by HAMP against lender for issues involving the processing of modification application).  
 
22 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
level of responsibility one would expect of someone entrusted with a security clearance. 
He has been honest and cooperative throughout the security clearance process, 
including providing documentary proof to substantiate his efforts to resolve his past 
indebtedness.23 These whole-person factors, in conjunction with the favorable matters 
noted above, fully mitigate the financial considerations concern. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
23 Contrast with ISCR Case No. 07-13766 (App. Bd. Nov. 24, 2008) (Applicant failed to submit 
documentary proof that she dealt with her debts in a responsible fashion).  
