                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 )  ISCR Case No. 11-01283 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Drug Involvement concern. He established that his use of 
marijuana in 2005 and 2008 occurred under unusual circumstances and will not recur in 
the future. Clearance is granted. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On July 5, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made a 
preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information.1 The basis 
for this decision is set forth in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which alleges the security 
concern under Guideline H (Drug Involvement). Applicant responded to the SOR on 
July 27, 2011 (Answer). He requested a hearing and, after coordinating with the parties, 
I scheduled the hearing for October 5, 2011.  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered four exhibits, which were marked and 
admitted into evidence, without objection, as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. 
Applicant offered four groups of exhibits, which were marked and admitted into 
evidence, without objection, as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D. Applicant and his 
wife testified at the hearing. The transcript was received on October 12, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old. He was a model student and was heavily involved with 
the Boy Scouts – attaining the rank of Eagle Scout. He excelled at computers and, in his 
spare time, started an IT company while still in high school. In 2000, he was accepted 
and attended one of the nation’s top colleges for engineering. He graduated with a 
degree in electrical and computer engineering in 2004. After graduation, he started his 
engineering career with a government contractor and was granted a security clearance. 
He has since worked for several government contractors and, in June 2010, began 
working for his current employer. As part of his current duties, he deployed overseas for 
a month in support of a critical mission for the United States. Applicant has also 
continued to pursue his educational goals and, in July 2011, attained an M.B.A. He is 
up-to-date on his security training and has never mishandled classified information.2  
 
Applicant met his future wife during his sophomore year of college. They dated, 
got engaged, and eventually married. She currently works for a consulting firm as an 
environmental scientist. They own their own home and plan on having a family in the 
near future.3 
 
 Applicant experimented with marijuana when he was a freshman in college. He 
did not like it and did not use it again while in college. He became one of the 
responsible members of his fraternity and protected younger members of the fraternity 
who did not want to drink underage or engage in other sordid activities. During their 
senior year in college, Applicant’s wife recalls seeing Applicant decline a “joint” offered 
to him by another member of the fraternity.4 
 
 Applicant used marijuana in 2005 and 2008 with his family. In 2005, he was on a 
trip to the beach with his brother, sister, and some family friends. A member of the 
group produced a marijuana cigarette and, when it was passed, Applicant used it. In 
2008, while visiting his father’s house for Christmas, Applicant again used marijuana. 
Over the course of dinner, the subject of Applicant’s wife never having used marijuana 
or having gotten “high” while in college came up in casual conversation. Applicant and 
his family drank quite a substantial amount of alcohol with dinner and, at some point, his 
father produced one or two marijuana cigarettes. Applicant was shocked, as he had no 
2 Tr. at 43-45, 59-61, 65-66; GE 1; GE 2; AE A.1 – A.3; AE B.1, B.6, and B.7; AE C.1. 
 
3 Tr. at 21-24, 38-41, 57-58; GE 2; AE C.3; AE D.3. 
 
4 Tr. at 45-46; AE C.7; AE D.3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
idea prior to this that his father used marijuana. The entire dinner group then headed 
outside, so that Applicant’s wife could experience the effects of marijuana. Applicant 
smoked from the marijuana cigarette that was passed around from his father to the rest 
of the family. Applicant does not believe that his employer at the time had a policy 
prohibiting employees from using marijuana or other illegal drugs. He has not used 
marijuana again since December 2008.5 
 
Applicant self-reported his marijuana use when applying for a position with his 
current employer. His current employer has an explicit policy prohibiting employees 
from using illegal drugs.6 Applicant disclosed his drug use on his security clearance 
application and during a background interview with a government agent.7 He fully 
answered all questions posed to him by DOHA about his drug involvement.8  
 
At hearing, Applicant testified that, even though only he and his family were 
aware of his limited marijuana use, he decided to reveal this adverse information 
because he wanted to “do the right thing.” He went on to say that: “I’m not going to try to 
hide anything . . . I have always tried to be as honest as I can.”9 Applicant’s supervisor, 
who has held a security clearance for over 20 years, is aware of Applicant’s past drug 
use and writes:  
 
In the time I’ve worked with (Applicant), he has displayed nothing but 
integrity, honesty and determination to do what is right. . . While working 
and on travel with him, I have never seen him drink in excess or do 
anything that would lead me to question his choices.10 
 
 Applicant fully understands that by using marijuana he violated the trust placed in 
him by the Government when he was granted a security clearance in 2005. He 
promises not to use illegal drugs in the future. He has discussed this matter fully with his 
family and is firmly convinced that they will not place him in this type of situation again. 
His father and brother wrote letters corroborating these conversations, and they are now 
fully aware of the serious implications for Applicant regarding any illegal drug 
involvement. Applicant and his wife credibly testified that they will not allow Applicant’s 
family, nor anyone else for that matter, to pressure them into using illegal drugs in the 
future. Applicant’s current friends and associates do not use illegal drugs. He 
emotionally testified how this process has humbled and humiliated him. He hopes to 
regain the Government’s trust and has been honest and forthright throughout the 
5 Tr. at 46-54, 60-63, 78-79; GE 2 at 52-53; GE 3; GE 4. See also, Tr. at 25-30; AE D.1 – D.3. 
 
6 AE B.2. See also, Tr. at 53-54, 69-70. 
 
7 GE 2 and 3. See also, GE 1.  
 
8 GE 3.  
 
9 Tr. at 76-78. 
 
10 AE C.2. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
process as a first step in regaining that trust.11 With his Answer, Applicant submitted a 
statement of intent “to never again abuse any illegal substance and accept an automatic 
revocation of my clearance for any violation of this statement of intent.”12  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  
 
 
 
11 Tr. at 32-33, 55-58, 72; AE D.1 – D.3. 
 
12 Answer at 1. See also, Tr. at 69-71. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern regarding illegal drug involvement is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant’s marijuana use while possessing a security clearance raises this 
concern and establishes the following two disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;13 and  
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 AG ¶ 26 sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the Guideline H 
concern. The following mitigating conditions warrant discussion: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use in 2005 and 2008 occurred under unusual 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur. Both uses occurred during family gatherings 
where Applicant had no warning or expectation that his family would engage in illegal 
drug use. Applicant’s own father was the main instigator behind Applicant’s last use of 
marijuana almost three years ago. This is not the case where Applicant simply was in a 
group of peers and decided to freely use marijuana. On the contrary, after 
experimenting with marijuana during his freshman year, Applicant not only turned down 
marijuana, but was a responsible, stable force in his fraternity. He only used marijuana 
again due to the unique peer pressure exerted by his family. Applicant’s employer is 
fully aware of his past drug use and continues to support his application for a security 
clearance. Applicant’s voluntary disclosure of his past drug use – after knowing of the 
13 Pursuant to AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug . . .” 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
potential adverse consequences – speaks volumes as to his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) applies.  
 
 Applicant also demonstrated that he will not use marijuana or any other illegal 
substance in the future. He fully understands that he violated the Government’s trust by 
using marijuana while possessing a clearance and promises not to engage in such 
conduct in the future. He recognizes that any future drug use, no matter how minor, will 
result in automatic revocation of his clearance. I recognize that, under these 
circumstances, an applicant’s promise not to engage in future drug use is to be treated 
with great caution.14 However, I had an opportunity to observe Applicant as he was 
questioned by counsel and I questioned him myself. I found him credible, 
straightforward, and resolute in his promise not to use marijuana or other illegal drugs in 
the future. Further, I also found his wife credible and together they have made a 
commitment that illegal drugs will not be a part of their future. Although Applicant still 
associates with his family, three years have passed since his last use and he is resolute 
in his insistence that he will never use marijuana again. Taking all these matters into 
account, Applicant met his burden and established AG ¶ 26(b). Applicant’s past drug 
involvement no longer raises a security concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).15 I incorporate my Guideline H analysis herein and 
highlight some additional whole person factors. Applicant has been a hard worker and 
role model his entire life from boy scouts to college to his current job. In college, he 
served as a responsible, stable factor in his fraternity. He has continued this responsible 
attitude and behavior into adulthood. He only faltered when subjected to the unique 
peer pressure exerted by his family. When faced with the dilemma of revealing his 
limited drug use and facing potential adverse consequences, Applicant did the right 
thing. Applicant’s honesty demonstrates rehabilitation on his part and the lack of any 
potential for coercion from his limited marijuana use. These whole-person factors, in 
conjunction with the favorable matters noted above, fully mitigate the drug involvement 
concern. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 10-06480 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 19, 2011).  
 
15 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:        For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
