1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-01271
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A, Administrative Judge:
On May 26, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. DOHA assigned
the case to me on July 25, 2011. A notice of hearing was issued on August 12, 2011,
and the case was heard on September 13, 2011. Department Counsel offered four
exhibits (GE) 1-4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own
behalf and presented one witness. He submitted three exhibits (AE) A-C at the hearing,
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript on
September 20, 2011. Based on a review of the pleadings, submissions, and exhibits, I
find Applicant has not met his burden of proof on mitigation regarding the security
concerns raised. Security clearance is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the delinquent debts in the SOR
with the exception of two accounts. Applicant is 46 years old. He is divorced and has
one daughter who is 15 years of age. He received his associates degree in 1986. He
expects to complete his undergraduate work soon.  He has worked in the information
technology field for almost 20 years. He believes he held a security clearance in 1990
but has not held one recently. (Tr. 90) Applicant has been employed with his current
employer as a senior level computer support analyst since July 2010. (AE A)
Applicant married in 1996, but he and his souse separated in 2001. The divorce
was final in 2005. As a result of the divorce, Applicant pays monthly child support in the
amount of $500. Applicant acknowledged that the many delinquent debts he incurred
arose from the marriage. A Chapter 13 bankruptcy was filed in February 2003 but was
dismissed in June 2003. A second Chapter 13 bankruptcy was filed in September 2003,
but the bankruptcy was dismissed in October 2008 for failure to make payments.
Applicant paid the monthly $550 for five years but stopped in 2008. He was
unemployed for about one month due to a reduction in staff in 2008. However, he has
been employed full time since that time.    
The SOR lists 30 delinquent accounts totaling approximately $84,000. The credit
reports in the record confirm the debts. (GE 2) Applicant acknowledges that he also has
approximately $45,000 in deferred student debt. (Tr. 35) Applicant satisfied several
judgments, and his credit report reflects his assertions. 
In March 2011, Applicant obtained the services of a credit restoration company.
They helped him to dispute some debts. He has paid $89 a month for the past six
months.  Since August 2011, he has worked with a debt consolidation program who has
assigned him a lawyer. Applicant is paying $174 a month so that they may settle his
debts. (AE B) The projected time frame is five years. (Tr. 65) However, Applicant could
not explain how the monthly payment is applied to his debts. He believes the smaller
debts are being addressed first. (Tr. 53)
Applicant’s net monthly income is approximately $2,918. He pays child support in
the amount of $500 a month. He has a car payment for a new car in the amount of
$550. He has little in savings or checking. Applicant has not received financial
counseling. He is amassing new debts. 
At the hearing, Applicant noted that he is in the process of resolving his
delinquent debts. He works hard and has tried to improve his opportunities by
continuing his college courses. He continues to take courses at work to receive
certifications in different areas. His marriage created many debts. He took responsibility
at the time of the divorce. He is supporting his daughter.
 
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
3
Applicant has received awards and recognition for professional work. He has
certifications. His facility security officer testified that he hired Applicant and that the
customers are pleased with Applicant’s work. He knew that Applicant’s finances were
the issue at the hearing, but he was not familiar with any specific facts. (Tr. 94)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant has acknowledged delinquent debts. His credit report confirms them.
He filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2003 but was unable to maintain the payments in
2008. The bankruptcy was dismissed. Applicant admitted that he has approximately
$80,000 in delinquent debt. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying
Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions
raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against her and mitigate security
concerns.  
Applicant had financial difficulties due to separation and divorce. He
acknowledges his debts. He was unemployed in 2008 for about one month. He has
been gainfully employed since then but has been unable to resolve his debts. He
stopped payments on his bankruptcy in 2008. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Mitigating Condition (FCMC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
5
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)
does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) is
potentially applicable. As noted, Applicant was unemployed in 2008 for one month. He
also suffered separation and divorce. He admitted that he incurred credit card debts
prior to the divorce. He attempted to resolve his delinquent debts through bankruptcy
but after a few years, he could not maintain the payments. He recently obtained the
services of a consolidation company. None of the delinquent accounts have been paid.
He recently purchased a new car and has a $550 monthly car payment. He has not
acted  reasonably under the circumstances. This mitigating condition does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant receives partial credit since he
did attempt bankruptcy. However, he has not had counseling and is not sure how his
money is being applied to his accounts. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or
is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control) does not apply. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 46 years old. Applicant has worked in the IT field for almost 20 years. He
6
has studied and is soon to receive his undergraduate degree. He was divorced in 2005.
He is supporting his daughter. He seems sincere and forthright. 
Although he had financial difficulties due in great part to the separation and
divorce, Applicant still has approximately $80,000 in delinquent debts. He has student
loans in the amount of $45,000 which are in deferment. He recently obtained the
services of a consolidation firm but there is no record of settlements for the delinquent
accounts. Applicant was vague as to the exact process and procedure for the
settlement plans. 
Applicant has not submitted sufficient information to mitigate the security
concerns raised in his case. He has not received financial counseling. When his
bankruptcy was dismissed in 2008, he was not active in trying to resolve his debts. He
is on the right track. However, he has not produced evidence to clearly show that his
debts are being reduced. Applicant has not  mitigated the security concerns under the
financial considerations guideline.  Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.ff: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
