                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01526 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of Percocet abuse and was diagnosed with opiate 
dependence. She did not present reliable evidence to show that she has overcome her 
opiate dependence, or that she is under medical treatment and her drug problem is 
under control. Moreover, she made numerous deliberate false statements through the 
security clearance process. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 29, 2008. 
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
On May 11, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR) 
indicating security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E 
(Personal Conduct) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2 On June 3, 2011, Applicant 
responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on July 5, 2011, to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted or denied. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 8, 2011, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on August 11, 2011. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, 
and she presented one exhibit (AE) 1, post-hearing, which was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 19, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of the evidence 
of record, and having observed Applicant’s demeanor and considered her testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a Government contractor. She graduated 
from high school in 1983, and completed some courses at a community college, but did 
not receive a degree. She has been married three times. She married her current 
husband in 2002. She has three sons, born from her two prior marriages, ages 25, 21, 
and 16. 
 
Applicant is a configuration management specialist. She has been working in the 
same contract, but for different Government contractors, during the last 14 years. She 
has held a security clearance at the secret level during that same period. There is no 
evidence to show that she has ever compromised or caused others to compromise 
classified information. Applicant is considered to be a dependable and highly capable 
employee. Her integrity and honesty have never been called into question. Her eight-
year supervisor trusts her implicitly. In January 2010, she was presented a letter of 
appreciation in recognition of her outstanding performance. She is dedicated to her job 
and to the Navy organization her company supports. 
 
Applicant started using Percocet, an opiate, in 1997. She was legally prescribed 
Percocet in 1997 and 2001, after visits to hospital emergency rooms because she was 
suffering from pain resulting from ruptured ovarian cysts. Around 2003-2004, Applicant 
started to take Percocet, either prescribed to her mother-in-law, or prescribed to 
Applicant by her family doctor (Dr. H) to control the pain she was suffering as a result of 
numerous medical problems (endometriosis, menorrhagia, fibroids, ovarian cysts, 
degenerative bone disease, sciatic nerve problems, and Morton’s neuroma). Dr. H 
placed Applicant in a pain management plan and, through the years, continued to 
prescribe increasing doses of Percocet.  
 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AG, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
In October 2007, Applicant realized she was addicted to the Percocet. She was 
taking more medication than that prescribed, and would run out of Percocet. She would 
then borrow Percocet from her mother-in-law or friends. She was also experiencing 
withdrawal symptoms. Her aunt, an oncology nurse, recommended to Applicant that she 
seek treatment for her addiction. (GE 2) In October 2007, Applicant sought medical 
treatment with Dr. S, a physician certified by the American Board of Addiction Medicine. 
During her initial visit with Dr. S, Applicant stated she was taking 10 Percocet pills a 
day, instead of the two pills a day prescribed by her physician. She had taken Percocet 
the same day she visited Dr. S. (GE 6) 
 
Applicant was under Dr. S’s medical care from October 2007 until September 
2010. During this period, she was prescribed Suboxone (a narcotic medication used to 
treat opiate addition) and placed on a detoxification program. According to her medical 
records, Applicant relapsed and returned to using pain medication (opiates) in 
November 2007 and January 2008. She also used more Suboxone than prescribed, 
and ran out of her medication in January 2008, March 2008, and April 2009. Applicant 
“borrowed” medications from friends when she ran out of her medication. 
 
At the suggestion of a coworker, in April 2009, Applicant disclosed to her 
employer’s facility security officer (FSO) her Percocet dependency and abuse problem. 
She told her FSO that in January 2009, she enrolled in a withdrawal and dependency 
recovery program with Dr. S. This is contrary to Applicant’s medical records, which 
indicate she started her treatment with Dr. S in October 2007. Notwithstanding, on April 
23, 2009, Dr. S sent a letter to Applicant affirming that for the past three months she 
had been under his medical care for opiate dependence treatment, and that she was 
responding well to the treatment. (GE 4) 
 
Applicant submitted her SCA in July 2008. Section 24 of the SCA asked 
Applicant to disclose whether in the last seven years she had illegally used any 
controlled substance or prescription drugs. Applicant failed to disclose that she had 
been using her mother-in-law’s Percocet and borrowing Percocet from friends, and that 
she was taking more Percocet than was prescribed to her. She believed she was taking 
Percocet legally because she had a prescription for it. At her hearing, Applicant 
disputed Dr. S’s medical records. She claimed Dr. S was confusing her with another 
patient, and that she never told him she had relapsed, that she was abusing her 
prescription, or that she was borrowing Percocet from other people. Around June 2009, 
Applicant asked Dr. S to place her on a detoxification program, and requested him to 
provide her with a letter to that effect. 
 
In July 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a set of interrogatories asking questions 
about her drug dependence. (GE 3) In her August 2010 answers, Applicant admitted 
that she was participating on a drug rehabilitation program. However, she stated that 
she started her counseling with Dr. S in 2009-2010. This is contrary to her medical 
records which indicate Applicant started her opiate dependency and abuse treatment in 
October 2007. Moreover, in the July 2009 interrogatories, Applicant was asked to 
explain why she failed to disclose her prescription dependence and abuse on her July 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
2008 SCA. Applicant stated: it “occurred after signing paperwork.” (GE 3) According to 
her medical records, Applicant’s opiate abuse started before October 2007. 
 
In September 2010, DOHA issued Applicant another set of drug-related 
interrogatories. Question 1 asked Applicant whether she had ever used any narcotics, 
opiates (to include Percocet or Oxycontin) . . . except prescribed to you by a licensed 
physician? Applicant answered “No,” and she failed to disclose that she had obtained 
Percocet from persons other than her physician. In response to other questions, she 
admitted her opiate (Percocet) dependence diagnosis, and stated her prognosis was a 
“success.” (GE 2) According to Dr. S’s October 8, 2010 letter to DOHA, Applicant’s 
detoxification efforts failed. In his opinion, Applicant has a chronic pain condition that 
probably will not be resolved, and she will need pain medication indefinitely, including 
opiates. (GE 7)  
 
In her answers to the interrogatories, Applicant also claimed that she became 
Percocet dependent because of the unscrupulous and unethical treatment she received 
from her family doctor (Dr. H). She presented documentary evidence showing that Dr. H 
was reprimanded and suspended from his practice for overprescribing narcotics to his 
patients. However, she presented no documentary evidence to show that she was Dr. 
H’s patient.  
 
Because of the interrogatories, Applicant became concerned about the possible 
adverse effect her Percocet abuse and her current treatment with Suboxone would have 
on her ability to hold a security clearance.3 In her September 23, 2010 response to 
interrogatories, Applicant stated that although the Suboxone helped her condition, “a 
few times over the last few years” she had stopped taking Soboxone on her own 
accord. She stopped visiting Dr. S for treatment and stopped taking Suboxone on 
September 17, 2010. 
 
In January 2008, Dr. S recommended to Applicant that she participate in 
psychological counseling because of her physiologic dependence and her psychological 
tendency to use opiates. As of her hearing date, Applicant had not participated in 
psychological counseling. Moreover, Applicant did not present documentary evidence to 
show that she successfully completed a drug rehabilitation treatment program after she 
was diagnosed with Percocet dependence.  
 
In August 22, 2011, Applicant was evaluated by a physician. He stated: 
[“Applicant] was evaluated today. There is no evidence of any psychiatric or substance 
use disorder. She is not at acute risk of harm to self or others. No treatment is indicated 
at this time.”4 (AE 1)  
 
3 In her response to the September 2010 interrogatories, Applicant asked whether she needed to 
stop her Suboxone treatment to be eligible for a continued security clearance. She then indicated she 
stopped her Suboxone treatment on her own.  
4 Because of the scant information provided about the physician’s qualifications, the tests he 
performed, and the factual information he considered to render his opinion, I consider his opinion of 
 
5 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AG are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied 
in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
 
limited probative value. Under the circumstances, his statement cannot be considered as a “diagnosis 
and favorable prognosis by a qualified medical professional” as required by the AG. 
 
6 
 
 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant started taking Percocet legally in 1997. In 2003-2004, Applicant 
developed dependence to Percocet and commenced abusing her medication by taking 
more than her prescribed dose. She also took Percocet prescribed to other persons.  
 
From October 2007 until September 2010, she participated in a drug withdrawal 
and dependency recovery program provided by a physician certified by the American 
Board of Addiction Medicine. Her detoxification efforts failed. Applicant suffers from a 
chronic pain condition that may require her to continue with pain medication, including 
opiates, indefinitely. The physician recommended that Applicant continue treatment with 
a pain medication specialist. He also recommended that she receive psychological 
counseling.  
 
In September 2010, Applicant discontinued her opiate dependency treatment. At 
her hearing, she did not present documentary evidence to show that she successfully 
completed a drug rehabilitation treatment program after she was diagnosed with 
Percocet dependence. She is not under treatment by a pain medication specialist. 
Furthermore, she did not present a reliable diagnosis and a favorable prognosis 
prepared by a qualified medical professional establishing that she has overcome her 
opiate dependence, or that she is currently undergoing treatment. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Five drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;5  
 
(c) illegal drug possession;  
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence;  
 
(e) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed 
by a duly qualified medical professional; and  
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
 
5  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
8 
 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 None of the Guideline H mitigating conditions fully apply. I consider Applicant’s 
prolonged abuse of Percocet recent and frequent. She was prescribed Percocet 
because of her chronic pain problems. She sought medical assistance and her 
detoxification efforts failed. She suffers from a chronic pain condition that may require 
her to continue with pain medication, including opiates, indefinitely.  
 
Notwithstanding, she is not currently under a pain medication specialist care, she 
terminated her drug rehabilitation treatment in September 2010, and she has not 
participated in psychological counseling. She did not present documentary evidence to 
show that she has successfully completed a drug rehabilitation treatment program. 
Furthermore, she did not present a reliable, favorable prognosis by a qualified medical 
professional indicating she has overcome her opiate dependence problem, or that she is 
under medical treatment and her drug problem is under control. I specifically considered 
AG ¶ 26(c), but I am not convinced that her opiate dependence and abuse has ended. 
Applicant’s favorable evidence is not sufficient to mitigate the Guideline H security 
concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  Applicant deliberately falsified her 2008 SCA when she failed to disclose that she 
was illegally using her prescribed medication (Percocet) by taking more than the 
prescribed dose, and by obtaining Percocet from persons other than her physician.  
 
  Applicant claimed that her failure to disclose her abuse of Percocet was an 
honest mistake because she had a legal prescription for Percocet and believed her use 
of Percocet was legal. She also disputed her physician’s records. Applicant claimed she 
never told her physician that she relapsed while in detoxification treatment, that she 
used Percocet from her mother-in-law, and that she borrowed Percocet from friends 
when she ran out of her medication. Considering the evidence as a whole, including her 
demeanor and testimony, Applicant’s claim of innocent mistake is not credible. 
Furthermore, Dr. S’s medical records, although sparse, are corroborated by the record 
evidence and Applicant’s testimony. SOR ¶ 2.a is decided against Applicant. 
 
9 
 
 
 
  In April 2009, Applicant self-disclosed to her FSO that she had a Percocet 
dependence problem. She specifically stated that since January 2009, she had been in 
a drug withdrawal and dependency recovery program. Her statement was partially false. 
Applicant’s physician’s records indicate she had been participating in the drug 
dependency rehabilitation program since October 2007. Applicant deliberately provided 
false information to her FSO. SOR ¶ 2.b is decided against Applicant. 
 
  SOR ¶ 2.c is decided for Applicant. Question 1 of the June 26, 2010 
“Interrogatories Concerning Drugs” (GE 3), literally asked: “Have you ever used any 
narcotic, depressant, stimulant, hallucinogen . . . , except prescribed by a licensed 
physician?” Apparently, the Percocet Applicant borrowed from her mother-in-law and 
her friends was prescribed to them by a licensed physician. Thus, Applicant did not 
make a false statement when she answered “No.” 
 
  SOR ¶ 2.d is decided against Applicant. Question 1 of the “Lifestyle Changes” 
section of the June 26, 2010 “Interrogatories Concerning Drugs” (GE 3), asked 
Applicant whether she had completed or was currently participating in a recognized 
alcohol and drug rehabilitation program. Applicant answered yes, and disclosed her 
treating physician. However, she deliberately provided false information when she 
stated the dates of her counseling were “2009-2010.” The evidence shows that she 
started her drug rehabilitation program in October 2007. 
 
  At her hearing, Applicant claimed she provided the wrong dates to her FSO (as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b) and in her answer to the June 2010 interrogatories, because she 
did not know until sometime in 2009 that Dr. S was a physician certified by the 
American Board of Addiction Medicine. She claimed she believed Dr. S was a pain 
medication specialist. Applicant’s claims contradict her own prior statements in which 
she said that in October 2007, she realized she was Percocet dependent, and she 
visited Dr. S for drug rehabilitation treatment following her aunt’s recommendation. 
 
  SOR ¶ 2.e is decided against Applicant. Question 1 of the September 2010 
“Interrogatory” (GE 2), asked: “Have you ever used any narcotic, opiate (to include 
Percocet or Oxycontin), depressant, stimulant, hallucinogen . . . , except prescribed to 
you by a licensed physician?” Contrary to the question in the June 2010 interrogatory 
(the SOR ¶ 2.c allegation), this question asked whether Applicant consumed drugs 
prescribed to another person. Applicant used Percocet prescribed to her mother-in-law 
and her friends when she ran out of her own medication. She deliberately failed to 
disclosed that information in her answer.  
 
  Applicant’s SCA falsification and her false statements trigger the applicability of 
the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
10 
 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal 
conduct security concerns:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
 
11 
 
 
                                           
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
  After considering the above mitigating conditions, I find none apply. Applicant 
falsified her 2008 SCA, made a false statement to her FSO, and provided false 
statements in her answers to two DOHA interrogatories. At hearing, she repeatedly 
minimized her questionable behavior, and contradicted her prior statements. Her 
falsifications are serious, recent offenses (felony level).6 Her behavior shows 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, and lack of candor.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 45 years old. She has 
held a security clearance while employed with Government contractors for 14 years. 
There is no evidence that she has ever compromised or caused others to compromise 
classified information. She is considered to be a dependable and highly capable 
employee. Her integrity and honesty have never been called into question. She is 
trusted implicitly by her supervisor. Applicant became Percocet dependent as a result of 
her chronic pain condition. 
 
Notwithstanding, she currently is not under medical treatment for her chronic pain 
condition or her drug dependency, and she has not participated in psychological 
counseling. She did not present documentary evidence to show that she successfully 
 
6 See 18 U.S.C. 1001. 
 
12 
 
 
completed a drug rehabilitation treatment program after she was diagnosed with 
Percocet dependence. Furthermore, she did not present a reliable, favorable prognosis 
by a qualified medical professional indicating she has overcome her opiate dependence 
problem, or that she is under medical treatment and her drug problem is under control. 
 
Moreover, Applicant made numerous deliberate false statements through the 
security clearance process. At hearing, she repeatedly minimized her questionable 
behavior, and contradicted her own prior statements. Her behavior shows questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, and lack of candor. 
 
On balance, I conclude that Applicant’s favorable evidence is insufficient to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from her drug involvement and personal conduct. 
Overall, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b, 2.d    
    and 2.e:      Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 2.c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
