 
1 
 
 
                                                                
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case: 11-00786   
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On August 25, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 15, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 6, 2011, Applicant filed an answer to the SOR and requested that the 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 21, 2011, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing eight 
 
2 
 
 
Items and mailed Applicant a complete copy on July 28, 2011. Applicant received the 
FORM on August 4, 2011, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. He timely submitted additional information. On September 15, 
2011, DOHA assigned the case to me. I subsequently marked Applicant’s submissions 
as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D and admitted them into the record without 
objection from Department Counsel. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i. He denied the remaining allegations. His admissions are 
incorporated into the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 37 years old and unmarried. He graduated from high school in 
June 1992. He experienced numerous periods of unemployment since 2004. He was 
unemployed from January 2004 to February 2004; September 2005 to November 2006; 
January 2007 to April 2007; December 2007 to June 2008; and October 2008 to August 
2010. In August 2010 he began an administrative assistant position for a defense 
contractor. (Item5.) Applicant accumulated debts during those periods of unemployment 
when his unemployment benefits were exhausted. (Item 4 at 4.)  
 
 In October 2010 Applicant met with a government investigator to discuss the 
delinquent financial obligations. He acknowledged his debts, but stated that he did not 
intend to make payment arrangement with the creditors until he became a permanent 
employee. (Item 6 at 3.) In June 2011, DOHA issued an SOR. In his July 2011 Answer 
to the SOR, he stated that he was now “in a position to make arrangements to pay [his] 
creditors.” Item 4 at 4. On August 19, 2011, he entered into a debt repayment plan that 
included six creditors with estimated balances totaling $11,891. His first monthly 
payment of $336 was due on August 23, 2011. (AE B, C.) The record does not contain 
proof that he made the initial payment. He has not received credit counseling. 
 
Based on September 2010 and March 2011 credit bureau reports (CBR), the 
SOR alleged 12 delinquent debts totaling $22,089, which accumulated between 2006 
and 2010. (Items 7, 8.) The status of each debt is as follows: 
 
1. (¶ 1.a) The $2,549 judgment owed to a credit card company is included in the 
repayment plan. (AE A, C; Item 6 at 2.) 
 
2. (¶ 1.b) The $2,767 judgment, filed in 2007 and owed to a credit card company 
is included in the repayment plan. (AE C.)  
 
3. (¶ 1.c) The $54 debt owed to a pizza parlor is paid. Applicant submitted a 
confirmation number for its payment. ( AE A.)  
 
4. (¶ 1.d) The $3,546 debt owed to a credit card company is included in the 
repayment plan. (AE C.)  
 
3 
 
 
5. (¶ 1.e) Applicant asserted that the $5,982 debt owed to a credit card company 
is a duplicate debt of the judgment listed in (¶ 1.b), and includes additional 
monies for late fees. (AE A, C.) He did not submit evidence to support that 
assertion. 
 
6. (¶ 1.f) The $1,495 debt owed to a credit card company is included in the 
repayment plan. (AE C.)  
 
7. (¶ 1.g) The $829 debt owed to a credit card company is included in the 
repayment plan. (AE C.)  
 
8. (¶ 1.h) The $705 debt owed to a department store is included in the 
repayment plan. (AE C.)  
 
9. (¶ 1.i.) Applicant asserted that the $3,099 debt owed to a credit card company 
is a duplicate debt of the judgment listed in (¶ 1.a), and includes additional 
monies for late fees. (AE A, C; Item 6 at 3.) He did not submit evidence to 
support that assertion. 
 
10.  (¶ 1.j) The $70 debt owed to a cell phone company was paid on March 22, 
2011. (AE D.)  
 
11.  (¶ 1.k) The $48 debt owed to a cell phone company is a duplicate of the 
above debt and is paid. (AE D.)  
 
12.  (¶ 1.l) Applicant asserted that the $945 debt owed to a collection agency for 
a credit card company is a duplicate of the debt listed in ¶ 1.g, and includes 
late fees. (AE A.) He did not provide evidence to support that assertion. 
  
To date, Applicant has paid three debts that total $172. His recently executed 
repayment plan incorporates an estimated balance of $11, 891 owed to six creditors. He 
provided no evidence that he made the initial August 2011 payment on the plan. He 
asserted during his interview and in AE A that three debts totaling $10,026 are duplicate 
accounts, but provided no evidence to confirm that statement. He has not obtained 
credit counseling. He did not submit evidence concerning the quality of his job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Based on two credit bureau reports and his statements, Applicant has been 
unable to satisfy delinquent debts that began accruing in 2006. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifications, 
the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. 
AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could mitigate financial security concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Because Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing and not isolated, there is 
insufficient evidence to support a finding that the indebtedness is unlikely to recur or 
continue. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. There is some evidence to warrant a 
limited application of AG ¶ 20(b) because the delinquent debt alleged in the SOR 
 
6 
 
 
accumulated as a result of periods of unemployment, which may have been the result of 
circumstances beyond his control. However, full application is not warranted because 
he did not provide evidence that he began to responsibly address any of his debt until 
after the SOR issued, and not while they were accruing. Applicant did not establish 
mitigation under AG & 20(c). He has not participated in credit counseling or submitted 
evidence that his financial situation is under control. AG & 20(d) has minimal 
application. He provided evidence that he paid three debts that total $172. At the end of 
August 2011, he entered into a repayment plan to resolve six debts through monthly 
payments. He did not provide proof that he made the initial payment or other evidence 
to confirm his assertions that three SOR-listed debts are duplicates. He failed to present 
sufficient evidence that he made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve his delinquent 
debts since their accrual. There is no evidence to support the application of AG & 20(e) 
or AG & 20(f). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
has worked for a defense contractor since August 2010. In October 2010 he learned of 
the Government’s concerns relating to his financial delinquencies, and specifically the 
SOR-listed debts. He indicated that he did not intend to address those debts until he 
became a permanent employee. On June 15, 2011, DOHA issued an SOR listing 
$22,089 of delinquent debts. On July 21, 2011, the Government filed the FORM, 
notifying him of the Government’s request that he be denied a security clearance and 
that he had an additional 30 days to file a response. On July 28, 2011, he received said 
document. On August 19, 2011, he executed a monthly debt repayment plan that was 
scheduled to begin on August 23, 2011. He then filed his response within the 30-day 
deadline.  
 
7 
 
 
For at least nine months, Appellant was on notice that his unpaid and 
unaddressed debts were creating security concerns and potentially affecting his 
employment. Despite that notice he waited until he received the FORM and issued a 
deadline to begin resolving the debt. While he may have had limited funds to address all 
debts since starting his position in August 2010, he could have taken some steps to 
address the debts, such as promptly paying the smaller debts, obtaining credit 
counseling or financial assistance through his company’s Employee’s Assistance 
Program, and establishing a solid budget or plan to resolve his obligations. At this time 
he has not provided a track record of responsibly managing his finances, resolving his 
delinquent debts, or exhibiting good judgment in responding to the government’s 
concerns. The record contains insufficient evidence about his character, 
trustworthiness, responsibility to mitigate these concerns, or make their continuation 
less likely. Overall, the record creates sufficient doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did 
not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:             Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.d through 1.i:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.j and 1.k:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.l:     Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
