 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
             )  ISCR Case No. 11-00394  
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Richard Morris, Esquire 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for Financial 
Considerations and Personal Conduct. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance 
is granted. 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (SF 86) on July 8, 2010. After reviewing the 
results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request. On May 
5, 2011, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which specified the 
 
 
 
2 
basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).2
 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, dated May 19, 2011, Applicant admitted the six debts 
alleged under Guideline F, and denied the four allegations under Guideline E. She also 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared 
to proceed on June 20, 2011, and I received the case on July 5, 2011. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on August 9, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 
31, 2011. 
 
During the hearing, the Government offered nine exhibits, which I admitted as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. Applicant testified, and offered ten exhibits, 
which I admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through J. DOHA received the transcript 
on September 9, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old college graduate. She married in 1998 and divorced in 
2002. She married her current husband in 2007. She has two daughters, 29 and 24 
years old, and one deceased daughter. She also has five step-children, the children of 
her current husband. Currently, one daughter, a grand-daughter, and a step-daughter 
live with Applicant and her husband. Other than four years from 1999 to 2003, Applicant 
has worked for the federal government or federal contractors since 1990. Her positions 
have been in the fields of budgeting, finance, and administration. She received her first 
security clearance in 2002, at the secret level. In 2006, she was granted a top secret 
clearance and, in 2009, she received Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) 
access. (GE 1; Tr. 30, 55-57) 
 
 In September 2009, Applicant began work for a federal contractor as a program 
analyst. Her job involved property management, and required her to locate and 
inventory property and record barcode numbers, room numbers, and names of persons 
using the equipment. Applicant stated that none of the property, or the reports she 
created, was classified or sensitive. On January 21, 2010, Applicant’s evaluation 
showed that she successfully completed her probationary period. Her supervisor noted 
                                                 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines, which supersede the guidelines 
listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in 
which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
3 
that she performed her assignment with enthusiasm and professionalism, she was well-
organized, had performed a meticulous inventory, and had “identified over 30 missing 
items.” He also stated that her work was “lauded by the Task Lead.” (GE 4; AE B) 
 
 However, starting on March 18, 2010, Applicant received several written 
warnings concerning her performance. The first concerned inaccuracies in a property 
report. Applicant reviewed and updated a property report in preparation for a client 
meeting the following day. The next day, her computer had crashed while she was at 
lunch and deleted all the updates Applicant had entered. She printed out and presented 
the report to the client, not knowing that it contained errors resulting from the crash. 
Other warnings noted that the client felt Applicant was taking too much time to complete 
the property inventory. Applicant’s task required that she inventory numerous pieces of 
equipment, determine their locations, serial numbers, and other information. It called for 
visual room-to-room inspection throughout a federal office building—a task Applicant 
described as a huge undertaking. She was promised help from another worker, but that 
person did not contribute to the project. Applicant was still required to complete the 
report timely. The client complained that Applicant also should have worked faster, as it 
was her only task. However, Applicant listed seven other tasks that she was also 
handling at the time. Another warning noted that she retained office cabinet keys at 
home when she was on sick leave. She informed her task lead that she had them, and 
told him that a duplicate set was available onsite. She also had her husband bring the 
keys to the office later during the week that she was ill. (GE 4) 
 
 On March 29, 2010, Applicant received a warning that outlined improvements 
she was expected to make, and required that she complete the property project in 30 
days. The following day, Applicant resigned her position, effective immediately, because 
the client was “unhappy with my performance.” In her memo, she stated that the client 
had treated her in a belittling and derogatory manner, and that “continuing to work for 
this client is a no win situation.” She then expressed her satisfaction in working for the 
company and appreciation of the management team’s support and concern, thanked 
the company, and wished her colleagues the best in the future. (GE 4; AE A) 
 
 The following month, Applicant applied for another position, and learned that her 
security clearance had been revoked. The Facility Security Officer (FSO) had entered a 
comment in JPAS in May 2010 stating that co-workers heard Applicant say that 
because her work was judged unsatisfactory, “they can create these documents from 
scratch.” The FSO apparently did not hear the comment herself, and does not identify 
the person who made the comment. The entry also stated that Applicant had removed 
government documents from her file and placed them in a burn bag to be destroyed. 
The FSO’s entry continues, “the inference was that she [Applicant] was destroying 
records to prevent anyone (including the govt) from being able to use the data or benefit 
from her work.” (GE 9) 
 
 When Applicant contacted the FSO to ask why her clearance had been revoked, 
the FSO stated that inspection of Applicant’s desk after she departed showed missing 
 
 
4 
sensitive backup documents that concerned classified systems related to Applicant's 
task, which were later discovered in the burn bag. Applicant claims that the FSO’s 
statement shows she is unfamiliar with Applicant's task, as neither the property 
Applicant inventoried, nor the related documents she produced, were classified or 
sensitive. The FSO did not work at the site where Applicant worked. (GE 4) 
 
 Applicant's husband testified, and described his wife’s termination as “being set 
up to fail.” She was assigned a task and told that another person would assist her to 
complete it. Although the other person did not help her, Applicant was punished for not 
completing the task. He described Applicant as the most honest person he has ever 
known. Applicant's step-daughter, a former Army service member, testified that she  
now lives with her father and Applicant. She has know her for 16 years, and Applicant 
has been a mother-figure for her. She trusts Applicant with the care of her daughter. 
Applicant has a strong moral character, and always gives an honest opinion “even if it 
hurts.” (Tr. 24-35, 36-41) 
 
 The senior program analyst at the company where Applicant was terminated also 
testified on her behalf. He held a top secret security clearance since 2002, and held it 
while he supervised Applicant at the company from September 2009 to January 2010. 
He testified that they worked together in a 20-foot by 30-foot room, with three other 
people. She was assigned to inventory the company’s property, including tracking the 
location and status of software and equipment. She tracked the property online and 
prepared unclassified tracking sheets using programs such as Excel. She “was not 
responsible to maintain any top secret information documents nor classified systems 
files” and her function had “no access to any top secret information whatsoever.” Other 
than the five people who worked in the office, three government managers had access 
to the room, which they could enter with an access code. The room contained one burn 
bag. Because they did not handle classified material, everyone used the burn bag to 
dispose of ordinary unclassified material. He said that anyone who worked in or entered 
the room could have placed material in the burn bag. He opined that Applicant is of the 
strongest moral fiber, is completely honest and straightforward, and demonstrates the 
highest integrity. He also submitted a notarized letter attesting to the above information. 
(AE C; Tr. 41-54) 
 
 Applicant's co-worker, who worked with her in the agency where she was 
terminated, submitted a notarized letter. He stated that Applicant took nothing with her 
the day she resigned, leaving even her personal items on her desk. He stated that she 
“worked very hard on her assignment as property custodian.” He attested that he did not 
see “her throw any files into a burn bag on that day.” (AE C) 
 
 Another federal employee and co-worker provided a notarized statement averring 
that she worked in the same unit as Applicant at the time of Applicant's termination. She 
never witnessed her “discard any classified documents or items of record nor did I ever 
witness her do anything that was in violation of her security clearance.” Applicant's co-
worker also stated, “to my knowledge, [Applicant] provided all documents or records 
 
 
5 
regarding the Unit’s property and location of property to my supervisor electronically and 
in hard copy form (when my supervisor’s signature was required); and after signage, 
she would file the hard copy forms.” (AE C) 
 
Applicant's credit bureau reports from 2006 to 2011 show that Applicant has had 
a solid financial history with few delinquent accounts. Most accounts are listed as “Pays 
as Agreed.” However, since she resigned in March 2010, the six accounts listed in the 
SOR have become delinquent. Applicant sought help in resolving her delinquencies. In 
2011, she and her husband attended financial counseling that taught them how to 
handle their bills, develop a budget, and minimize expenses. (GE 5-8; Tr. 62-63) 
 
The SOR lists six debts, totaling $5,926. The first four SOR debts (allegations 1.a 
through 1.d) amount to approximately $3,000. In each case, Applicant has closed the 
account in order to stop the accrual of interest. She also contacted the creditor and 
established payment plans for each account, and provided documentation showing her 
payments of $20 to $25 per month for each creditor. As to allegation 1.f, Applicant 
explained in her Answer to the SOR that she had a dispute with the creditor regarding 
the debt, which related to a returned leased vehicle. When she returned the vehicle, the 
balance was zero, and the dealer informed her that adverse information would not 
appear on her credit report. Applicant provided documentation showing that she has 
paid the $397 debt in full. (AE F, G, I, J; Tr. 57-65)  
 
The largest SOR debt (allegation 1.e) represents a past-due mortgage payment 
of $2,495. Applicant and her husband obtained a Special Forbearance Agreement in 
July 2009, under which their interest rate and monthly payment were reduced. She 
provided the lender’s record of her payment history with her Answer to the SOR. She 
provided documentation from the lender dated March 2011 which informed her that she 
had completed the payments under the agreement, and that she was current on her 
home loan. Applicant also applied in July 2011 for a loan modification and her request is 
under review. (AE F, G, I; Tr. 57-65) 
 
 The Government alleges that Applicant failed to disclose her delinquent debts 
when she completed three security clearance applications in 2006, 2007, and 2010. 
However, her credit reports for 2006, 2007, and 2010 show that none of the six debts 
were delinquent in 2006 or 2007 (allegations 2.b and 2.c). The 2010 credit report shows 
that the status of four of the SOR debts at that time was “Pays as Agreed.” (GE 1-3 and 
5-8; Tr. 65-66) 
 
 Allegation 1.e is Applicant's mortgage loan. The July 2010 credit report shows 
that she had one payment 120 days late at the time she completed her July 2010 
application. Applicant should have answered “Yes” to the question that asked if she was 
currently 90 days past due. But she correctly answered “No” to the question that asked 
if she was 180 days past due. Applicant testified that at the time she completed all of 
her applications, she answered honestly, believing that she was not significantly past 
due on any debt. Applicant was asked to update her security application in 2009. In her 
 
 
6 
Answer, she provided the financial portion of the application, which was signed and 
dated on April 22, 2009.3
 
 In that application, Applicant answered “Yes” to question 
26(m) that asked if she had been 180 days delinquent on any debt within the previous 
180 days. She listed her mortgage loan, indicated the loan value of $360,000, and 
explained that it was “currently under modification.” (GE 1-3, 5-8; Tr. 65-66) 
 Applicant provided ten character reference letters, with several from three 
different federal agencies where Applicant has worked. A federal employee and co-
worker who knew her at the federal agency where she was terminated describes her as 
“having a meticulous work ethic.” She noted that Applicant “single-handedly managed 
all property for the entire office and worked congruently and extremely well with division 
personnel…” She was thorough and had great rapport with agency personnel on all 
levels. Another federal employee and co-worker found her to work well both as a team 
member and as a team leader. Another describes her as displaying a high level of 
maturity, and taking painstaking efforts to meet critical timelines and trouble-shoot 
difficult problems. Applicant participates in her church, and volunteers in her community. 
She serves on the Board of Elections and working at voting sites during state and 
national elections. She was recognized for outstanding volunteer service by a non-profit 
organization in 2006, and by several local schools between 1988 and 2000. (AE C, D, 
E) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4
 
 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
guidelines. 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
 
 
                                                 
3 Among several documents submitted with her Answer, Applicant provided this partial security 
clearance application. It was included in a document with a cover sheet titled, “E-QIP file in 2009. Copy 
E-QIP Section 26—Financial Record.” She provided the same cover sheet in Exhibit H at the hearing, 
but mistakenly failed to attach Section 26 of the security clearance application that she had attached to it 
in her Answer packet. (See Answer; AE H) 
4 Directive §6.3. 
 
 
7 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant 
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Therefore, the government has a compelling interest in ensuring each 
applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who 
will protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the 
national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an 
applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.7
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, 
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
over-extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial 
crimes including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by 
known sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate 
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
 Applicant accrued six delinquent debts in the year and a half since she left her 
employment with a defense contractor. The debts total $5,926. The record supports 
application of disqualifying condition AG ¶19 (a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts.  
 
 
                                                 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8 
 The Financial Considerations guideline also contains factors that can mitigate 
security concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20, especially 
the following:  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and, 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Six of Applicant's accounts became delinquent in the past year and a half. Her 
inability to pay these debts timely stemmed chiefly from her resignation from her 
position when her performance was questioned. Applicant's decision to resign was her 
own, and the ensuing delinquencies cannot be ascribed to conditions beyond her 
control.  
 
 However, Applicant has been making efforts to resolve her financial situation. 
She and her husband have attended financial counseling that taught them about 
minimizing expenses, handling debts, and budgeting. She has handled the situation in 
a responsible fashion: contacting each creditor, closing past-due accounts to stop 
interest accrual, and making payments on the payment plans she established for four 
debts. She has paid a fifth debt in full. The last debt is her largest – approximately 
$2,500 for a past-due payment on her mortgage loan. She has been working with her 
mortgage lender. She and her husband were able to obtain a forbearance 
arrangement, and she provided the lender’s record of her payments since 2009. Her 
2011 credit report shows that she is now current on the loan. Applicant has made 
consistent good-faith efforts to meet her financial obligations, and her debts are under 
control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance 
process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance 
process. 
 
The Guideline E allegations implicate the following disqualifying condition under 
AG ¶ 16: 
 
 
 
9 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. 
 
The Government alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose her true 
financial status when she completed security clearance applications in 2006, 2007, and 
2010. Falsification of a security clearance application implicates AG ¶ 16(a); however, 
application of this disqualifying condition requires a deliberate intent to conceal. Here, 
Applicant did not intentionally hide relevant information from the Government.  
 
Applicant’s credibly testimony that she believed she was answering the financial 
questions honestly is supported by the evidence. In 2006 and 2007, she was not past 
due on the debts listed in the SOR, and her “No” answers were accurate. In 2010, she 
believed that none of her debts were 180 days or more past due, and again, she was 
correct. At that time, she was 120 days past due on one mortgage payment, and 
should have answered “Yes” to one question: whether she was 90 days past due on 
any debt. I find that this one error stemmed from mistake rather than intentional 
falsification. Moreover, when Applicant completed an additional application in 2009, 
she reported that she was 180 days past due on the mortgage payment. Her disclosure 
in 2009 shows that when she knew a debt was delinquent, she reported it. Moreover, 
her disclosure of her job termination on her 2010 security clearance application 
demonstrates that she honestly provided negative information, as well as a highly 
detailed account of the facts. I conclude that Applicant did not intentionally falsify her 
security clearance applications, and AG ¶ 16 (a) does not apply. 
 
 AG ¶16 (d) is implicated by Applicant’s alleged unauthorized disposal of 
government documents. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are relevant: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
 
 
10 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 While working for a defense contractor at a federal agency in 2010, Applicant 
worked on several projects including one involving inventory of company property. The 
property items, and the reports that she created to inventory them, were not classified 
or sensitive. It is alleged that she deliberately and improperly placed her work in a burn 
bag to be destroyed; if true, that would not be minor misconduct. However, given the 
scant evidence of Applicant's wrongdoing, and Applicant's long history of high-level 
performance for the federal government, this situation was unique, unlikely to recur, 
and does not cast doubt on her current trustworthiness or good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) 
applies. 
 
 The allegation that Applicant improperly placed government documents in a 
burn bag to be destroyed is based on a JPAS entry by Applicant's FSO. Her entry 
stems from a comment allegedly made by Applicant, which was overheard by an 
unknown party. That person, or another unknown party, passed it on to the FSO, who 
worked at another location and apparently did not hear the comment personally. The 
FSO admits in her entry that she made an inference, based on the overheard 
comment, that Applicant wished to prevent future use of her work product. No evidence 
was offered as to the identity of the co-worker(s). No corroborating statements from 
them were presented. The FSO did not testify or submit a statement that would explain 
whether she had any other basis for her entry. The FSO also stated that government 
documents related to Applicant's project were found in the burn bag. Seven other 
employees had access to the same burn bag. No evidence was provided to show that 
Applicant, rather than any of the other employees, placed the documents in it. 
However, Applicant provided evidence from a co-worker who was present on that day. 
In his notarized statement, he states that he did not see Applicant place any material in 
the burn bag on the day she left. The information on which allegation 2.a is based is 
unsubstantiated and AG ¶17 (f) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
 
 
11 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant has made a good-faith effort to manage her finances, and did not 
intentionally misrepresent her financial situation. Based on the credible testimony of 
Applicant and her witnesses, and the lack of substantiated evidence showing 
otherwise, I conclude that she did not improperly handle government documents. It is 
unlikely that Applicant would jeopardize her professional career and her clearance 
because of one allegation of poor performance. Applicant's numerous letters attesting 
to two decades of highly competent work performance at numerous federal agencies, 
her long record of recognized volunteer work in the community, and her strong 
character and integrity, all support a finding that she is reliable and trustworthy.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E   FOR APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
