 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00779 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
October 19, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations or Personal Conduct 
security concerns caused by his long history of inaction on his delinquent tax debts. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 5, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F, Financial Considerations, and E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 23, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 5, 2011. DOHA issued a 
 
2 
 
notice of hearing on July 14, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
August 10, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were 
admitted without objection, and testified on his own behalf. The record was held open 
for Applicant to submit additional information. On August 15, 2011, Applicant submitted 
an email with five scanned attachments totaling 19 pages, marked collectively as AE D, 
which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on August 16, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2004. He is married and has two children, ages 8 and 13. 
(GE 1; Tr. 29-31, 42.) 
 
 Applicant was the owner and president of three businesses. His managers “ . . . 
kept hiring employees. So the business had more employees than it could afford to 
have, which accumulated the payroll tax.” As a result, Applicant incurred tax debts and 
credit card debts trying to keep his businesses operational. However, by 2002 Applicant 
closed each of his businesses. He filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 1998. Applicant 
estimates his liabilities listed in his Chapter 13 totaled $200,000 and included delinquent 
payroll tax debt owed to both the Federal government and to his state. Applicant made 
monthly payments ranging between $2,000 to $2,500 on his Chapter 13 for 
approximately two years. In May 2003 Applicant converted the Chapter 13 into a 
Chapter 7, when he could no longer afford his payments to the trustee because he was 
still self-employed and he was not earning enough income to pay his bankruptcy 
obligation and support his family. His Chapter 7 bankruptcy was discharged in August 
2003 (SOR allegation 1.a). His delinquent tax debts were not discharged through the 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (GE 2; GE 3; Tr. 21-22, 31-35.) 
 
 Applicant was indebted to his state for both delinquent sales tax payments and 
for payroll tax obligations. In 2002 several liens were filed against him for these 
delinquent state taxes from the period October 1, 1997 through March 31, 2002 (SOR 
allegations 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e.). Applicant testified that in 2003 or 2004 he satisfied 
his state sales tax debt. He indicated that he hired several attorneys to help him 
negotiate his tax debt, but they failed to secure an offer in compromise with the state. 
The last time he worked with an attorney to try to settle any of his delinquent tax debts 
was in 2007. In 2010, Applicant made the state an offer to settle this debt, but it was 
declined. As of May 11, 2011, Applicant owed the state $14,292.66 in delinquent taxes. 
Applicant reached an installment agreement with the state in May 2011. On May 16, 
2011, he made his first payment of $1,207.83. He presented copies of his bank 
statement showing monthly payments of $1,207.83 in May through July 2011, and 
additional payments of $800 in June 2011 and $598.73 in August 2011. His July 2011 
statement reflects a balance of $11,148 still due. Applicant plans to fully satisfy this debt 
in 2012. (GEs 2-6; AEs A-D; Tr. 23-24, 27-28, 35-36, 42.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is also indebted to the IRS for payroll taxes. A Federal tax lien was filed 
by the IRS in August 2002 for $13,570 (SOR allegation 1.f). A recent credit report 
reflects that the lien was refiled in 2005 for the same amount. Applicant testified that his 
Federal tax debts were incurred from 1996 to 2001 by his businesses and that as 
president of the businesses he accepted personal liability for this debt. He indicated that 
the attorneys he hired to help with his tax debts tried to negotiate with the IRS, but no 
offer in compromise was established. In 2010 through 2011 Applicant attempted to learn 
how to submit an offer in compromise to the IRS by himself without the help of an 
attorney. However, he never submitted a package to the IRS on his own because he felt 
it was too complicated. Applicant testified he has not communicated with the IRS in the 
past six months. However, in his Answers to Interrogatories he indicated, “I called the 
IRS on February 23, 2011, and spoke to [IRS representative] who provided me my 
actual balance as of 2/2011 is $75,087.31.” He provided Account Transcripts from the 
IRS establishing the balances from 1996 through 2001. He intends to start making 
payments on this debt once his state tax debt is satisfied. This debt remains unpaid. 
(GE 2; GE 3; AE C; Tr. 22-25, 34-37, 46-48.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he currently lives within his means. He claims he is able to 
afford to pay his bills, including car payments of $600 per month of a 2007 BMW X5 that 
he purchased in November 2010. He also indicated that he has a savings of $10,000 for 
his children’s education. He claims no other assets, but noted his wife has retirement 
savings of $140,000 and an additional $9,000 in savings for their children’s education. 
Applicant is current on his consumer obligations listed on his credit report. (GE 4; GE 5; 
GE 6; Tr. 42-45.) 
 
 Applicant testified he operates a non-profit organization, in addition to his full-
time employment with the government contractor. The non-profit organization promotes 
education and conducts multi-cultural activities in high school campuses. He presented 
no character reference letters or work performance evaluations. (Tr. 26.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 
5 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent tax debt from 1996 through 2002. He has only 
recently begun to repay his state tax payroll obligations and has not begun to repay his 
Federal payroll tax obligations incurred during the same time period. His history of 
inaction on these debts evidences an unwillingness to pay his delinquent obligations 
and raises significant security concerns. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s SOR-listed liens have been unsatisfied since they were filed in 2002. 
He only recently began making payments to the state and has not made any payments 
on his Federal tax debts. These debts are current and on-going. Further, Applicant has 
not established that he makes wise financial choices, as he chose to purchase a vehicle 
and save money instead of using those funds to fulfill his tax obligations.  
 
 Applicant failed to show that his delinquent tax debts were due to conditions 
beyond his control or occurred under such circumstances that further debt is unlikely to 
recur. He testified that the debts were incurred through poor hiring choices of his 
managers who failed to satisfy the payroll debts. However, Applicant was president of 
these companies and knew of the debts since at least his filing of Chapter 13 
bankruptcy in 1998. It appears that Applicant took little action on these financial 
obligations from at least 2007 until 2011. While his recent actions to repay his state tax 
 
6 
 
debts are noteworthy, given his history of delinquencies it is unclear whether Applicant 
will follow through with his promises to repay them and his remaining outstanding 
Federal tax debts. His actions with respect to his debts fail to establish a pattern of 
responsibility. There is no showing he has initiated a good-faith effort to repay his 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his unpaid debts. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 
20(d), and 20(e) are not mitigating. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant is significantly indebted to the state and Federal government on 
delinquent tax obligations. He estimated that his Federal tax obligation was 
approximately $13,500, but the documentation indicates he owes approximately 
$75,087.31. He has done little since 2007 to satisfy this obligation and only began to 
repay his state tax obligation in May 2011. However, during the same time he was 
unable to make payments to either the state or the Federal government, he was able to 
buy a BMW and save money for his children. His choices with respect to his debts and 
his inability to pay indicate he is potentially vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress and shows that he has questionable judgment. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) apply. 
 
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct raises questions about his trustworthiness, judgment and 
reliability. He has failed to present any character evidence establishing that he is 
reliable or has rehabilitated himself in any manner. He still in indebted to the IRS for a 
significant amount and has failed to take action to satisfy that debt thereby reducing his 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. I find none of the above mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
8 
 
Applicant is active in his non-profit organization. However, despite this 
contribution, he has failed to demonstrate good judgment when it comes to satisfying 
his financial delinquencies to the state and Federal governments. His choices, with 
respect to his debts, do not demonstrate the judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness 
needed to hold a security clearance. There are significant unresolved concerns about 
Applicant’s finances and judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations or Personal Conduct 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
