 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-06473 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 27, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence, raised by his business contacts, friendship with a long-time friend, 
and small bank account in China through his longstanding relationships with the U.S. 
and minimal financial interests in China. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
On March 22, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 18, 2011, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 24, 2011. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 6, 2011, scheduling the hearing for June 23, 
 
2 
 
 
2011. Applicant submitted a request for a continuance and, based upon good cause, 
the continuance was granted. On June 20, 2011, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
scheduling the hearing for July 13, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant did not object and they were 
admitted. The Government requested administrative notice be taken of certain facts 
relating to China as contained in GE 5. Applicant had no objection and I took 
administrative notice of the facts contained in GE 5. Applicant testified on his own behalf 
and presented Exhibits (AE) A through H, which were admitted without objections. The 
record was left open for receipt of additional documentation. On July 24, 2011, 
Applicant presented a post-hearing submission, marked AE I; and on July 27, 2011, 
Applicant presented a second post-hearing submission, marked AE J. Department 
Counsel had no objections to AE I or AE J, and they were admitted into the record. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 21, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 DOHA alleged under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, that Applicant’s friend and 
business associate resides in the People’s Republic of China (China) and is a citizen of 
Canada (1.a); that Applicant owns a corporation that has a business agreement with a 
company in China to sell its product within China (1.b); that another of Applicant’s 
companies has an agreement to purchase raw materials from a company in China (1.c); 
and that Applicant maintains a bank account in China valued at $9,000 (1.d). Applicant 
denied all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He works as a 
computer programmer. He has worked as a government contractor since 2006. In 
addition to his work as a government contractor, he has owned several small 
businesses. (GE 1; Tr. 27-28.) 
 
Applicant was born in China in 1965. His father, like many Chinese scholars, was 
imprisoned by the Chinese government during the height of the Chinese Cultural 
Revolution. Applicant, in a letter to the court, described how his family was harassed 
and socially outcast from Chinese society. (GE 1; AE J.) He recalled: 
 
I remember it clearly that day: they (the local Chinese government 
officials) stormed into our home while my other was nursing my younger 
sister. I remember how the furniture was arranged in the apartment. They 
ransacked our home turning over tiles on the floor in looking for evidence 
used against my father. My father did not come home that day. During the 
next 2-3 years, we visited my father in the “re-education camp.” The “re-
education camp” was setup during the Chinese Cultural Revolution for 
detaining and incarcerating those who were falsely accused as “People’s 
Enemies.” (AE J.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s father was officially exonerated in the 1980’s before his family left 
China for the United States. In 1983, Applicant and his family immigrated to the U.S. He 
became a U.S. citizen in October 1989. He considers himself to be solely a citizen of 
the U.S. He attended college in the U.S. (GE 1; AE J; Tr. 49-51.) 
 
Applicant’s immediate family all live in the U.S. He is married to a citizen of 
Singapore. Together, they have two children who are solely U.S. citizens. His son is 19-
years old and is a freshman at a Big-Ten university. His daughter is 16-years old and in 
high school in the U.S. Applicant’s mother and sister are also U.S. citizens and 
residents. (GE 1; Tr. 27-29, 49-51.) 
 
Applicant has owned several businesses. In July 1995 Applicant incorporated a 
sub-chapter S Corporation (Corp. 1). The primary purpose of Corp. 1 was to develop 
and sell photo I.D. and security products. Applicant, through Corp. 1, created software 
that helped create I.D. access cards. He sold his products to many customers, including 
a privately held Chinese company (Foreign Company, hereafter FC) owned by the sister 
of Applicant’s former high school classmate in China. FC sold Corp. 1’s products in 
China. In Applicant’s December 2008 statement, he indicated that he believed Corp. 1 
and FC had a written agreement for FC to represent and sell Corp. 1 products in China, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant testified at hearing that he was unable to locate a 
copy of the agreement. From 1999 to 2006, Applicant took many short trips to China to 
meet with FC. Corp. 1 ceased business operations in 2009, prior to filing bankruptcy. 
Corp. 1 filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in December 2009. A letter from Corp. 1’s 
bankruptcy attorney establishes that this corporation has ceased doing business. (GE 2; 
GE 3; GE 4; AE A; AE F; AE I; AE J; Tr. 28-39, 46, 52-60.) 
 
In May 2008, Applicant formed a second corporation (Corp. 2). The purpose of 
Corp. 2 was to provide finger printing technologies to other businesses and to new 
parents. Corp. 2 was initially part of Corp. 1, but eventually became a separate entity, 
prior to Corp 1 filing bankruptcy. Corp. 2 sells finger printing packets to companies 
around the world. A sample of the product was entered into evidence. Corp. 2 acquires 
plastic cases and molding for its products from FC. FC offers the best prices on these 
parts. Applicant testified he does not have an ongoing contract or agreement with FC for 
these supplies as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but orders them from FC as needed. (GE 2; GE 
3; GE 4; Tr. 39-48, 53-63, 71, 74-75.) 
 
Applicant is still in contact with his high school friend, who is the general 
manager for FC, owned by the friend’s sister. Applicant and his friend went to school 
together in China, prior to Applicant’s immigration to the U.S. After the Tiananmen 
Square protests in 1989, Applicant’s friend immigrated to Canada and became a 
Canadian citizen. He is still a Canadian citizen, but returned to China in approximately 
1996 when it opened up economically. Applicant’s friend was unable to master English 
and could only find work at restaurants in Canada. In China, he has been able to work 
at FC. Applicant has a close relationship with his friend and they would buy and sell 
products between one another when Applicant owned Corp. 1. Applicant still buys 
supplies for Corp. 2 through his friend from FC, as noted above. He also exchanges 
 
4 
 
 
emails, pictures of family, and phone calls regularly with his friend. He visits his friend 
when he travels to China. (GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; Tr. 29-30, 32, 37-40, 48, 57-60, 71, 74-
75.) 
 
Applicant has a bank account in China with a balance of approximately $9,000. 
Applicant uses this money during his travels in China. He testified that transactions in 
China are cash based. He once got sick on a trip to China and needed to go to the 
hospital. He was expected to pay in cash. After that experience, he opened up an 
account in China for his use when he is on travel. As indicated on Applicant’s Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing, Applicant makes many short trips to 
China each year. His last trip to China was in March 2011. The account is used solely 
for personal use and is not connected with any business transactions. He testified that 
he has assets totaling over one million dollars in the U.S. and provided documentation 
on several of his investment accounts. Applicant has no investments or retirement 
accounts in China. (GE 1; GE 4; AE B-AE E; Tr. 33, 45-46, 66-68, 71.) 
 
Applicant is well respected by his friends, colleagues, and fellow church 
members who wrote letters on Applicant’s behalf. Each letter attests to Applicant’s 
strong morals, honesty, and reliability. He votes in U.S. elections and is involved in 
volunteering through his church community. He has no criminal background, as 
evidenced by a criminal background check Applicant introduced into evidence. (AE G; 
AE H; Tr. 70-71.) 
 
China1 
 
China is a large and economically powerful country, and has a population of over 
a billion people. It has an authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese 
Communist Party.  
 
China’s People’s Liberation Army (PLA), which includes the army, navy, air force 
and strategic nuclear forces, is modernizing its forces. China has articulated roles for 
the PLA that “go beyond China’s immediate territorial interests.” There is limited 
transparency in China’s military and security affairs that enhances uncertainty and 
increases the potential for misunderstanding and miscalculation. 
 
A 2009 Annual Report to Congress indicated that “China is the most aggressing 
country conducting espionage against the United States, focusing on obtaining U.S. 
information and technologies beneficial to China’s military modernization and economic 
development.” The Chinese Government rewards actions of private individuals who 
obtain technology on its behalf and it offers financial inducements to U.S. government 
officials to encourage them to compromise classified information.  
 
The 2009 Report of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission 
noted the following about China's enterprise-directed industrial espionage:  
 
                                                          
1 All of the information about China is contained in GE 5.   
 
5 
 
 
Enterprise-directed espionage may also be growing in importance and taking 
on less random and more targeted form. The 2008 unclassified report of the 
Defense Security Service cited a rise in efforts undertaken by commercial 
entities to target restricted technologies, speculating that this likely represents 
"a purposeful attempt to make contacts seem more innocuous by using non-
governmental entities as surrogate collectors for interested government or 
government-affiliated entities. . .”  
 
Chinese intelligence personnel are inclined to make use of sympathetic people 
willing to act as a "friend of China." While this most clearly has been seen in PRC-targeted 
recruitment of Chinese-Americans, PRC agents also have used U.S. citizens of other ethnic 
backgrounds as sources.  
 
In cases resulting in federal prosecutions during fiscal years 2007 and 2008, China 
was ranked second only to Iran as the leading destination for illegal exports of restricted 
U.S. technology. China’s espionage and industrial theft activities are a threat to the 
security of U.S. technology. Department Counsel’s summary provides additional details 
of China’s aggressive intelligence efforts directed towards acquiring U.S. secrets and 
proprietary technologies, as well as nine examples of criminal cases in 2007 to 2009 
involving people and organizations connected to the PRC. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
 
6 
 
 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 
7 
 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s long-time friend and business associate lives and works in China. 
Applicant has a long history of conducting business with this friend through Corp. 1 and 
Corp. 2. Applicant also has $9,000 in a bank account in China. However, the mere 
possession of close ties with a person or financial interests in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. It must also be shown that the 
foreign friend, business interest, or financial interest could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
Most nations with substantial military establishments seek classified and sensitive 
information from the United States because it has the largest military industrial complex 
and most advanced military establishment in the world. Chinese military officials could 
seek or accept classified information from U.S. citizens with access to this material. In 
fact, the administrative notice documents highlight several recent cases involving 
China’s attempts to collect proprietary information from U.S. sources. Applicant’s 
access to classified information and his connection to his friend and financial interest 
could create a potential conflict of interest. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) apply.  
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 
8 
 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its efforts to target U.S. protected information are relevant in assessing the likelihood 
that an Applicant’s friendship, bank account, and business dealings make him 
potentially vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious 
problem in the country with crime or terrorism. China is known to target U.S. 
intelligence.  
 
On the other hand, Applicant’s ties to the United States run deep. He immigrated 
to the U.S. after watching the persecution and “re-education” of his father at the hands 
of Chinese Communists. He attended college in the U.S., earning a bachelor’s degree 
from an American university. His mother and sister are naturalized U.S. citizens. His 
children are both U.S. citizens and attend American schools. He is active in his 
community and his church. He votes in U.S. elections.  
 
Applicant’s ties to China are limited. Applicant admittedly has close ties to his 
friend in China. They communicate frequently and Applicant orders parts for Corp. 2 
through this friend. Thus ¶ 8(c) is not mitigating in the instant case. However, aside from 
this one friendship and business connections through this friend, Applicant’s ties to 
China are insignificant. Applicant has no assets in China, expect for the $9,000 bank 
account for emergencies when he is traveling in China. His bank account in China is 
minimal when compared to the over one million dollars in assets he possesses in the 
U.S. 
 
I have had the opportunity observe Applicant, listen and consider his testimony, 
examine the evidence and resolve any questions. I find that, although Applicant has a 
friend in China and business ties to China, he has a deep and longstanding relationship 
with the United States. His life and that of his immediate family is entrenched in the 
United States. I find his connections to the United States are stronger than his 
connection to China. His memories of the Chinese government ransacking his home 
and imprisoning his father are still fresh in his mind. His loyalty to the United States is 
steadfast and undivided and he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest. The value and routine nature of buying parts for his finger 
printing kits from China are unlikely to result in any conflict and could not be used to 
influence, manipulate, or pressure Applicant. I find AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(f) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has been in the United States since 1983. He has no family in China, 
nor does he have fond feelings for China after the imprisonment of his father. Applicant 
has one friend, with whom he does business in China, and a bank account with $9,000. 
He no longer has any type of written agreement with the FC after Corp. 1 ceased 
operations in 2009. He only buys parts from FC for Corp. 2 because FC produces the 
most affordable parts. The purchases for Corp. 2 are done through purchase orders on 
an as needed basis. There is no outstanding agreement binding Applicant to future 
purchases.  
 
Applicant raised his children in the U.S. and is active in his community and 
church. His references reflect that Applicant is an honest and trustworthy individual. I 
have carefully considered all of the evidence and I am convinced Applicant’s roots are 
firmly planted in the United States. I am also convinced that should there ever be a 
conflict of interest, Applicant would clearly resolve it in favor of this country due to his 
steadfast commitment to the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Foreign Influence.  
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
