                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                     
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)     
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-05047
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: William Savarino, Esquire
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of Case
On September 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992,  issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative
determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral
to an administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied or revoked. 
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 22, 2010, and requested a hearing.
Department Counsel filed an amendment to the SOR on  February 7, 2011.  Applicant
responded to the amended SOR on March 9, 2011. 
The case was assigned to another judge and reassigned to me on April 5, 2011.
The case was scheduled for hearing on April 15, 2011. A hearing was held as
scheduled, for the purpose of considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant, continue, or deny Applicant’s application for a security
clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted of eight exhibits (GEs 1-8);
Applicant relied on seven witnesses (including himself) and seven exhibits (AEs A-G).
The transcript (Tr.) was received April 25, 2011.  
Besides his seven exhibits, Applicant requested administrative notice of six
documents: White House Press Release, Remarks by President Obama and Prime
Minister Gillard of Australia (March 7, 2011); U.S.-Australia Relations, Prime Minister
Gillard’s Address to U.S. Congress (March 11, 2011); American forces Press Release,
U.S.-Australian Alliance Never More Important (November 7, 2010); U.S. Central
Command, Support to the Global War on Terror (April 14, 2011); Background Note:
Australia, U.S. Department of State (November 24, 2010); and Security Treaty Between
Australia, New Zealand, and the United States (Australian Treaty Series 1952 No. 2,
1997).
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007);
ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007).  Administrative notice is appropriate
for noticing facts or government reports that are well known.  See Stein, Administrative
Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good cause shown, administrative notice
was granted with respect to the above-named background reports addressing the
geopolitical situation in Australia.  Administrative notice was extended to the documents
themselves, consistent  with the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid.  This notice did
not foreclose Applicant from challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information
contained in the reports addressing Australia’s current status.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline C, Applicant allegedly: (a) exercised dual citizenship with
Australia and the United States by applying for citizenship with Australia, applying for
and retaining an Australian passport in January 2006, even though he possessed a U.S.
passport issued in June 2002 that will not expire until January 2016, and used his
Australian passport instead of his U.S. passport for travel to Australia from about 1998
to at least 2009 and (b) obtained an Australian secret or top secret security clearance,
which he has held from 1993 to at least February 2010, having secured its update in
about 2008. 
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly: (a) sought and held employment with an
Australian defense organization from about 1993 to 1998 and (b) maintains substantial
3
financial and property interests in Australia, to include a bank account with a value of
approximately $700,000. 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations.  He provided
no explanations.
Department counsel amended the SOR in February 2011 to add Guideline L
allegations. Under Guideline L, the allegations contained in subparagraphs 1.b and 2.a
were incorporated by reference. In his answer, Applicant admitted the amended
allegations without explanation.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 74-year-old engineering consultant for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married W1 in April 1958 and divorced her in October 1961. (GEs 1
and 4; Tr. 77) He has three adult children from this marriage. (GE 1) He married W2 in
June 1982. She developed depression later in their marriage and turned to alcoholism.
(Tr. 84-86) W2 abandoned him in the early 90s, claiming she could never cure herself
while living with him. (Tr. 85-86). He divorced W2 in June 1992. (GE 1) 
Applicant married W3, a U.S. citizen, in September 1992. (GE 1; Tr. 87-88) W3
passed away in July 2006 after a long battle with cancer. (GEs 1 and 4) Two years later,
he married W4, a U.S. citizen and resident. (GE 4; Tr. 147)  They continue to  maintain
their primary residence in the U.S. (GE 4)
Between 1955 and 1958, Applicant served in the U.S. military as a Army enlistee.
(GE 1; Tr.76) He received an honorable discharge in May 1958. Following his Army
discharge, he enrolled in college on a night basis and pursued an engineering
curriculum. (Tr. 77-78)
Applicant earned a BS degree in electrical engineering from an accredited U.S.
university in June 1965. (GEs 1 and 4)   He earned an MSE in engineering from another
institution in June 1967 and a PhD in electrical engineering from the same institution in
September 1971, while working for a defense contractor. (GEs 1 and 4; Tr. 79-80)  
Between 1973 and 1993, Applicant worked for a major defense contractor.
Before his retirement in 1993, he served as his company’s chief scientist and was
responsible for research and development of weapons systems for DoD. (GE 4; Tr.82-
83). He became a self-described authority on stealth air vehicle design and
development, weapon systems analysis and design, radar and infrared surveillance,
and all-spectrum signatures and images of air, land, and sea targets. (GE 4) He held a
4
security clearance for all of his employment years with this defense contractor. With his
anticipated retirement from his defense employer, Applicant also resigned his
membership on DoD’s scientific advisory board. (AE K)
Following his retirement from his U.S. defense contractor employer in 1993,
Applicant and W3 (who worked for the same defense contractor and held a security
clearance at the time of their marriage) made a joint decision to relocate to Australia
and start a new life. (GE 4 and AEs F and G; Tr.  87-90) Without an identified job in the
country, Australia’s immigration laws did not permit residence in the country beyond the
three months available on a tourist visa. (GE 4; Tr. 89-90). And because of a cannot-
compete clause in his employment contract with his U.S. employer, he could not employ
with any private competitor of his U.S. employer. (Tr. 185-186).
With the help of W3, Applicant was able to locate a potential job with an
Australian defense organization. (Tr. 93-94, 181-183) Before accepting the Australian
defense offer, he obtained oral assurances from the U.S. State Department (DoS) that
his U.S. citizenship would not be jeopardized by his taking permanent Australian
citizenship should he ever return to the United States and reenter the U.S. defense
industry (Tr. 95-97) 
Applicant also elicited assurances from his U.S. defense employer and AF
security officers that he should not encounter any problems reactivating his U.S.
security clearance, absent any encountered problems in Australia. (Tr. 96-97; 188-192)
However, his assurances were not reduced to writing.
In March 1993, Applicant accepted employment with an Australian defense
organization under a temporary employment contract (guaranteed for one year and
renewable for up to five  years as a principal research scientist (GEs 2 and 4 and AEs
F, G, and Q; Tr. 185) with this defense organization. He advised his prospective
employer of his intent to relocate to Australia. (GE 1 and AE Q) At the time, he had no
intention of relocating to Australia permanently. (Tr. 95-96) In exit letters to colleagues
with his defense contractor, he disclosed his plans to take a temporary civilian position
with the Australian Defense Department. He assured his colleagues of his intention to
resume his career in the United States (conditions permitting) 
 Initially, Applicant and W3 acquired temporary Australian residency status. (Tr.
105) His Australian employer advised him that after May 1995 he could not reenter
Australia without Australian citizenship and persuaded him to switch to permanent
residency status. (Tr.106-108) 
Applicant’s employment conditions with his new Australian government employer
required him to sign an agreement that he would seek citizenship when he became
eligible. (GE 4) With help from his Australian employer, he was able to expedite his
citizenship application and acquired his Australian citizenship in a little over two years
(i.e, in 1996). (GE 2; Tr. 120) His employer also required him to obtain an Australian
5
security clearance as a condition of employment. (GEs 2 and 4 and AEs F and G; Tr.
109) 
Upon applying for Australian citizenship in 1993, the Australian DoD granted him
a security clearance the same year. (Tr. 109) Applicant held an Australian security
clearance for the duration of his employment with his Australian defense organization.
(GE2)
Applicant’s civilian work for his Australian defense organization involved mostly
classified projects (about 80%), but included some work on analysis of Australian
cooperative ventures with the United Sytates on overhead surveillance. (Tr. 191-192)
His work included scientific analysis of airborne radar systems. (AE O; Tr. 192)
Applicant continued his direct employment with his Australian defense organization
through August 1998, and held both Australian citizenship and an Australian security
clearance for the duration of his employment.  (Tr.120,151-152)  
While still employed by his Australian defense organization, Applicant also
undertook consulting assignments with both U.S. defense contractors and the U.S. DoJ
with the acquiescence of the Australian government (GE 4 AE O; Tr.112-113-194-195)
His consulting work for DoJ required a security clearance, and DoJ granted him a
security clearance in 1996 without any documented ancillary DoD rights. (AE J
Applicant  made it clear to his Australian defense employer that “classified knowledge
gained through his previous employment on Defense projects in the U.S. would not be
divulged.” (AE O) Applicant’s Australian defense employer accepted Applicant’s self-
imposed information-sharing limitations with the understanding he would avoid any
conflicts of interest, and approved his DoJ assignment.  (AE O; Tr. 114-115)  
For the ensuing six years (between 1995 and 2001), Applicant commuted to the
United States to fulfill his witness and consulting commitments to the U.S. DoJ.  (GEs 2
and 4) His U.S. DoJ employer at the time sponsored Applicant in his security clearance
application. (GE 4)   Applicant assures he was granted a security clearance for his DoJ
consulting work in 1997 while he was still contemporaneously employed by the
Australian defense organization, and with the acquiescence of his DoJ employers. (AEs
B, H, M, and R; Tr.  116-118, 126-127) 
Applicant assures he fully informed his DoJ employer of his Australian citizenship
and security clearance and past employment with the Australian defense organization.
(AE R; Tr. 116-118,126-127) However, the declaration furnished by the DoJ attorney
responsible for hiring Applicant as a DoJ expert does not indicate any awareness of
Applicant’s holding an Australian security clearance. And the SF-86 Applicant
completed for DoJ does not list any Australian security clearance. (AE I).  So, it is still
unclear from the proofs whether DoJ was officially informed of Applicant’s Australian
security clearance when it approved his security clearance for access to DoJ-related
classified information. 
6
Besides his DoJ consulting contract, Applicant was sponsored by a DoD
contractor in1996 to obtain a security clearance that would permit him access to
classified information. As a part of his application, Applicant was asked to provide a
separate SF-86.  He completed this SF-86 in November 1996 and was granted a DoD
security clearance in 2000. (AEs J and M)  In his clearance application, he listed his
Australian citizenship and passport, but not his Australian security clearance. (AE J; Tr.
127-130) Whether DoD was aware of Applicant’s Australian security clearance when it
granted him a DoD clearance in 2000 is unclear.        
                                                                              
Post-retirement activity
Upon his retirement from his direct employment position with the Australian
defense organization in 1998, Applicant became eligible for an Australian pension. (GE
2) Since 1998, he has continued to receive an annual pension from the Australian
government totaling around $10,000. (GE 2) Between 1998 and 2001, he continued to
consult with the defense organization, as well as DoJ and U.S. defense contractors, on
both classified and unclassified projects. During this time frame, he retained his security
clearance with the Australian government while supporting the government’s defense
science board.  (GEs 2 and 4 and AE B; Tr.132-134, 226) He and W3 also looked for
new housing in a northeast section of Australia. (GE 4) They purchased a home in this
region and established their permanent residence in this home. (GE 4)
By late 1998, W3 had contracted a rare cancer. (GE 4; Tr. 225) To ensure the
best medical treatment for her, they returned to the U.S. in 2001. (GEs 2 and 4) By
2001, W3's health had deteriorated to the point where she required regular cancer
treatments. (GEs 2 and 4; Tr. 137-138, 225) Between 2001 and 2005, Applicant and W3
purchased a home in their local U.S. community and remained in the United States for
the most part. (GE 4; Tr. 138) During this inclusive period, Applicant suspended virtually
all of his U.S. and Australian consulting assignments. (Tr. 139) For added convenience
when he did return to Australia for business purposes, he obtained an Australian
passport in 1998 and used it on his return trips. (GE 2) He updated his Australian
passport in January 2006, even though he had previously updated his U.S. passport in
June 2002. (GE 2)
W3 passed away in early 2006. (GEs 1 and  4; Tr. 140). In September 2006,
Applicant applied for the updating of his DoD security clearance (GE 2; Tr. 143-144)
The following month (in October 2006), he applied to the Australian government for the
updating of his Australian security clearance; his clearance was updated. When asked
by an  investigator of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) who interviewed him
in January 2007 why he updated his Australian security clearance, Applicant responded
that he “wanted to keep all his options open.” (GE 2) To date, he has retained his
Australian clearance. 
Applicant last provided consulting services to the Australian government in 2007.
(Tr. 209) He maintains contact with a number of friends and former colleagues in
Australia, but has no family members living in the country. (Tr. 171-172) Currently, he
7
earns consulting fees in the United States that have varied from $40,000 a year to
$100,000 a year. (Tr. 171)
Applicant’s property interests 
When Applicant relocated to Australia in 1993, he transferred all of his combined
checking, savings and term deposits in U.S. banks (about $700,000) to an Australian
savings account (AEs 2 and 4).  He and W3 purchased a home in Australia following
their relocation and held the home for approximately five years before they sold it in
1998. (GE 2; Tr. 105) Following Applicant’s retirement from his Australian government
employment the same year, he and W3 purchased another home in a northern
Australian province, with the intention of using the home for their permanent Australian
retirement. (AE 2). They paid over $600,000 in cash for their home and never placed a
mortgage on the property. (GE 2; Tr. 161)  
With funds withdrawn from his Australian bank account, Applicant and W3
purchased their U.S. home in the 1993 time frame.  They financed the purchase of this
home with a first mortgage (amount unknown).  Following W3's death in 2006, Applicant
continued to maintain this home with his own resources.  After his marriage to W4 in
May 2008, he and his spouse continued to maintain both of their homes in their U.S.
community. 
By 2007, Applicant was no longer reliant on income from Australia to cover his
expenses (save for expenses incurred in the maintenance of his Australian home and
visits to the country). He maintained U.S. assets of $363,000 (with $263,000 allocated
to his home) at the time and a U.S. IRA account valued at about $700,000. (GE 2) W4
reported assets of about $125,000 and an IRA account worth about $250,000. Still, he
maintained his Australian home, valued at $1.1 million, and retained  deposits of around
$620,000 in an Australian bank. (GE 3)  He also receives a small pension from Australia
as the result of his direct employment with a defense organization of the Australian
government.
Committed in 2007 to relocating permanently to the United States transferring
many of his Australian liquid assets to U.S. accounts, and updating his U.S. security
clearance, Applicant placed his Australian home up for sale the same year. (GE 2; Tr.
145) He sold this house in March 2009. (Tr. 146) With urging from W4, he then made a
cash purchase of a smaller vacation home in the same region of Australia for about
$650,000 and made substantial improvements in the home (GE 4; Tr. 147-148, 159-
160) Applicant and W4 took possession of the home in April 2009. (Tr. 148)
Having second thoughts on the wisdom of purchasing this second home,
Applicant and W4 placed the property up for sale in May 2010 with a local real estate
agent. (AE N; Tr. 150-154)  When they did not receive any offers for the home at their
$750,000 asking price, Applicant lowered the asking price to $700,000. (AE N; Tr. 160-
162) 
8
Applicant’s listing agreement expired in March 2011. (AE N) His current progress
in selling his Australian residence is unknown. (Tr. 162) He has no updated information
on market conditions or his sale prospects in the foreseeable future, but knows he
needs his Australian citizenship to retain and sell the property at fair market value. (AE
C; Tr. 162-163) In the interim, he still maintains a large Australian bank account (around
$800,000). He has net annual income from Australia of approximately $53,000, which
consists of his lectureship, interest on his savings, his 401(k), and his Australian
government pension, which nets him about $1,200 a month. (GE 4; Tr. 170-171; 214-
215) He continues to pay Australian income and property taxes, and has voted in
Australian elections. (Tr. 215-216) By comparison, Applicant has a home in the U.S.
valued at about $200,000 and a U.S. bank account of $160,000. (Tr. 168)
Applicant’s passport, citizenship, and security clearance status
Since updating his Australian passport in January 2006, Applicant used it on
several occasions to enter and exit Australia. (Tr. 212) He never used his Australian
passport after 2009 and documents surrendering it to the Australian government in April
2011. (AE L)  Currently, Applicant retains his U.S. passport and uses it now exclusively
when he travels anywhere in the world.  It is his understanding that Australian citizens
must use their Australian passports when entering and exiting the country; U.S. citizens
must use their U.S. passports. (Tr. 219) Applicant is not sure how Australia administers
its passport laws with dual citizens like himself.   
When Applicant applied for Australian citizenship in 1993, he pledged his loyalty
to Australia and its people, “whose democratic beliefs I share, whose rights and liberties
I respect, and whose laws I will uphold and obey.” (GE 4)  This pledge has evolved
since its introduction in January 1949. (GE 5) The original citizenship oath required the
applicant to swear allegiance to be faithful and bear true allegiance to his Majesty King
George the VI, his heirs, and successors, faithfully observe the laws of Australia, and
fulfill his duties as an Australian citizen. (GE 5) This oath underwent a number of
amendments between 1948 and 1993. The 1993 amendment introduced a pledge of
commitment to replace the oath or affirmation of allegiance and remove the reference to
the Crown. (GE 5) Still, the pledge of commitment imposes a pledge of loyalty on an
applicant to Australia and its people. The pledge is written in the conjunctive and binds
an applicant to the country and its government and may not be parsed to minimize its
impact on an applicant for Australian citizenship. 
Applicant’s claim of a more limited reading of the commitment pledge he took in
1995 to extend loyalty to Australia and its  people cannot be sustained as a fair and
reasonable interpretation of the pledge. By pledging his loyalty to Australia and its
people, Applicant declared his support to Australia’s government and institutions as well
as its people, and in doing so placed himself in a position of potential conflict with the
governmental interests of the United States were the two countries ever to become at
odds over protecting their vital security interests.  (GE 5)  
When Applicant surrendered his Australian passport in 2011, he did not
renounce his Australian citizenship. (AE L; Tr. 222) He is reluctant to renounce his
9
Australian citizenship for so long as he owns real estate in Australia. (Tr. 162-163, 165-
166, 222) He understands that ownership of real property in Australia requires the
owner to be either a citizen or permanent resident of Australia. He cites advice he
received from his Australian attorney in October 2010 that should he surrender his
Australian citizenship and passport, the country’s foreign investment and review board
could require him to sell his home and suffer losses, given the current depressed nature
of the real estate market in his region of Australia. (AE C; Tr. 163, 237-239) Applicant’s
understanding of Australia’s limitations on home ownership in the country is not in
dispute.  His decision to retain his Australian citizenship until he is able to divest himself
of his Australian home is not an unreasonable one from an economic point of view. But
it does reflect an option exercise and illustrates a split preference for the government
and institutions of Australia and those of the United States.  
Besides his continued holding of dual citizenship with Australia and the United
states, Applicant retains security clearances with both Australia and the United states,
as well.  While he has had no occasion to use his Australian clearance in recent years,
he has not relinquished it. (Tr. 227) He assures that he has never encountered a
situation where his project access to classified information in either country created a
conflict of interest with his clearance access in the other. 
Applicant, however, has never obtained any written approvals that he can
document. Considering all of the surrounding historical circumstances of Applicant’s
work in the two countries to date, inferences warrant that his holding security clearances
with Australia and the United States  contemporaneously provides the potential for a
conflict of interest should the security interests of Australia and the U.S. ever diverge.  
Australia’s country status
The Commonwealth of Australia (comprised of six colonies) is a constitutional
monarchy with a constitution patterned partly on the model of the U.S. Constitution;
although it does not include a bill of rights. (see Background Note: Australia, supra)
Australia is an independent nation within the British Commonwealth.  It has a bicameral
federal parliament, whose chambers have equal power, except that revenue bills must
originate in the House of Representatives. (see id.)  
Australia’s court system is headed by the High Court of Australia, which has
general appellate jurisdiction over all other federal and state courts and possesses the
power of constitutional review. (see Background Note: Australia, supra) Australia has a
population of 22.3 million and a large diverse economy with a GDP of $1.2 trillion
(estimated 2009-2010). (id.)
In foreign relations, Australia has historically been a strong and dependable ally
of the United States and has fought beside the United States and other Allies in virtually
every significant conflict since WW I. (see Security Treaty between Australia, New
Zealand, and the United States, supra; Background Note: Australia, supra) Australian-
U.S. defense relations are grounded in the Australia, New Zealand, U.S. (ANZUS)
10
security treaty of 1951. (see id.)  The treaty binds the signatories to recognize that an
armed attack in the Pacific area on any of them would endanger the peace and safety of
the others.  Since  New Zealand was suspended from treaty coverage following a port
dispute in 1984, the ANZUS treaty remains in force between Australia and the United
States under the abbreviated heading of AUSMIN. The United States and Australia hold
regular consultations and conduct a variety of joint activities (including military
exercises). As a result of terrorist attacks on the United States in September 2001, then-
Prime Minister Howard and U.S. President Bush jointly invoked the ANZUS treaty for
the first time. (id) Australia was one of the earliest participants in Operation Enduring
Freedom.  
In May 2009, the Australian Government released its Defense white paper,
outlining Australia’s long term strategic outlook, which calls for enhancing its military
defenses. (see Background Note: Australia, supra).  In November 2010, high level U.S.
officials attended a summit with their Australian hosts to explore and chart future
progress for their longstanding alliance with a collective view of shaping a more stable,
prosperous region in light of current and emerging threats and challenges. (see U.S.-
Australia Alliance never more Important, supra.)  
More recently, U.S. President Obama and Australian Prime Minister Gillard
conducted bilateral meetings in Washington in which they, inter alia, celebrated the 60th
anniversary of their alliance and stressed the strengths of their alliance: shared values
based on the deep and longstanding relationship between the two countries and their
enduring friendship. (see Remarks by President Obama and Prime Minister Gillard,
supra.) 
U.S.-Australian relations are grounded in the WW II experiences of both
countries. Similarities in culture and historical background and shared democratic
values have made U.S. relations with Australia exceptionally strong and close. (see GE
7; Background Note: Australia, supra) Both countries share extensive links in their
international relations that range from commercial, cultural, and environmental contacts
to political and defense cooperation. 
Historically, Australia and the United States have worked together closely to
promote global trade liberalism over the past 50 years. (GE 7) Australia has
demonstrated vital interests in U.S. economic, trade, and investment policies and has
worked closely with the United States in the World Trade Organization (WTO) and other
pursuits in promoting their trade liberalization agendas. (GE 7)
Two-way trade exceeded $7.7 billion U.S. dollars in 2008-2009 and shows no
signs of ebbing in 2010. (see Background Note: Australia, supra)  Anchored by a
bilateral Australia-U.S. Free Trade agreement completed in 2005, Australia and the
United States have worked on a range of liberalizing trade reforms designed to
streamline and promote their trade liberalization agendas. (GE 7; Background Note:
Australia, supra)
    
11
Endorsements
Applicant has excellent character references to his credit. Former colleagues with
his longstanding defense employer in the United States who have worked with Applicant
in the past, credit him with unique scientific and research skills. They consistently
characterize Applicant as conscientious, dedicated, reliable, and trustworthy (see exs. D
through S)  Consistently, they stress his conscientious work habits and recommend him
for a position of trust. 
Applicant earned numerous awards for his scientific contributions to the U.S.
defense effort before his retirement in 1993. Credits include a distinguished public
service award in 1983 from the U.S. DoD, aircraft design award in 1989, and a design
and development award in 1992. (AEs A and P) Applicant has been a fellow of
prestigious engineering and aeronautics societies, and has been honored for his
engineering contributions by the Australian government. (AE P)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in reaching at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial, commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk.  When evaluating an applicant’s
conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be considered together with the following AG ¶
2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9)
the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
12
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
      Foreign Preference
The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate preference
for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
See AG ¶  9.
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under the this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the
foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target
United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.   See AG ¶ 6.
Outside Activities
The Concern: Involvement in certain types of activities of outside employment or
activities is of security concern if it imposes a conflict of interest with an individual’s
security responsibilities and could create an increased risk of unauthorized disclosure of
classified information.  AG ¶ 36.
Burden of Proof
Under the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an applicant's request for
security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly
consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires administrative
judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record,
the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends,
in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all adversarial
proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and
logical basis from the evidence of record. Conversely, the judge cannot draw factual
inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR; and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required showing of material bearing, however, does not
13
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or his security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.  Because Executive Order 10865 requires that all
security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, “security-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
Analysis
Applicant is a highly regarded defense consultant who, after retiring from his
senior position with a U.S. defense contractor in 1993, relocated to Australia to work for
an Australian defense organization. Conditions of his employment included Australian
citizenship and an Australian security clearance. Within a year his Australian employer
issued him a security clearance, and within three years, he was granted citizenship by
the Australian government. Besides acquiring Australian citizenship and a top secret
Australian security clearance, he obtained an Australian passport in 1997, which he
used when exiting and entering Australia on his trips to the United States. While he has
since surrendered his Australian passport, he retains both his Australian citizenship and
his Australian security clearance, and plans to retain both for the foreseeable future.  
Trust concerns relate to foreign preference, conflicts of interest associated with
his holding dual security clearances with the U.S. DoD, and the Australian Defense
Department, and foreign influence relative to his holding employment with an Australian
Defense organization and maintaining substantial property interests in Australia.
Foreign Preference 
Dual citizenship concerns necessarily entail allegiance assessments and invite
critical considerations of acts indicating a preference for the interests of the foreign
country over the interests of the United States. The issues, as such, raise concerns over
Applicant’s  preference for a foreign country over the United States.  By accepting
employment with an Australian defense organization, obtaining an Australian passport
and security clearance, transferring his bank accounts and other liquid assets to
Australia, and acquiring Australian real estate reserved for residents and citizens of the
country, Applicant revealed a split preference for the U.S. and Australia.  By accepting
Australian citizenship, he satisfied a major legal requirement for acquiring real property
in the country. 
Taking advantage of one of Australia’s ownership conditions, he and W3 were
able to acquire and hold two pieces of property in Australia between 1993 and 1998.
14
And with his Australian passport and security clearance, he was able to freely exit and
reenter the country with minimal disruption. Applicant continued his practice of using his
Australian citizenship, passport, and clearance  to vest and protect his consulting and
real estate interests in the country. 
Not until just before the hearing did he surrender his Australian passport to
Australian government personnel.  Pending the sale of his home, he remains unwilling
to renounce his Australian citizenship. And he indicates uncertainty how to relinquish his
Australian security clearance. So, as matters stand, Applicant will continue to maintain
his dual citizenship with Australia and retain his Australian security clearance for the
foreseeable future.  
While Applicant’s surrender of his Australian passport may be sufficient to satisfy
the technical surrender requirements of MC ¶ 11(e) of the AGs for foreign preference
(see discussion infra), it does not in of itself resolve the larger preference question
raised in this case.  Whether Applicant’s possession and use of his Australian passport
reflect an overall preference for his acquired country of Australia, or enjoyment of a
privilege of foreign citizenship for convenience purposes only that is not incompatible
with his imposed fiduciary duties to the United States, are issues that require reconciling
with the security requirements demanded of those who are afforded access to U.S.
classified information.
Since becoming a naturalized Australian citizen, Applicant has taken several
actions and exercised Australian privileges that reflect active indicia of dual citizenship.
Specifically, he accepted employment with the Australian government, acquired
Australian citizenship and an Australian security clearance to satisfy the demands of his
Australian employer, purchased real property and invested funds in Australian banks,
obtained an Australian passport to meet country exit and entry requirements imposed
by the Australian government, and retained his Australian citizenship and security
clearance.
In assessing split-preference cases, the Appeal Board has looked to indicia of
active exercise of dual citizenship. In cases where there is record evidence of a dual-
citizen applicant having substantial real property interests in a country that are not
available to non-residents or citizens on the same terms, the Appeal Board has
considered such interests to represent special benefits or privileges that reveal a
preference to that particular country. See ISCR Case No. 08-02864 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec.
29, 2009); See ISCR Case No. 16098 at 2 (App. Bd.  May 29, 2003). 
Department Counsel finds parallels in Applicant’s situation in ISCR Case No. 08-
05869, at 4-7 (App. Bd. July 24, 2009) and the facts in the present case. Like Applicant
here, the applicant in ISCR Case No. 08-05869 relocated to Australia and became a
naturalized Australian citizen with an Australian passport and security clearance who
maintained dual citizenship with the U.S. However, his case differs from Applicant’s in
many key respects. Unlike Applicant, the applicant in ISCR Case No. 08-05869 was
commissioned into the Australian Army, accepted graduate student benefits from the
15
Army, paid Australian taxes, voted in Australian elections, and contributed to an
Australian retirement fund.  By joining the Australian Army, that applicant demonstrated
a willingness to risk life and limb for that country, which the Appeal Board found to
reflect strong evidence of a “profound, deeply personal commitment to the interests and
welfare of that country.” (id.)  Even after that applicant renounced his Australian
citizenship and relinquished his Australian passport, the Appeal Board found these
actions insufficient to mitigate Applicant’s demonstrated preference for Australia   (id. at
5)  Considering the totality of the applicant’s actions in  ISCR Case No. 08-05869,  the
Appeal Board found a continuing preference for Australia despite his eventual return to
the United States, relinquishment of his Australian citizenship, and surrender of his
Australian passport.  See id, at 5-6.  
Applicant’s situation differs appreciably from those linked to the dual Australian-
U.S. citizen applicant in ISCR Case No. 08-05869, supra. Service in a foreign military
requires much deeper and more exacting commitments to the country’s defense efforts
than does working for the same foreign government in a civilian capacity. Applicant’s
continued maintenance of his Australian dual citizenship and security clearance to
protect his property interests and consulting prospects in the country is more
comparable to the fact situation in ISCR Case No. 08-02864, supra. Applicant’s
retaining his Australian citizenship and security clearance enables him to preserve his
Australian real estate holdings. 
Without dual Australian citizenship retention, Applicant  could be subjected by the
Australian government to a forced sale of his property in a poor real estate market.  And
by holding on to his Australian security clearance, he is able  to retain his employment
and counseling options in Australia in case his U.S. consulting business does not
prosper as he hopes.  Applicant’s retaining his Australian citizenship and security
clearance in these circumstances represents material indicia of a preference for
Australia that cannot be easily reconciled with the split preference he has shown for
many years for his home country of the United States.  
Preference questions require predictive judgments about how an applicant can
be trusted in the future to honor his fiduciary responsibilities to the Government.
Applicant worked in the defense industry as a respected scientist and advisor for over
25 years and held security clearances for most of his professional career. Although he
checked with State and Defense Department officials about his prospects for regaining
his security clearance should he choose to return to the United States, he surely was
aware of the potential risks of working for the Australian government, acquiring dual
citizenship with the country, accepting a security clearance from his Australian
employer, and retaining his clearance while contemporaneously holding a U.S. security
clearance. While his choices are understandable, considering his circumstances when
he retired from U.S. defense contractor in 1993, they also reflect a current and ongoing
split preference for the United States and Australia.  
Because Applicant elected to retain his Australian citizenship, security clearance,
passport, and other privileges of Australian citizenship (e.g., a pension and home
16
ownership entitlements) while he still held dual U.S. citizenship and a U.S. security
clearance without seeking the written approval of authorized DoD officials, the
Government may apply certain provisions of disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 10(a) of AG
¶ 9, “exercise of any right, privilege or obligations of foreign citizenship after becoming a
U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  This DC includes but
is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such         
           benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another    
           country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and
(7) voting in a foreign election.”  
Specifically, DC ¶ 10(a)(1)(3)(5) and (7) apply to the established facts and
circumstances herein. By acquiring and retaining his Australian citizenship and
passport, Applicant was able to accept special real estate and mortgage borrowing
benefits in the Commonwealth of Australia that are not currently available to non-
Australian residents and citizens. As a dual citizen and resident of Australia, he has paid
income and property taxes to the Australian government and receives Australian
pension benefits.  And he has voted in Australian elections.  
Were Applicant to renounce his Australian citizenship and relinquish his
Australian security clearance, he risks a potential forfeiture of his property and his ability
to acquire Australian consulting assignments.  This creates a dilemma for Applicant who
has historically expressed his desire to keep his options open. His election to retain the
Australian citizenship he acquired in 1995 and preserve his consulting options in
Australia with his retention of his Australian citizenship makes good practical sense and
reflects entirely rational and understandable choices on his  part.  They also reflect split
preferences for his newly adopted country of Australia,  where he would like to retain a
presence if possible. 
Applicant surrendered his Australian passport in April 2011, in accordance with
established procedures for surrendering a foreign passport to a cognizant security
authority of the Australian government. In doing so, he does forfeit the short-term
flexibility of unfettered and undocumented travel.  Applicant is quite right on this point.
And, he may, accordingly, claim the benefits of another mitigating condition under
17
Guideline C. MC  ¶ 11(e), “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated,” is fully applicable as well to
Applicant’s situation.  Because his dual citizenship status is not based on his parent’s
citizenship, he may not claim the benefits of MC ¶ 11(a), “dual citizenship is based
solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” Nor are any of the other
potential mitigating conditions available to Applicant based on the developed record. 
Whole person precepts are certainly helpful to Applicant in surmounting the
Government’s preference concerns herein. The strong trust impressions he has forged
with his supervisors, coworkers, and friends who have worked with him add support to
his claims that during his more than 25 years of faithful service to the defense industry
he has demonstrated loyalty and preference for the United States.
Overall, though, Applicant is not able to persuade that his current preference is
with the United States. Because he made considerable use of Australian privileges
associated with his obtaining his Australian citizenship and passport in 1995, he
manifested a preference for Australia under the criteria as established by the Appeal
Board. Applicant fails to absolve himself of foreign preference concerns associated with
the presented issue of whether he retains a preference or split preference for his
adopted country (Australia), or his country of birth (the United States). Unfavorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a and
1.b of Guideline C.
Outside Activities that produce conflicts or potential conflicts of interest
Applicant’s contemporaneous, and potentially simultaneous possession of
security clearances with the US. DoD and Australia’s defense department poses a
conflict of interest with his U.S. DoD issuer on one side and a potentially similar conflict
risk with his Australian DoD employer. The Appeal Board addressed conflicts of interest
generally in ISCR Case No. 00-0244 at 3-5 (Appeal Board January 29, 2001). While
noting the special relationship the host country employing the applicant had with the
United States and the applicant’s discounting of any potential conflict of interest,  the
Board found  applicant’s conflict was not mitigated by the special allied relationship of
the two countries or by the absence of any realistic potential of the applicant’s being
subjected to undue influence by the host government he worked for. 
In ISCR Case No. 00-0244, supra, the Board noted applicant’s lack of a proposal
to terminate his conflict of interest, and found the applicant’s duties with his first
company to be incompatible with any security responsibilities he would have while
employed with his second company.  Considering all of the evidence of record, the
Board concluded that even if the likelihood of “undue influence, coercion or pressure to
disclose classified information could be discounted, the possibility of inadvertent
disclosure cannot.”  See id, at 6. The Board found the applicant failed to meet his
burden of proof and sustained the hearing decision.  
18
While the underlying facts differ in ISCR Case No. 00-0244 from Applicant’s
situation, the core principles that undergird conflict of interest concerns do not.  Where
conflicts of interest exist, the potential for inadvertent disclosures, even if not
intentioned, cannot be easily reconciled. Where actual or potential conflicts of interest
are found, they must necessarily be carefully scrutinized.
Absent written approval by the authorized DoD approving authority, his holding of
security clearances with both countries simultaneously (as he seeks to achieve) would
violate U.S. security guidelines, as they are currently written, and leave U.S. clearance
reviewers without any cognizable way of knowing and assessing what U.S. classified
information is shared with its U.S. counterpart, Australia.  
Based on the assembled facts, the Government may rely on two of the
disqualifying conditions covering outside activities: DC ¶37(a)(1), “any employment or
service, whether compensated or volunteer, with (1) “the government of a foreign
country” and (4), “any foreign, domestic, or international organization or person
engaged in analysis, discussion, or publication of material on intelligence, defense,
foreign affairs, or protected technology.”
To his credit, Applicant owns a proven track record for reliable and trustworthy
service in the U.S. defense industry before his retirement in 1993 and relocation to
Australia.  He has been honored with numerous awards and citations recognizing his
considerable contributions to the U.S. defense effort and his dedication to protecting
vital defense secrets.  
Holding of a U.S. security clearance permits little deviation in the holder’s fiducial
responsibilities and duties. Presumably, other governments like Australia impose similar
burdens on their holders of security clearances.  For so long as the clearance holder is
burdened with reciprocal fiducial obligations to each country he has clearances with, he
places himself at risk to even inadvertent compromises of classified information in his
possession and control.
Before or after he applied for his U.S. security clearance, Applicant had options
at his disposal. As a first option, he could have sought written approval from the
appropriate DoD authorizing official to maintain simultaneous security clearances with
the U.S. and Australia.  Alternatively, he could have formally relinquished his Australian
security clearance by posting a written request to relinquish his clearance to the
appropriate Australian government official responsible for administering clearances.
Applicant chose neither option and seeks a U.S. security clearance based on his
longstanding loyalty to the United States and his historically special contributions to U.S.
security interests.  
 Applicant’s maintenance of simultaneous security clearances presents conflicts
that cannot be safely discounted. While the risks of his holding dual clearances pertain
principally to risks of inadvertent disclosures while working on individual or joint projects,
they invite key concerns that cannot be reconciled without DoD written approvals.
19
Available mitigating conditions within DOHA’s jurisdiction require either an a priori
approval of Applicant’s holding simultaneous security clearances with the United States
and Australia, or that failing, relinquishment of his Australian security clearance. To
date, Applicant has pursued neither option, and as matters stand, he cannot avail
himself of any of the mitigating conditions covered by Guideline L. Unfavorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline L.
Foreign influence 
Applicant and his family have deep roots in the United States.  Determined to
make a new life for himself and W3, he acquired dual citizenship with Australia, gained
employment with an Australian defense organization, and took advantage of the
country’s privileges reserved for Australian citizens and residents: ownership of local
real estate, receipt of earned health and pension benefits, and a security clearance
sponsored by the Australian defense organization who employed him. 
Australia is a longstanding friend and ally of the United States with core values of
democracy, free markets, and adherence to the rule of law that compares favorably to
our own. Australia has a security treaty with the Unites States by which each member is
committed to the mutual protection of the other against outside aggressors. Since WW I,
Australia has participated in every conflict as a U.S. ally. Since gaining its independence
from the British Crown, Australia has flourished under well-established constitutional
government and institutional respect for human rights, and has benefitted from its strong
bilateral security and trade relations with the United States. Foreign ownership of real
estate within its homeland remains one of the few areas of disagreement between
Australia and this country.
Still, the Government urges trust concerns over risks that Applicant might use his
U.S. and Australian contacts and security clearances with both countries  to exploit his
real estate and other interests he retains in Australia.  Because he has a  security
clearance and potential Australian clients with needs for his special skills and
experience, conceivably, he might be subject to undue foreign influence by Australian
government authorities to access sensitive proprietary information in Applicant’s
possession or control. As such, he presents  a potential heightened security risk
covered by disqualifying condition  (DC) ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” of the AGs for foreign influence. 
Applicant’s special access through his holding of Australian citizenship and a
security clearance, combined with his own demonstrated split-preference for the
country, does pose some potential concerns for him because of the risks of undue
foreign influence that could potentially affect his use of his acquired real estate and
other gained financial benefits (e.g., his banking protections and his pension benefits) in
Australia.  But they do not appear to pose any heightened risks.
20
Applicant has no immediate family members resident in Australia. However, he
retains large Australian interests in real estate, bank accounts, and pension interests.
He also retains the potential for contacts with Australian government and military
officials by virtue of the Australia citizenship and clearance he retains. As a result,
consideration of DC ¶ 7(b), “connection to a foreign person, group, government, or
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign
person, group, or country by providing that information,” is warranted herein.
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or mandate
particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of foreign
countries in general.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country
may not be in another.  While foreign influence cases must by practical necessity be
weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing in the
supplied materials and country information about Australia. The AGs do take into
account the country’s demonstrated relations with the United States as an important
consideration in gauging whether the particular relatives with citizenship and residency
elsewhere create a heightened security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies of the
particular foreign regime involved do matter. 
Based on his case-specific circumstances, MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.”  is
not fully available to Applicant. For so long as he retains his Australian citizenship and
security clearance, Applicant poses some risk that could subject him to potential
pressures and influence from Australian government and military officials. 
Of some benefit to Applicant is MC ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group,
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant’s demonstrated
loyalty, patriotism, and professional commitments to the United States, are well
demonstrated and sufficient under these circumstances to neutralize all potential
conflicts that are implicit in his professional relationships with Australian government
and military officials.
 
 Neither MC ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create risk for foreign influence or
exploitation,” nor MC ¶ 8(f), “the value or routine nature of the foreign business,
financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual,” are
available to  Applicant. His Australian contacts and financial interests are considerable
21
and account for major reasons why he has been unwilling to renounce his Australian
citizenship and relinquish  his Australian security clearance.
Available to Applicant is MC ¶ 8(e), “the individual has promptly complied with
existing agency requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats
from persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country.” Applicant has been fully
forthcoming to date in keeping his U.S. DoD and DoJ official contacts apprised of his
work for the Australian government.
All told, Applicant’s interests and contacts in Australia, while considerable and
manifestly conflicting and potentially conflicting, do not appear to pose heightened risks
of pressure, coercion, and  influence that could be brought to bear on Applicant, his
former colleagues and friends, and family members.  Both Australia’s strong ties to the
United States and Applicant’s longtime support of U.S. defense and security efforts
minimizes any risk of pressure, coercion, or compromise in the near and foreseeable
future.
Whole-person assessment is available to minimize Applicant’s exposure to any
potential conflicts of interests with Australian government and military officials. His
former supervisors and colleagues with his previous U.S. employer and DOJ colleague
who worked closely with Applicant on a highly classified U.S. defense project consider
him very reliable and trustworthy. And Applicant is not aware of any risks of coercion,
pressure, or influence that he or any of his former colleagues, friends, or family
members might be exposed to.
Overall, any potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's having pension
rights and property interests in Australia, as well as Australian security clearance, are
sufficiently mitigated to permit safe predictive judgments about Applicant's ability to
withstand any Australian  risks of undue influence. Favorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by Guideline B.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in AG ¶ 2(a).
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE C (FOREIGN PREFERENCE): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
22
Subparas. 2.a and 2.b: For Applicant
GUIDELINE L (OUTSIDE ACTIVITIES): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 3.a: Against Applicant 
 Conclusions  
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
23
