                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 08-10098 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid Williams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s debts were discharged in a 1998 bankruptcy proceeding. Since then, 
he acquired 19 debts, totaling close to $40,000, that have been delinquent for many 
years. He failed to establish a track record of financial responsibility in addressing his 
legal obligations. Additionally, his unmitigated personal conduct security concern create 
doubt about his judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and his ability to follow the law, 
rules, and regulations. Eligibility to occupy a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) on 
August 8, 2008. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, 
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to 
make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with national security 
to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a public trust position.  
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
 
On October 15, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
indicating trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 1, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 3, 2011, to 
determine whether Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position should be granted or 
denied. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 9, 2011, convening a hearing on July 
13, 2011. At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 13. Applicant 
testified and presented exhibits (AE) 1 through 3. AE 3 was timely received post-
hearing. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 20, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1b, 1.d through 1.h, 2.a 
through 2.c, 2.e through 2.i, 2.l, and 2.n through 2.t.3 He denied the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 2.d, 2.j, 2.k, and 2.m. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of the evidence of record, including Applicant’s answer to the 
SOR, his March 2009 statement, and his demeanor and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He attended college 
from 1983 until 1988, and received a bachelor’s degree in business marketing. He 
married his wife in June 1997, and they separated in June 2010. His wife has a 16-year-
old daughter from a previous relationship who is currently living with Applicant. He did 
not adopt his stepdaughter. Applicant’s disabled mother also lives with him. He provides 
financial support for his step-daughter and his mother. His wife provides limited financial 
support for her daughter. 
 
Applicant worked for a Government law enforcement agency from June 1989 
until August 2005. He possessed a security clearance at the secret level during the 17 
years he worked for that agency. He was terminated from his employment after his 
security clearance was revoked as a result of criminal misconduct, personal conduct, 
and financial problems. (GE 9) In November 1997, Applicant issued a bad check for 
over $200. In March 1998, he was arrested and charged with issuing a bad check with 
the intent to defraud, a Class 6 felony. (GE 3) Because he worked for a law 
enforcement agency, Applicant was required to notify his employer of his arrest, 
 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised; and DoD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation). 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted in part, and denied in part, SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. 
However, during his hearing he admitted the factual allegations in both paragraphs.  
 
3 
 
 
charges, and financial problems. He failed to do so, and he was issued a letter of 
reprimand. (GE 4)  
 
In April 2001, Applicant was arrested and charged with reckless driving for 
driving 36 miles over the speed limit. He was convicted and sentenced to 60 days in jail 
(56 days suspended), to pay a fine, and to 12 months probation. His driver’s license 
was suspended for six months. (GE 5) He retained an attorney to represent him in the 
reckless driving trial. He issued a bad check to pay for his legal fees. In February 2002, 
Applicant was charged with issuing a bad check for over $200. He pled guilty to a 
misdemeanor charge. He was sentenced to pay a fine, to perform community service, 
and to serve 12 months supervised probation. In October 2002, Applicant received a 
letter of reprimand and was suspended from work for three days for recklessly driving a 
Government car, and for his failure to timely report an accident involving a Government 
car. (GE 7) 
 
In 2002, Applicant went on a family vacation and used his Government credit 
card to pay for his personal rental car expenses. He then failed to timely reimburse the 
Government. He was reprimanded and suspended for one day from his employment 
because of his misuse of a Government credit card, and for his failure to fulfill his 
financial obligations. (GE 8) As a result of Applicant’s personal conduct and financial 
problems, his security clearance was revoked in August 2005. Shortly thereafter, he 
was terminated from his employment. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant disclosed that he issued another bad check in June 
2010. He was arrested in August-September 2010, and charged with issuing a bad 
check with the intent to defraud. (Tr. 48) Applicant admitted to issuing the three bad 
checks, but he claimed that he reviewed his bank account balance prior to issuing the 
checks. In all three occasions, his wife withdrew money from his checking account 
without his knowledge and that caused the checks to bounce. He also claimed that his 
improper use of the Government credit card was an honest mistake. He was in a hurry 
and used the wrong credit card. 
 
After his termination, Applicant was unable to find a steady, full-time job for three 
years. He was unemployed and underemployed until August 2008, when he was hired 
by his current employer, a Government contractor. He provided financial support for his 
family by working part-time jobs and accepting unemployment benefits. 
 
Concerning his financial problems, Applicant explained that his 1998 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy filing was the result of his wife bringing numerous personal debts into the 
marriage. He claimed that he sought the discharge of his individually accumulated debts 
because he wanted to be in a better financial posture to assist his wife to pay the debts 
she brought into the marriage. (GE 10) 
 
Applicant submitted his application for a public trust position in August 2008. In 
his application, he disclosed that he issued a bad check in 2002. He failed to disclose 
the bad check he issued in March 1998, and the subsequent criminal charge filed 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
against him. He disclosed no legal judgments filed against him. He also indicated that 
he had no loans or financial obligations over 180 days delinquent. 
 
The subsequent background investigation disclosed the 19 delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR, totaling close to $40,000. In March 2009, Applicant was questioned 
by a Government investigator concerning his personal conduct, delinquent debts, and 
current financial problems. During the interview, Applicant claimed he was not aware of 
the judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.c (filed in October 2007), and 2.d (filed in October 
2006). Additionally, he claimed not to recognize the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
2.g, 2.h, 2.l, 2.q, and 2.s. He admitted that he was aware of the delinquent debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 2.i,4 2.m (delinquent since July 2004), 2.o (delinquent since April 2006), 2.p 
(delinquent since April 2007), and 2.q (delinquent since November 2004). The debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.o and 2.p were the result of personal loans taken by Applicant in 
2003-2004, to pay other delinquent debts. (Tr. 43) 
 
Applicant admitted during his 2009 interview that he had not taken any steps to 
pay, settle, dispute, or resolve any of his delinquent debts. He claimed that he was 
employing the services of a debt consolidation company to help him pay his debts. He 
attributed his financial problems to being unemployed for two years. He indicated that 
his family combined monthly income was $4,200 (Applicant’s income was $2,200 and 
his wife’s income was $2,000). His total monthly expenses were $4,135, with a net 
monthly remainder of $65. 
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that all the debts alleged in the SOR 
are Applicant’s delinquent debts, most of which have been delinquent for many years. 
At his hearing, Applicant explained that his current financial problems were the result of 
his and his wife’s periods of unemployment and underemployment, his 2010 separation 
from his wife, and him being the sole financial support for his mother and stepdaughter. 
He explained that most of his debts were acquired by him and his wife when he was 
making $70,000 a year and she was also working. Since August 2008, he has been 
making only around $40,000 a year, and his wife contributes very little to her daughter’s 
support.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant claimed he considered employing the services of a debt 
consolidation company to help him resolve his debts. He decided against it because he 
currently does not have the financial resources to do so. Applicant has not paid or 
resolved even his small delinquent debts (less than $300). He testified he only has 
sufficient income to pay for his day-to-day living expenses and necessities, but not to 
pay for his delinquent debts. He averred that he was working with a mortgage lender to 
repair his credit. He plans to take a second job sometime in the future to expedite the 
payment of his debts.  
 
4 Applicant claimed he paid this debt. However, he failed to present documentary evidence to 
support his claim. The debt is reported as delinquent in both the February and July 2010 credit reports, 
GE 11 and 12, respectively. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Applicant further claimed that in December 2010, he sent letters to his creditors 
to ascertain the validity of the debts, to dispute some debts, to inform creditors of his 
financial problems, and to request reduced payment schedules and a reduction of the 
debt owed. Applicant presented no documentary evidence of any payments made, 
contacts with creditors, disputed debts, or of any other actions taken to otherwise 
resolve his delinquent financial obligations since he acquired them.  
 
Applicant repeatedly stated that he is an honest and forthright person. He 
considers himself to be a hard-working, Christian family man. Applicant expressed 
remorse for his financial problems. He believes that his financial problems are due to 
circumstances beyond his control, and that he is currently doing all that he can to 
address his delinquent obligations. He noted he worked for another Government agency 
for 17 years, and that he held a security clearance at the secret level without any 
security violations.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s controlling adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to 
the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
“[S]ecurity clearance [or trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a trustworthiness concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant issued bad checks in March 1998, February 2002, and August 2010. 
He was arrested and charged with issuing bad checks with the intent to defraud. In 
1998, he was reprimanded for his failure to notify his employer that he was arrested and 
 
7 
 
 
charged with a criminal offense. He was convicted in April 2001, for reckless driving. In 
October 2002, he was suspended for three days from his job because of his reckless 
driving charges, and for  his failure to timely notify his employer that he was involved in 
an accident with a Government vehicle. In 2003, he misused a Government credit card 
and failed to pay the charges on time.  
 
Applicant’s overall behavior triggers the applicability of disqualifying condition AG 
¶ 16:  
 
(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and  
 
(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
After considering all the AG ¶ 17 mitigating conditions, I find none apply. 
Applicant’s frequent questionable behavior established a pattern of misconduct. His 
repeated offenses show that he is not learning from his mistakes, and that his 
questionable behavior is likely to recur. Considering his age, education, and job 
experience holding a security clearance, his misconduct cannot be considered minor, 
and it is not mitigated by the passage of time. His overall behavior shows questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, and an unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the trustworthiness concern is that failure or inability to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant filed for bankruptcy protection in 1998 and was discharged of his 
financial obligations. His financial problems have continued through the years as 
 
8 
 
 
demonstrated by him issuing bad checks and abusing the Government credit card. He 
accumulated 19 delinquent debts, totaling nearly $40,000. His financial problems 
worsened after he was terminated from his employment because of his personal 
misconduct. Later, he was unable to pay his debts because of his periods of 
unemployment, underemployment, and his separation from his wife. AG ¶ 19(a): 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
trustworthiness concerns. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial 
problems are ongoing. His periods of unemployment and underemployment were the 
result of his job termination because of his personal and criminal misconduct. Thus, his 
unemployment and underemployment were not the result of circumstances beyond his 
control. As such, they do not mitigate his financial considerations concerns. 
 
 Moreover, Applicant failed to establish that he acted responsibly under the totality 
of his circumstances. He filed for bankruptcy protection in 1998, and he did not learn 
from that experience. He has continued to accumulate significant delinquent debt, most 
of which remains unresolved. He presented little or no evidence of contact with 
creditors, settlements, payments, or of efforts to otherwise resolve his delinquent 
financial obligations since he acquired them. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 During his 17 years working for a law enforcement agency and holding a security 
clearance, Applicant was made aware of the Government’s financial considerations 
security concerns through his submissions of security clearance applications and when 
he was disciplined for issuing bad checks. He was made aware of those concerns again 
during his 2009 interview and through the October 2010 SOR. Notwithstanding, he took 
little action to resolve even his small debts. Applicant should have been more diligent in 
his efforts to resolve his delinquent financial obligations. On balance, and considering 
the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s financial irresponsibility casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant has not received counseling, his financial 
problem is ongoing, and there are no clear indications that his financial problems are 
under control. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. AG ¶ 20(f) is not raised by the evidence in 
this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
9 
 
 
                                           
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public trust position 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated in my whole-person analysis my comments 
on the analysis of Guidelines F and E. 
Applicant receives credit for being a good son and a good father. 
Notwithstanding, public trust concerns remain. Applicant acquired financial obligations 
beyond his financial means and then showed disregard for his legal obligation to pay his 
debts. He failed to establish a track record of financial responsibility. The record 
evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns 
arising from his financial considerations and personal conduct.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:     Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.e,       
    2.g – 2.j, and 2.l – 2.t:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.f and 2.k:    For Applicant5 
 
 
5 These two debts were paid by Applicant’s wife. (AE 3) 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position. Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust position is 
denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
