 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01488 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A, Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
September 20, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Personal Conduct security concerns related to his 
criminal history, employment history, and falsification surrounding his police record, 
alcohol arrests, and use of illegal substances. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 18, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines E, Personal Conduct, and J, Criminal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 18, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 21, 2011. DOHA issued 
 
2 
 
a notice of hearing on May 3, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
May 23, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GEs) 1 through 11, which were 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered no exhibits. He testified on his own 
behalf and called one witness. The record was left open until May 31, 2011, for the 
Applicant to submit additional documentation. On May 31, 2011, Applicant submitted a 
one-page letter, marked Exhibit (AE) A and Department Counsel indicated he had no 
objections. AE A was admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
June 1, 2011.  
 
Amendment to the SOR 
 
Pursuant to Additional Procedural Guidance ¶¶ E3.1.2, E3.1.3, E3.1.7, and 
E3.1.13 of the Directive, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR ¶ 1.a through 
1.m to correct a typographical error in the lettering of the SOR, which alleged two 
different allegations as ¶ 1.i. The SOR was amended to include allegations 1.a through 
1.n (instead of 1.a through 1.m, with two 1.i’s) in their correct alphabetical order without 
duplication. Further, Department Counsel moved to strike ¶2 of the SOR in its entirety, 
which alleged Criminal Conduct. Applicant had no objection to the amendments and I 
granted the motions. (Tr.8-17.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.b, 1.c, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.l. (Tr. 8-17.) He 
denies allegations 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.k, 1.m, and 1.n. (Tr. 8-17.) After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
  
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor since approximately 
2001. He is married and has two children and one step-son. He served in the Navy as 
an electronics technician from 1985 to 1989. (GE 1; GE 2; AE A; Tr. 51-55; 56-60.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges that Applicant was arrested in about April 1994 and charged 
with Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol and Drugs and Driving While having 
Measurable Blood Alcohol in System. The Applicant admits that in 1994 he was 
arrested. He claims that the arrest was for “wet reckless” and not Driving Under the 
Influence of Alcohol. Applicant explained that the incident occurred after he was struck 
by a hit-and-run driver. He admitted to drinking one beer prior to the incident. He 
claimed his blood alcohol content was only .03%. As a result of this charge, he was 
required to complete a first offender program. (GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 10; Tr. 32-34.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.b alleges that Applicant was cited in June 1996 and charged with 
Alcohol on Beach. Applicant admits this allegation. At hearing, he claimed he had “one 
foot on the beach” and didn’t know the law. He received a $60 ticket for this offense. He 
paid the fine in full. (GE 5; Tr. 34.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.c alleges that Applicant was arrested in July 2005 and charged with 
Driving Under the Influence. Applicant denied this allegation because he claims he was 
 
3 
 
only charged with Malicious Driving. He asserted he had only consumed one beer and 
was at the legal limit on this occasion. He stated he had been given a breathalyzer test 
and his blood alcohol content was .05% or .06%. The breath test in evidence shows that 
Applicant actually had a blood alcohol content of .92%. Applicant pled guilty to the 
lesser charge of Negligent Driving. As a result of this charge, Applicant was required to 
complete a “witness panel.” He was also fined $600. He had difficulties completing the 
court required witness panel because he was working in Japan at the time and could 
not locate a comparable class. As of December 2008, Applicant had not completed the 
“requirements for this ticket.”(GE 1; GE 7; GE 8; GE 9; Tr. 34.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.d alleges that Applicant falsified material facts on his Security 
Clearance Application electronically transmitted on January 20, 2000, in response to 
question “24. Your Police Record – Alcohol/Drug Offenses Have you ever been charged 
with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs? For this item, report 
information regardless of whether the record in your case has been ‘sealed’ or 
otherwise stricken from court record. The single exception to this requirement is for 
certain convictions under the Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court 
issued an expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 3607.” 
He answered “No”, whereas in truth, he failed to list that he had been arrested for the 
alcohol offenses as set forth in subparagraphs 1.a, and 1.b, above. Applicant explained 
that he did not know why he answered this question “No,” but denied that the 
falsification was intentional. He testified that he has worked for the Government “long 
enough to know there is no sense in hiding it.” He testified he disclosed everything in his 
security clearance interview. However, Applicant admitted in his April 15, 2003 
statement to Special Agents of the Defense Security Service that with respect to the 
charge of Alcohol on Beach (SOR ¶ 1.b), “the reason I did not list this on my security 
questionnaire or discuss it during my prior interview with DSS was because it was just a 
non-traffic ticket and I don’t believe it was required.” (GE 2; GE 5; Tr. 35-36.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.e alleges that Applicant falsified material facts on his Security 
Clearance Application electronically transmitted on January 20, 2000, in response to 
question “27. Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity – Illegal Drug Use The 
following questions pertain to the illegal use of drugs or drug activity. You are required 
to answer the questions fully and truthfully, and your failure to do so could be grounds 
for an adverse employment decision or action against you, but neither your truthful 
response nor information derived from your responses will be used as evidence against 
you in any subsequent criminal proceeding.” He answered “No,” whereas in truth, he 
deliberately failed to list that he had used marijuana in at least 1994. Applicant 
explained that as a result of his “Wet Reckless” conviction in 1994, he was required to 
take an alcohol class. The teacher of the class thought he came to class stoned and 
asked him about it. Applicant didn’t think she was serious and answered “sure.” He was 
dismissed for that class. At hearing, Applicant denied using marijuana in 1994. 
However, he testified used marijuana while in college from 1984 to 1985. (GE 2; Tr. 36.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.f alleges that in a signed, sworn statement dated November 28, 
2001, Applicant falsified material facts in that he stated he first used marijuana from age 
14 or 15 to September 1984 and from April 1989 to 1990. Applicant’s statements with 
 
4 
 
respect to his drug use are confusing and contradictory. He testified he last used 
marijuana in college but explained in his November 28, 2001 statement that he “did not 
use it” at college because he did not have close friends in college. His November 2001 
statement regarding his drug use did disclose he used cocaine and psilocybin 
mushrooms while in college. He used marijuana again from 1989 to 1990 when his 
friends would pass around a joint. Court records indicate that in 1994, Applicant was 
reported to the Court for failure to comply with the requirements of the DUI program by 
reporting to the program under the influence of drugs. Applicant testified he did not use 
marijuana in 1994. (GE 6; GE 10; Tr. 36-40.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.g alleges that Applicant was terminated from employment with a 
government contractor in violation of its corporate policy, which included a violation of 
the tobacco and smoke free environment, absence from work services policy, and for 
recording more hours on his time card than worked. Applicant claimed that his 
supervisor did not like him. He testified that his supervisor had no proof Applicant 
smoked in the company vehicle, as the write-up alleged. He indicated he did not know 
what the time card allegations were about. He just signed the write-up as was required. 
He claimed that his supervisors were later fired for misconduct and that prior to leaving 
his employer he filed a complaint against his supervisor. He failed to present 
documentation to support his claims. (GE 3; GE 8; GE 11; Tr. 40-42.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.h alleges that Applicant failed to return his government issued CAC 
card to his employer after his termination in May 2007. Applicant testified that no one 
asked him for his CAC card at the time he was terminated. Eventually, when he was 
asked to return it, he could not locate it. However, in his Answers to Interrogatories 
dated December 22, 2010, Applicant stated, “My CAC card was turned in to the security 
office . . .” He indicated he “had no further communication with [new employer] about 
[his] CAC card or anything else to [his] knowledge.” (GE 11; Tr. 42.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.i alleges that Applicant falsified material facts on his Security 
Clearance Application electronically transmitted on November 26, 2007, in response to 
“section 23: Your Police Record For this item, report information regardless of whether 
the record in your case has been ‘sealed’ or otherwise stricken from the court record. 
The single exception to this requirement is for certain convictions under the Federal 
Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an expungement order under the 
authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 3607. d. Have you ever been charged with or 
convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?” Applicant did list an August 
2006 (estimated) arrest for “malicious driving” and indicated he had “to go to meetings 
and pay fine,” but omitted his other alcohol arrests set forth in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, above. 
Applicant explained that his omission was not intentional. He testified that he did 
answer, “Yes,” to this question, but only listed the most recent arrest. He did not recall 
why he only listed one arrest. (GE 1; Tr. 42-43.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.j alleges that Applicant was arrested in October 2008 and charged 
for Driving While License Suspended-3rd Degree. At that time, he also had an 
outstanding warrant for Driving Under the Influence (SOR ¶ 1.c). (GE 9.) 
 
 
5 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.k alleges that Applicant falsified material facts during his October 
29, 2008 interview with an investigator for the Department of Defense when he 
indicated he had not received any alcohol counseling or treatment. Contrary to his 
statement, records reflect that Applicant received alcohol treatment while in the Navy in 
approximately 1986 and 1987. Applicant testified that in 1986 he “self referred” for 
alcohol treatment after he showed up late for work while serving in the Navy. He 
attended a 40 hour alcohol course. In 1988, Applicant was late for work and sent to a 
counselor. He was referred to two weeks inpatient treatment. He testified he 
participated in Alcoholics Anonymous and was sober for a total of six years. Applicant 
had no explanation for denying his alcohol treatment when he was interviewed in 
October 2008. He indicated he “forgot” about the treatment. (GE 4; GE 8; Tr. 43-45.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.l alleges that Applicant was cited in September 2009 for Proof of 
Registration. Applicant explained that he had mailed in his registration documentation to 
the state, but had not received the registration sticker for his license plate back. He was 
parked in a parking lot and found the citation on his windshield when he returned to his 
vehicle. (Tr. 45-46.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.m alleges that Applicant falsified a signed, certified statement dated 
April 28, 2010, when he indicated that he had not been involved in any alcohol incidents 
except for the July 2005 incident. He omitted the alcohol offenses set out in ¶¶1.a and 
1.b, above. Applicant testified that he did bring up the 19951 incident (¶ 1.a) and that he 
forgot about the alcohol on the beach charge (¶ 1.b). Applicant’s April 28, 2010 
statement supports his testimony that he did bring up what he described as the “wet 
reckless” charge in 1994. (GE 4; Tr. 46-47.) 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.n alleges that Applicant signed a notarized interrogatory dated 
December 22, 2010, which contained a falsified statement with respect to Applicant’s 
past drug use. In the interrogatory, Applicant was asked, “Have you illegally used any 
controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, 
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants 
(barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.) or 
prescription drugs.” Applicant answered “No.” In truth, he used marijuana in at least 
October 2005 and from approximately 1979-1994. He also used cocaine and psilocybin 
mushrooms while attending college in 1984-1985. Applicant claims that in 2005, when 
he was pulled over for Malicious Driving (as alleged in ¶ 1.c.), the officer claimed to 
have found “green particles” in Applicant’s sunglasses case. The green particles were 
alleged to be marijuana. Applicant testified that the police statement was “not correct.” 
He denied intentionally falsifying this statement. (GE 3; GE 10; Tr. 47-49.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife testified that she finds her husband to be a truthful person. He 
has been supporting her through school. They have been married for 15 years. (Tr. 56-
60.) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant appears to have confused the date of his 1994 arrest and indicates in his testimony and his statement that 
it occurred in 1995. 
 
6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another country, 
engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that 
country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group.  
 
 Applicant admits to being charged with consuming alcohol on the beach; his 
2005 arrest for Driving Under the Influence; failing to return his CAC card; his October 
2008 arrest for Driving While License Suspended; and that he was cited in September 
2009 for Proof of Registration. The Government also presented sufficient information to 
establish that Applicant was arrested in 1994 for Driving Under the Influence; he was 
terminated from an employer due to violations of corporate policy; he failed to return his 
CAC card as required; he falsified material facts on his January 2000 and November 
2007 Security Clearance Applications; he falsified his November 2001 and April 2010 
statements; he provided the investigator with false facts in his October 2008 interview; 
and he falsified material facts in his answers to interrogatories dated December 2010. 
Applicant’s testimony and explanations regarding these incidents and false statements 
 
8 
 
are not credible. His statements are confusing and contradictory. He has not adequately 
explained his omissions. I find they were deliberate. His inability to tell the truth about 
his criminal incidents and drug use, along with his termination and failure to return his 
CAC card, casts doubts on his candor and creates a vulnerability to exploitation. The 
Government has established sufficient concern under AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(b), and 16(e) to 
disqualify Applicant from possessing a clearance.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant's falsification and poor personal conduct is unmitigated. Falsification of 
information provided to the Government cannot be considered minor. He has not been 
forthcoming with the truth and has made little attempt to correct his omissions. His 
statements contain numerous inconsistencies and cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Further, the arrests, drug use, employee 
misconduct, and failure to return his CAC card demonstrate a long pattern of 
misconduct. He has not shown sufficient steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation. AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(c), and 17(e) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant has served the Navy for six years and has worked in his current 
position for ten years. His wife finds him to be an honest person. However, his conduct 
indicates a lack of judgment and trustworthiness, and raises doubts as to whether he 
understands what is required of those who hold security clearances. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a through 1.n:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
