 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07563 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 5, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
In an undated response, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on August 3, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
August 10, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on August 31, 2011. 
Department Counsel offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 that were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
 
without objection. Department Counsel’s list of exhibits was marked as hearing exhibit 
(HE) 1. Applicant testified, but called no witnesses and offered no exhibits. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 12, 2011.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old security officer employed by a defense contractor. He 
has worked for his current employer for over two years. He graduated from high school 
in 2001 and attended two years of community college. He has never been married and 
has no children. This is the first time that he has applied for a security clearance.2  
 
 The SOR alleges 15 delinquent debts totaling about $22,521. These debts were 
listed on credit reports obtained on June 27, 2009; October 28, 2009; and March 17, 
2011. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.p). His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact.3 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to a period of unemployment and low 
paying jobs. His care for his ailing mother also contributes to his financial problems. He 
does admit, however, that he was young and has made financial mistakes. Currently, he 
is only working part time. Because he frequently transports his mother to medical 
appointments and treatments, his ability to work additional hours has been limited. From 
January 2007 to December 2007, he worked for an investigative company that required 
him to travel often. Under the company’s policies, he was responsible financially for 
travel expenses if he lost receipts or for hotel bills incurred above the authorized 
reimbursement limits. At the hearing, he indicated that he resigned from the company 
because he could not afford the travel expenses. In his interview with an Office of 
Personnel Management investigator in July 2009, he stated that he did not officially 
resign, but chose to resign because it was better than being fired. After leaving that job, 
he was unemployed from December 2007 to December 2008 and did not receive 
unemployment compensation for that period. He then was employed in a low-paying job 
for six months before obtaining his current part-time job.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 12-13, 25-26; GE 1. Parts of Applicant’s Answer are apparently missing from the record. 
His Answer does not reflect that he requested a hearing, but he testified that he requested a hearing in 
his Answer.  
 
2 Tr. at 6-8, 88; GE 1. 
 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
4 Tr. at 22-24, 30-49, 54, 56-57, 88; GE 2. During his interview with an Office of Personnel 
Management investigator, Applicant reportedly stated that the vice-president of the investigative company 
advised him that his resignation was accepted. He indicated that, although he did not officially resign, he 
did not challenge that decision because he thought resigning was better than being fired. In his Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), Applicant indicated that he was suspended by the 
company in October 2007 because he was arrested for driving while his license was suspended. GE 1 at 
24. At the hearing, he testified that his license was suspended because his friend who worked for the 
police department forgot to “fix” his traffic tickets. Tr. at 42-44. 
 
 
3 
 
 Each of the alleged debts is addressed below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a – judgment for $2,556. This debt was for a car loan that Applicant 
obtained in 2006. He was making payments on this loan until he resigned from his job in 
December 2007. Since then, he has not been able to make any payments, but still has 
possession of the vehicle. He plans to start making payments when he is able to do so.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b – charged-off debt for $9,038. This debt was for a car loan that 
Applicant cosigned with his fiancée in 2008. She was supposed to make the payments, 
but failed to do so. The vehicle has been repossessed. He admits that he is financially 
responsible for this debt. He has had no contact with the creditor.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c – charged-off debt for $258. This debt was a credit card that he 
obtained in college with a $200 or $250 limit. He claimed that he never reached the 
credit limit and the card was declined. He refuses to pay this debt. He provided no 
documents showing that he has a legitimate basis for disputing this debt.7 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d – collection account for $873. This debt was for a credit card with a 
$200 limit that he obtained to rebuild his credit history. He stopped making payments on 
this debt when he resigned from his job in December 2007. Since then, he has not been 
in contact with this creditor.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e – collection account for $831. This debt was for an overdrawn bank 
account. Applicant received a check from an individual that he deposited in his bank 
and then withdrew the money. The check bounced, causing the deficiency. The bank 
indicated that it would accept a payment arrangement, but he has not yet made those 
arrangements.9 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f – collection account for $90. This debt was for car insurance. Applicant 
claimed that he had no knowledge of the debt. He had car insurance while working for 
the investigative company, but does not remember the name of that insurance 
company. He has not contacted the insurance company or the collection agency about 
this debt. 10 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g – collection account for $2,015. This debt was for a company travel 
card that Applicant used while working for the investigative company. He claimed this 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 23-24, 26-31; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 24, 58-59; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 25, 59-61; GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 61-63, 67; GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. at 63-67; GE 2. 
 
10 Tr. at 67-68; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
was the company’s debt and he was not responsible for it. He also noted that the 
company was taking money from his paycheck to pay bills arising from his use of this 
credit card. He indicated that former employees of the company have brought a lawsuit 
against the company because of its credit card practices. He indicated that he is a party 
to that lawsuit, but provided no documents showing that he has a legitimate basis for 
disputing this debt.11 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h – medical debt for $100. This debt was placed for collection in 
October 2005. Applicant claimed that he has no knowledge of this debt.12 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i – collection account for $125. This debt was a doctor bill. He still 
receives medical care from this doctor. He stated that he has been making payments on 
this bill, but provided no documentary proof.13 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j – collection account for $351. This debt was for a loan. Initially, 
Applicant had a loan with this creditor that he paid. He then borrowed more money that 
he has not repaid. He has not had contact with the creditor and stated that there is no 
reason why he has not paid this debt.14 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k – collection account for $759. This debt arose from a college class 
that Applicant dropped. He thought he dropped the class before the deadline for doing 
so. He has not made any payments on this debt.15 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.m – medical debt for $2,446. This debt was placed for collection in May 
2008. Applicant claimed that he has no knowledge of this debt.16 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.n – collection account for $2,479. Applicant claimed this debt is a 
duplicate of the one alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Department Counsel agreed. This debt is 
resolved.17 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.o – collection account for $150. Applicant opened this account to 
purchase some jewelry for his mother. He mother was supposed to pay the monthly 
balance, but failed to do so.18 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 23, 37-49, 68; GE 2. 
 
12 Tr. at 68-69; GE 3, 4. 
 
13 Tr. at 68-69; GE 2. 
 
14 Tr. at 24, 71-72; GE 2. 
 
15 Tr. at 25, 72-73; GE 2. 
 
16 Tr. at 69-71; GE 2. 
 
17 Tr. at 69-71, 73-74. 
 
18 Tr. at 74-75; GE 2. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.p – judgment for $450. This debt arose from an apartment that 
Applicant leased. In 2005, the apartment was having sewage problems and he refused 
to pay his rent. He went to court over the issue. He indicated that the judge asked him if 
his rent was $450 and he responded “yes.” A judgment was rendered against him. He 
asked why the judgment was entered and was told that he admitted the debt. He 
complained and the judge told him there was nothing further that could be done. He has 
not paid this debt.19 
 
 In responding to interrogatories in August 2010, Applicant stated: “None of these 
debts have been paid. Right now I’m not financially able at the current time to take care 
of these debts. But when I am able to I ensure you that these matters will be 
resolved.”20 
 
 Applicant lives with his fiancée, and they share living expenses. He indicated that 
he is current on his living expenses. In August 2010, he submitted a Personal Financial 
Statement (PFS) that reflected his net monthly income ranged from $1,400 to $2,200 
and that his total monthly expenses were $2,182. In that PFS, he did not list any debt 
payments.21 
 
 A week before the hearing, he purchased a vehicle for $11,800. He financed that 
purchase through a bank, put down no money on that purchase, and will soon have 
monthly payments of $299. In 2010, he received a tax refund of about $5,000. He stated 
that he did not use any of that refund to pay delinquent debts, but used it to pay for 
living expenses. He stated that he is living paycheck to paycheck and does not have a 
budget. He has not received any financial counseling. He indicated that he will attempt 
to pay the delinquent debts in the next couple of months.22 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
                                                          
19 Tr. at 75-77. 
 
20 GE 2. 
 
21 Tr. at 57-58, 80, 88-89; GE 2. 
 
22 Tr. at 77-79, 85-87. 
 
 
6 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to satisfy them for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are ongoing and significant. There is no indication that they will 
not recur. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant admitted that he has made financial mistakes. In 2007, he resigned 
from a job when it appeared he was about to be fired. After his resignation, he was 
unemployed for about one year and then was employed in a low-paying job for six 
months before obtaining his current part-time job. Such circumstances do not support a 
determination that his financial problems arose from conditions beyond his control. He 
does, however, care for his ailing mother, which is a condition beyond his control. To 
obtain full credit under AG ¶ 20(b), he must also have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Here, given that he has not taken any meaningful action to resolve his 
 
8 
 
delinquent debts since his financial problems arose, I cannot find that he has acted 
responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant has not obtained financial counseling. He presented no documentary 
evidence showing that he has made payments on any of the delinquent debts. No 
settlement agreements were offered into evidence. There is no indication that these 
debts are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not applicable.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.n was a duplicate of the one in SOR ¶ 1.a. When the same 
conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in an applicant’s favor.23 Therefore, SOR ¶ 1.n is 
resolved in Applicant’s favor. Although he contests various other debts, he presented no 
documentary evidence to show he has a legitimate basis for disputing them. In absence 
of supporting documentary evidence, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. He has failed to 
take meaningful action to resolve his financial problems. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s service to his employers as well as his periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. Nevertheless, he has not established that he is 
                                                          
23 ISCR .Case No. 03-04704 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005. 
 
 
9 
 
financially responsible. He does not have a plan for resolving his debts. He has taken 
minimal action to address them and they remain unresolved. Despite his ongoing 
financial problems, he recently took on additional debt by purchasing a vehicle. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a–1.m:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.n:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o–1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
