 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05224 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Foreign Influence security concerns but failed to mitigate 
Personal Conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 5, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 26, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 18, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on May 31, 2011, and the hearing was convened as 
 
2 
 
scheduled on June 29, 2011. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 
11, 2011. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Afghanistan and Pakistan. There was no objection from Applicant 
and the request was approved. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Ia. 
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.1   
 
Evidence 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as HE II. 
Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without 
objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. 
Applicant submitted AE C, which was admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s post-hearing memorandum is marked HE III.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance for the first time. He was born in Afghanistan. He left 
Afghanistan in 1987 when his whole family moved to Pakistan. He married in 1994. His 
wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen. He has three children, ages 11, 7, and 5, who were 
born in the United States.2  
 
 Applicant’s parents moved the family to Pakistan in 1987 so the children could 
avoid military service. The family stayed in Pakistan for three years before coming to the 
United States. Applicant first entered the United States illegally, but was granted 
political asylum in 1989. He was naturalized in 1995. He obtained his college degree in 
2004. Since November 2010, he has served as a language advisor for a defense 
contractor. He deployed in this capacity to Afghanistan from November 2010 through 
May 2011.3   
 
 The SOR alleged Applicant had several relatives with connections to 
Afghanistan, either through citizenship or residency. Applicant provided documentation 
that his sister is currently a citizen of Germany. She is a housewife and he has only 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 13-14. 
 
2 Tr. at 6-7, 35-36, 38-39; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 35-40; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
monthly contact with her. Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law both reside in the 
United States. His mother-in-law became a U.S. citizen and received a U.S. passport in 
June 2011. His father-in-law’s citizenship is pending. They have no affiliation with the 
Afghanistan government. Applicant has monthly contact with them.4 
  
 Applicant had five sisters-in-law who were citizens of Afghanistan and who 
resided in Pakistan. Three no longer live in Pakistan, two moved to the Netherlands and 
the third moved to England. None of them are affiliated with the Afghanistan or Pakistan 
governments. Applicant has contact with these sisters-in-law about once a year. He also 
has a sister-in-law who is an Afghanistan citizen and also resides there. She is a 
housewife, not affiliated with the Afghanistan government. He has contact with this 
sister-in-law about once every five years. He also has a brother-in-law who is a citizen 
of Afghanistan and a resident of France. He is a salesman and has no affiliation with the 
Afghanistan government. Applicant’s last contact with this brother-in-law was over one 
year ago.5 
 
 Applicant applied for a linguist position with another federal agency in 2002. He 
was denied a position because he failed the language test. In 2008, Applicant reapplied 
for a federal linguist position. This time he was interviewed for a position and a counter 
intelligence (CI) screening questionnaire was completed from his interview answers on 
December 11, 2008. During his interview, he disclosed that he sent money to his 
parents-in-law, who were living in Pakistan at the time, using the Hawala6 system. He 
admitted to sending approximately $150-$200 six times a year between 2003 and 2004. 
He also disclosed that he loaned his brother-in-law, who lives in France, $25,000 to 
assist him with his business. Additionally, he disclosed during the interview that he had 
five sisters-in-law who, at the time, were citizens of Afghanistan and resided in Pakistan 
as well as one sister-in-law who was a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. These 
disclosures were then documented on Applicant’s CI screening questionnaire dated 
December 11, 2008. Applicant was not selected for a linguist position in 2008. He 
believed he was put on some kind of “hold” position until his security clearance was 
approved.7 
 
 Applicant went through a subsequent interview and resulting CI screening 
questionnaire that was completed on September 27, 2010.8 During this process, he 
failed to disclose his financial assistance to his parents-in-law in 2003-2004, he failed to 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 25, 55; GE 4; AE C. 
 
5 Tr. at 56-63; GE 4; AE C. 
 
6 Hawala is defined as: an underground banking system based on trust whereby money can be 
made available internationally without actually moving it or leaving a record of the transaction. 
Dictionary.com. 
 
7 Tr. at 40-49; GE 4. 
 
8 Both CI screening questionnaires dated December 11, 2008, and September 27, 2010, 
contained the same substantive questions and were numbered in the same manner. 
 
 
4 
 
disclose the $25,000 loan to his brother-in-law, and he failed to disclose the six sisters-
in-law described above. The interviewer for the September 2010 interview noted in the 
CI screening package the discrepancies Applicant made from his December 2008 
interview concerning the Hawala payments to his in-laws and the loan to his brother-in-
law.9 
 
 Applicant explained the differences in his two interviews and follow-up CI 
screening questionnaires by stating that he was only interviewed for 20 minutes during 
the September 2010 interview and was not specifically asked about Hawala or about a 
loan to his brother-in-law so he did not bring up the subjects. He went on to say the first 
interview (December 2008) was more extensive and lasted much longer, approximately 
two hours. However, the CI screening documents do not support Applicant’s assertion. 
According to the interviewer of the December 2008 interview, the interview started at 
1135 hrs and ended at 1300 hrs, for a total interview time of one hour and twenty-five 
minutes. According to the interviewer of the September 2010 interview, the interview 
started at 1200 hrs and ended at 1330 hours, for a total interview time of one hour and 
thirty minutes. The second interview was actually longer than the first one.10  
 
 Applicant first explained the failure to not list his six sisters-in-law in his answer to 
the SOR by stating he was told by his security officer he did not need to list his sisters-
in-law. However, when Department Counsel pointed out that he did list some sisters-in-
law during his September 2010 interview, Applicant changed his testimony to state that 
he now remembered he was told he did not have to list any sisters-in-law from his wife’s 
side of the family. I do not find Applicant’s testimony credible.11  
 
 Two officers, who served with Applicant in Afghanistan, provided character letters 
on his behalf. The letters describe him as taking part in over 100 combat missions, 
incurring significant personal danger during those missions. He performed his translator 
duties in a reliable and effective manner. It was noted by one officer that Applicant was 
frequently exposed to sensitive critical information during missions and from all 
accounts he maintained close guard over that information. Both officers expressed their 
trust in Applicant.12 
 
Afghanistan13 
 
 Afghanistan is located in Southwestern Asia and borders Pakistan, Iran, Russia, 
and other countries. It has been an independent nation since 1919, after the British 
relinquished control. A monarchy ruled from 1919 until a military coup in 1973. 
Following a Soviet-supported coup in 1978, a Marxist government emerged. In 1979, 
                                                          
9 GE 3, 4. 
 
10 Tr. at 46, 65; GE 3 (see p. ooo), GE 4 (noted as p. 37, but it is the first page of the exhibit). 
 
11 Tr. at 50-51; Applicant’s answer to SOR. 
 
12 AE A-B. 
 
13 HE I. 
 
5 
 
Soviet forces invaded and occupied Afghanistan. A resistance movement eventually led 
to an agreement known as the Geneva Accords, signed by Afghanistan, Pakistan, the 
United States, and the Soviet Union, which ensured Soviet forces withdrew by February 
1989. The resistance party was not part of the Accords and refused to accept it. A civil 
war ensued after the Soviet withdrawal. In the mid-1990s, the Taliban rose to power 
largely due to anarchy and the existence of warlords. The Taliban sought to impose 
extreme interpretation of Islam and committed massive human right violations. The 
Taliban also provided sanctuary to Osama Bin-Laden, Al Qaida, and other terrorist 
organizations.  
 
 After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, demands to expel Bin-Laden and 
his followers were rejected by the Taliban. U.S. forces and a coalition partnership 
commenced military operations in October 2001 that forced the Taliban out of power in 
November 2001. The new democratic government took power in 2004 after a popular 
election. Despite that election, terrorists including Al-Qaida and the Taliban continue to 
assert power and intimidation within the country. Safety and security are key issues, 
because these terrorists target United States and Afghan interests by suicide 
operations, bombings, assassinations, carjacking, assaults, and hostage taking. At this 
time, the risk of terrorist activity remains extremely high. The country’s human rights 
record remains poor and violence is rampant.  
 
 Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the violence and increased attacks. 
Despite the loss of some key leaders, insurgents have adjusted their tactics to maintain 
momentum following the arrival of additional U.S. forces. It is suspected that the Taliban 
was most likely responsible for suppressing voter turnout in the August 2009 elections 
in key parts of the country. The Taliban’s expansion of influence in northern Afghanistan 
since late 2007 has made the insurgency a country-wide threat. Over 5,000 people died 
within the last year as a result of the insurgency. 
 
 Afghan leaders continue to face the eroding effect of official corruption and drug 
trade. Criminal networks and narcotics constitute a source of funding for the insurgency 
in Afghanistan. Other insurgent groups and anti-coalition organizations also operate in 
Afghanistan. Insurgents have targeted Non-Government Organizations, journalists, 
government workers, and United Nation workers. Instability along the Pakistan-Afghan 
frontier continued to provide Al-Qaida leadership with mobility and the ability to conduct 
training and operational planning, targeting Western European and U.S. interests. The 
United States Department of State has declared that the security threat to all American 
citizens in Afghanistan remains critical as no part of the country is immune to violence.  
 
Pakistan14 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic with a population of more than 167 
million people. After September 11, 2001, Pakistan supported the United States and an 
international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom to remove the Taliban from 
power. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in the Federally 
                                                          
14 HE Ia. 
 
6 
 
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan and in the Balochistan Province, which 
borders Iran and Afghanistan. The leader of the Taliban operates openly in Pakistan, as 
do extremists from the Pakistani Taliban and Al Qaida. Taliban financing has been 
traced from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to 
strengthen its military and technical capabilities. Pakistan has intensified its 
counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has been mixed. 
 
The U.S. Department of State has defined several areas of Pakistan to be 
terrorist safe havens. The security situation in Afghanistan worsened in 2008, driven in 
part by insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous 
Afghan-Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide vital 
sanctuary to Al Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups. 
Al-Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the Afghan 
insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and Western interests 
in Pakistan and worldwide. Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremists 
groups, Al Qaida uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare 
regional and transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and 
supplies. Al Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of destabilizing suicide 
attacks throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high-profile government, military, and 
western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in 2008 due to such attacks. 
In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan conducted at least 40 
suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed about 600 Pakistani 
civilians and security force personnel.   
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to 
Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several American citizens present in 
Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other personal reasons. The human rights 
situation in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, and disappearances 
occur. Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is widespread, and the 
Pakistani government maintains several domestic intelligence agencies to monitor 
politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
intelligence agents. Credible reports indicate that authorities use wiretaps and monitor 
mail without the requisite court approval, and also monitor phones and electronic 
messages. In addition, Pakistan continues to develop its own nuclear infrastructure, 
expand nuclear weapon stockpiles, and seek more advanced warhead and delivery 
systems. In the aftermath of Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United 
States cut off military aid to Pakistan for several years.  
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the United States in 
counterterrorism methods. Pakistan committed to elimination of terrorist camps on the 
Pakistan-Afghanistan border and subsequently sent thousands of troops and sustained 
hundreds of casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified its 
counterinsurgency efforts, and demonstrated determination and persistence in 
combating militants. The United States is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster 
Pakistan’s military forces and security. In 2003, President Bush announced that the 
United States would provide Pakistan with $3 billion in economic and military aid over 
the next five years beginning in 2005. On May 1, 2011, U.S. Special Forces personnel 
 
7 
 
raided a large Al-Qaida compound located in Pakistan where they found and killed 
Osama bin Laden, the leader of Al-Qaida. He was found in a residential neighborhood 
in Pakistan.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 7 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
  Applicant sister and mother-in-law no longer have any affiliations with 
Afghanistan. Neither AG ¶¶ 7(a) nor 7(b) applies to them. His father-in-law, six sisters-
in-law, and a brother-in-law have affiliations with Afghanistan and two sisters-in-law still 
live in Pakistan. Both Afghanistan and Pakistan have human rights issues, and they 
have been victimized by insurgencies and terrorism. The connection Applicant’s family 
members have with Afghanistan and Pakistan creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential 
conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
 
9 
 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant has been in the United States since 1989, and he has been a U.S. 
citizen since 1995. His wife and children are U.S. citizens. His parents-in-law both 
reside in the United States, one is currently a citizen and the other is seeking 
citizenship. Of his six sisters-in-law of concern, only one currently resides in 
Afghanistan. She is a housewife with no affiliation with the Afghanistan government. His 
brother-in-law is also not a resident of Afghanistan. Two of his sisters-in-law live in 
Pakistan, but he has limited contact with them and they have no affiliation with the 
government. It is unlikely that Applicant would be put in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of his in-laws and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) is 
applicable.  
 
 Applicant served the Afghanistan mission at from late 2010 into May 2011. He 
served on combat missions. He made a significant contribution to the war effort. He was 
trusted by military commanders to translate vital information and provide invaluable 
cultural insight. He also had access to sensitive information and protected it. The 
Appeal Board has stated that such testimony, standing alone, is of limited value, unless 
there is record evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner in the past in 
comparable circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous track record of 
complying with security regulations and procedures in the context of dangerous, high-
risk circumstances in which he or she made a significant contribution to the national 
security.15 In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the Appeal Board 
discussed this issue: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
 
10 
 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
 
I find Applicant has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
America that he can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
 
GUIDELINE E, PERSONAL CONDUCT 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.  
Applicant failed to provide relevant information during his September 2010 
interview with an investigator. He failed to provide information that he previously 
provided during a security interview. Not coincidentally, that earlier disclosed 
information was considered when Applicant was not given the position. Therefore, 
Applicant must have concluded that he was in a better position to get a security 
clearance if he did not disclose the information concerning his use of the Hawala 
system to give money to his in-laws, his loan to his brother-in-law, and his sisters-in-law. 
Moreover, Applicant’s explanation for not listing the information was not credible. AG ¶ 
16(b) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and considered the following as potentially applicable: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
  Applicant’s nondisclosure of relevant information sought in the course of his 
application to be a linguist is not a minor offense, nor infrequent. Despite the statements 
 
11 
 
attesting to Applicant’s good character, he has established a pattern of deceitful 
behavior by providing information during his CI screening process that casts doubt on 
his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and service in Afghanistan. 
I also considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Afghanistan. Guideline B is not 
limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United States has a compelling 
interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, 
organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of 
whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.”16 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be 
made with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
12 
 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense. However, he also deliberately failed to 
provide relevant information during his security screening process. He compounded that 
deception by providing explanations that are not logical or supported by the evidence. 
Therefore, although Applicant met his burden to mitigate the foreign influence concerns, 
he failed to mitigate the personal conduct concerns created by his deceptive 
nondisclosures.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude although Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns, he 
has not mitigated the Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
