                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01284 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid Williams, Esquire, and Richard Stevens, Esquire, 
Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant acquired 13 debts totaling $19,616 that have been delinquent for a 
number of years. Her evidence is insufficient to establish a good-faith effort in the 
resolution of these debts, or a current track record of financial responsibility. There are 
no clear indications that her financial problems are being resolved or are under control. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 
1 
 
 
                                           
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 25, 2008. 
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
 
On July 6, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 29, 2010. She requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 3, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on June 9, 2011, convening a hearing on July 20, 2011. At 
the hearing, the Government offered four exhibits (GE 1 through 4). Applicant testified, 
and offered three exhibits (AE 1 through 3). AE 3 was received post-hearing.3 All 
exhibits were received without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on July 27, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations under SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.e, 1.l, and 
1.m. She denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.f through 1.k. Her admissions are incorporated 
as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, her answers to the 
SOR and interrogatories, and her demeanor and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old mail clerk employed by a defense contractor since 
August 1998. She graduated from high school in 1984. Applicant testified she was 
granted access to classified information at the top secret level shortly after she 
submitted her 2008 SCA. Her access to classified information was suspended when she 
was issued her SOR. She indicated that her position and pay were downgraded after 
her clearance was suspended. There is no evidence she has compromised or caused 
others to compromise classified information. She married her husband in May 2007. 
She has a 28-year-old daughter from a prior relationship, and five stepchildren ages 22, 
21, 21, 18, and 15. Her daughter is self-supporting, and it is unclear whether Applicant 
provides support for her stepchildren. 
 
In her answers to the financial questions in her August 2008 SCA, Applicant 
indicated that during the last seven years she had no property repossessed for failing to 
pay a debt, that she did not have any debts over 180 days delinquent, and that she was 
not currently over 90 days delinquent on any debts. Applicant’s background 
investigation addressed her financial problems and revealed the 13 delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR, totaling $19,616.  
 
 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 AE3 is an unsigned letter, presumably to the credit bureaus (addressed “To whom it may 
concern”), dated August 4, 2011 (post-hearing), disputing a $30 medical debt. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant explained that in 2000, she was in a relationship with a man and they 
purchased a home together. In July 2007, the relationship ended and she refinanced 
the home individually to buy out her partner. She took a mortgage, and at the time, she 
believed that all her insurance and taxes were also included in the monthly mortgage 
payments. Later on, she discovered that was not the case. She was unable to meet her 
mortgage payments because of the additional mortgage expenses and because her 
mortgage payments ballooned. She claimed that even though her financial situation was 
strained, she was making her payments on time until one of her mortgage payments 
was lost. After that, she was not able to catch up with the mortgage payments.  
 
Applicant’s home was foreclosed in 2007, and sold in a foreclosure auction in 
April 2008. Her deficiency on the home mortgage payments is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
She does not know how much she owes as a result of the mortgage foreclosure and 
auction of her home. She claimed she tried to contact the lender to modify her 
mortgage, but received no assistance. Applicant presented no documentary evidence to 
support her claim of negotiations with the lender. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.f through 1.k allege seven delinquent medical accounts, 
which Applicant denied. These accounts are established as Applicant’s delinquent debts 
on the September 2008 (GE 3) and March 2010 (GE 4) credit reports. At her hearing, 
Applicant claimed she contacted all her medical providers to determine whether these 
are her delinquent debts. She claimed she was told by some of the medical providers 
that she is no longer in their accounting systems. She did not receive a response from 
other medical providers. Applicant also claimed she did not recognize the debt or the 
creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. She presented no documentary evidence to support her 
claims of efforts taken to contact providers, to dispute her debts, or to otherwise resolve 
those debts. 
 
Applicant admitted the delinquent medical account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. She 
claimed she paid that debt in April 2011. She presented no documentary evidence to 
support her claim. Concerning SOR ¶ 1.l, Applicant testified she telephonically 
contacted the creditor two years ago, and again the Friday before her hearing (July 15, 
2011). She claimed the creditor informed her telephonically that she was no longer in 
their system. (Tr. 46-47) She presented no documentary evidence to support her 
claims. Concerning the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m, Applicant admitted that she 
purchased a dining table on credit, and that account became delinquent six years ago. 
She claimed she contacted the creditor the day before her hearing and settled the $700 
delinquent account for $400. (Tr. 36) She has to pay the $400 sometime in the near 
future to take advantage of the settlement offer. She presented no documentary 
evidence of any payments made. 
 
A review of Applicant’s credit reports (GE 2, 3, and 4) show that she paid other 
delinquent debts, including some delinquent medical accounts. The credit reports also 
document the debts alleged in the SOR as Applicant’s debts, which have been 
delinquent for a number of years. She presented no documentary evidence of any 
payments made toward any of the SOR debts. Applicant’s November 2009 personal 
 
4 
 
 
financial statement indicates a net monthly income of approximately $1,760. Her 
monthly expenses totaled $1,275. She listed no monthly debt payments. Applicant did 
not participate in financial counseling, and she does not have a working budget. (Tr. 67) 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for her financial situation. She understands she is 
responsible for her financial obligations and intends to pay them sometime in the future. 
She needs her job to pay her delinquent obligations and support her family. Without her 
security clearance, she believes she would lose her job. She developed financial 
problems because she was a single parent and struggled to make ends meet. She 
believes she was doing all that she could do under her circumstances. Although 
Applicant is currently married and her spouse works, he does not contribute financially 
to the household. (Tr. 66-67)  
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
 
5 
 
 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The evidence established that Applicant acquired the 13 delinquent debts alleged 
in the SOR, totaling $19,600, that have been delinquent for a number of years. AG ¶ 
19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Applicant has a history of ongoing financial problems, dating back to 2004, and 
the evidence fails to show they developed under circumstances that are unlikely to 
recur. She continues to acquire delinquent debt without resolving her past delinquent 
financial obligations. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant presented some evidence to establish circumstances beyond her 
control contributing to her inability to pay her debts, e.g., her 2004 separation from her 
 
6 
 
 
partner, and she was self-supporting until she married her husband in 2007. According 
to Applicant, her husband does not currently contribute financially to the household.  
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant has been gainfully employed for the same 
Government contractor since 1998. Her circumstances do not fully explain her 
precarious financial situation. Applicant presented no evidence of contacts with 
creditors, settlement agreements, or payments made to the SOR creditors. The only 
documentary evidence of efforts to dispute her debts was an unsigned letter, dated 
August 4, 2011, that was submitted post hearing. (AE 3) Applicant’s documentary 
evidence is not sufficient to show that she made good-faith efforts to resolve her debts, 
or that she has a track record of financial responsibility. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and (d) do not 
apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there are no clear indications that her 
financial problems are being resolved or under control. She did not receive financial 
counseling. The remaining mitigating conditions are not reasonably supported by the 
facts in this case. 
 
 Considering the number of delinquent debts, the date the debts were acquired, 
the aggregate value of the debts, and the limited documentary evidence of efforts to 
resolve her legal financial obligations, Applicant’s information is insufficient to establish 
that her financial problems will be resolved in the foreseeable future, or that they are 
unlikely to recur.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated in my whole-
person analysis my comments on the analysis of Guideline F. 
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for her 
work history with a Government contractor. She has held a security clearance since 
2008, with no adverse incidents. She is a good mother and wife. 
 
Considering the record as a whole, I find that security concerns remain about 
Applicant’s current financial responsibility, reliability, and judgment. Applicant’s evidence 
failed to show financial responsibility in the acquisition of the debts, good-faith efforts to 
resolve her financial problems in a timely manner, or a current track record of financial 
responsibility. Applicant’s information is insufficient to establish that her financial 
problems will be resolved in the foreseeable future, or that they are unlikely to recur. 
The mitigating record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance. Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
