KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Hearing Office decisions are not binding on other hearing office judges nor on the
Appeal Board.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 09-08023.a1
DATE: 09/06/2011
DATE: September 6, 2011
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-08023
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
John N. Griffith, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On October 18, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
2
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June 3, 2011, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Mark Harvey denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s credibility
determination was erroneous; whether the Judge erred in finding that Applicant’s answers to the
security clearance application (SCA) were deliberately false; whether the Judge’s application of the
mitigating conditions was erroneous; and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis was erroneous.
Consistent with the following, we affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a trainer working for
a Defense contractor.  He served in the Marine Corps from 1995 to 1997, when he received a
General Discharge.  He is married and has three children.
When Applicant was 18 years old, he and a friend stole $8,000 from the family of his
girlfriend.  He was charged with larceny over $100, a felony.  The court sentenced him to 11 days
in jail, 36 months of probation, community service, and a fine plus restitution.  Although Applicant’s
parents paid the restitution, Applicant later reimbursed them.
In 1996, while in the Marine Corps, Applicant operated a vehicle while he was impaired by
alcohol.  As a consequence of this act and his apprehension for it, he missed the next day’s
formation.  Applicant received nonjudicial punishment under Article 15 of the Uniform Code of
Military Justice.  His commander imposed a forfeiture of $400 pay, reduction to the grade of E-2
(suspended for six months) and 60 days restriction.
Later that year, Applicant was charged with use of cocaine, and the command referred his
case to a special court-martial.  This charge was based upon a positive urinalysis for that drug.
Applicant pled guilty, advising the military judge during the providence inquiry that he had
“snorted” cocaine.  The military judge sentenced him to forfeiture of $300 pay per month for 3
months, 30 days confinement (to run consecutively with 30 days restriction), and reduction to E-2.
Subsequently, the Marine Corps discharged Applicant for misconduct, giving him a General
Discharge.
Applicant’s SCA, completed in June 2007, asked, at question 23, whether he had “ever been
charged with or convicted of any felony offense.”  The question required him to report information
even if his case had been sealed or otherwise stricken from the record.  Applicant answered the
question “no.”  This answer was not true, in light of his conviction for larceny of $8,000.  Applicant
stated that he thought the conviction was going to be “erased” after he completed his sentence.
Decision at 5.
Question 23d asked “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related
to alcohol or drugs?”   Applicant answered the question “no.”  This answer was untrue in light of
his court-martial conviction for wrongful use of cocaine.  “He attempted to remember his thought
1“[Q]: “Well, what about the cocaine?  Didn’t you say that you had 30 days in the brig for that? [A]: I did. [Q]:
Okay.  Why wouldn’t you list that, then? [A]: I don’t’ know.”  Tr. at 100.  
3
process or mental state in 2007 when he completed his [SCA]; however, he concluded that he could
not remember why he did not disclose his court-martial conviction.”  Id.  
Applicant enjoys an excellent reputation among supervisors and co-workers for his
professionalism, integrity, responsibility, reliability and security compliance.  He has received
awards for his performance of duty.
In his analysis of Applicant’s case, the Judge concluded that the two answers which
Applicant provided in his SCA were deliberately false.  He further concluded that Applicant had not
mitigated the security concerns arising from these deliberate omissions.  However, the Judge entered
favorable findings for the Guideline F security concerns and for the Guideline E concerns arising
from his underlying criminal conduct.  The Judge also entered favorable findings for a Guideline
E allegation concerning a false statement on his SCA about the character of discharge Applicant had
received from the Marine Corps.
Applicant challenges the Judge’s credibility determination.  Specifically, he contends that
the Judge erred in making the following evaluation: “I do not believe his initial statement at the
hearing that he did not know why he tested positive for the presence of cocaine in his body.  His
statement under oath at his providence hearing that he snorted cocaine is more credible than his
denial of knowing cocaine use.”  Decision at 10.  However, the challenged statement is a reasonable
interpretation of the record evidence.  Applicant has not provided a reason to disturb the Judge’s
credibility determination.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-17076 at 3 (App. Bd. May 11, 2011). 
Applicant challenges the Judge’s findings that his answers to the two SCA questions at issue
were deliberately false.  In analyzing Applicant’s state of mind at the time he made the statements
in question, the Judge was required to examine Applicant’s answers in light of the entire record.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-05637 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010).  The Judge stated, “The questions
are clear, and his resume and good character evidence . . . show that he is an intelligent and detail-
oriented person.”  Decision at 11.  We also note the Judge’s finding that Applicant could not
remember why he left out his court-martial conviction.1  The record, viewed as a whole, supports
the Judge’s findings about the deliberate nature of Applicant’s SCA omissions.    
    
Applicant cites to a Hearing Office decision which he contends supports his case for a
security clearance.  We give due consideration to this case.  However, each case must be decided
on its own merits.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  Hearing Office decisions are binding neither on
other Hearing Office Judges nor on the Board.  In any event, the case which Applicant has cited
contains significant differences from his own.  
Applicant contends that the Judge should have found that he met his burden of persuasion
as to mitigation.  Among other things, he contends that the four years that have elapsed since his
false statements, during which time there has been no other security significant conduct, demonstrate
4
rehabilitation.  However, we note the Judge’s conclusion, referenced above, about the lack of
credibility concerning some of Applicant’s hearing testimony.  This is a matter that is relevant to
the question of whether an applicant has demonstrated rehabilitation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-
09232 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010).  Applicant contends that the Judge should have applied
several mitigating conditions in Applicant’s favor.  The Judge explicitly listed two of the cited
conditions and concluded that they do not apply “to a sufficient degree” to mitigate any SOR
allegations.  We concur.  The third mitigating condition pertains to the passage of time which has
already been addressed.  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan           
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                    
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                     
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
