                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 09-01151 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Steven Garcia, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On June 1, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 17, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 29, 2011. DOHA issued 
a Notice of Hearing on August 9, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 
31, 2011. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1. Applicant did not object and it was 
admitted into evidence. The Government requested administrative notice be taken of 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Hearing Exhibit I.1 I granted the request. Applicant testified on her own behalf. She did 
not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 8, 
2011.  
 
Procedural Matters 
  
 Department Counsel withdrew SOR ¶1.a. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. I have included her 
admission in my findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old. She worked for a federal contractor for six years as a 
logistics manager. Applicant was born in Madagascar and met her husband there in 
1979. He was a U. S. Marine at the time serving with the Marine Security Guard at the 
U.S. embassy. Prior to him transferring in January 1981, Applicant applied for and was 
granted a fiancée visa so she could accompany him to the United States and they could 
later marry. Applicant’s husband reported to his new embassy assignment in Costa 
Rica. Applicant lived with her husband’s parents during this time awaiting their pending 
nuptials. Their plan was to marry in Costa Rica after he got settled. In March 1981, 
before they were married, Applicant’s husband and other Marines were targeted by 
terrorists and a bomb exploded, hitting them on their way to work. Her husband suffered 
severe injuries, including having both of his femurs shattered. They moved up their 
wedding date and were married in June 1981. Her husband was awarded the Purple 
Heart. After numerous operations he was medically retired in 1984 and receives 
disability compensation. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1988.2  
 
 Applicant and her husband have two daughters. Their eldest is 28 years old and 
they have a 15-year-old adopted daughter. They also have two granddaughters. In 
1996, Applicant returned to Madagascar to attend the funeral of her sister. This is the 
only time since she left in 1981 that she has returned. Her deceased sister had a baby 
daughter who was 11 months old at the time. The father of the child was unable to care 
for the baby and asked Applicant to adopt her. Applicant and her husband agreed to 
adopt the baby. They consulted with the U.S. embassy in Madagascar to ensure they 
followed the proper procedures. They were advised that they needed to complete the 
adoption before the child could obtain a U.S. visa. Applicant remained in Madagascar 
for three to four months to complete the process. Once the child was legally adopted the 
proper visa and paperwork were issued, and Applicant and child returned to the United 
States. Upon entry into the United States, Applicant and her husband filed a Petition of 
1 HE II is Applicant’s written closing statement.  
 
2 Tr.40-47, 61-62. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
U.S. Residency with the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service (USCIS).3 They were 
informed by USCIS that they would receive additional documentation from the agency in 
the future. They never received additional documentation from the USCIS. They made 
an appointment with USCIS in early 2011 and were advised that during the transition 
from the U.S. Immigration Service to USCIS their paperwork was lost, so they had to 
resubmit it and start over. Applicant and her husband have resubmitted the appropriate 
documents for permanent residence status for their adopted daughter. Applicant 
admitted after they adopted their daughter and first submitted the required documents to 
USCIS, they forgot about following through, and they moved on with their lives raising 
their daughters. They did not think about their daughter’s citizenship status. Their 
adopted daughter is in the United States legally.4  
 
 Applicant’s father, stepmother, four brothers, and sister are citizens and residents 
of Madagascar. She has had minimal contact with all of them since leaving in 1981. She 
telephones them on holidays and birthdays. The last time she visited any family 
members in Madagascar was in 1996 when she returned for her sister’s funeral. She 
has no plans to return there.5  
 
 Applicant’s father is a 78-year-old retired businessman. Before he retired he 
owned a hardware store. He recently had a stroke and Applicant has called him on the 
telephone more often. Her father never served in the military and does not receive any 
pension or benefit from the government. He has never visited Applicant in the United 
States. Her father remarried seven years ago. His wife, Applicant’s stepmother, is a 66-
year-old housewife. She never served in the military and does not receive any benefits 
from the government.6  
 
 Applicant’s brothers’ ages are 57, 55, 51, and 44. Her eldest brother owns a 
restaurant. He is married. His wife is a homemaker. They have one child, 18 years old. 
Neither he nor his wife has served in the military or receive government benefits.7  
 
 Applicant’s second brother is retired from the military. He is married. His wife is a 
homemaker. They have two children, ages 19 and 17. He enlisted in the country’s 
Coast Guard and served twenty years. He receives a military pension. He retired from 
the military about ten years ago. Neither he nor his wife, or their children have any 
3 U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Service was previously the United States Immigration Service.  
 
4 Tr. 24, 47-61; Answer to the SOR. Applicant included with her Answer copies of her daughter’s 
application for permanent residence and associated documents.  
 
5 Tr. 25-29. 
 
6 Id. 
 
7 Tr. 29-40. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
government affiliation. Except for his pension they do not receive any other benefit from 
the government.8  
 
Applicant’s third brother sells cars. He is married and has two sons, ages, 25 and 
22. The sons are required to register with the country’s selected service, but they have 
not been called to serve in the military. His wife is a homemaker. Neither he nor his wife 
served in the military and neither receives any benefit from the government.9  
 
 Applicant’s youngest brother sells cars. He is married and has three children, 
ages 10, 8, and 5. Neither he nor his wife has served in the military. His wife works for 
the government’s Department of Agriculture as a land surveyor.10  
 
 Applicant’s sister is a homemaker. Applicant does not know her sister’s 
husband’s occupation. Her sister did not serve in the military and does not work for the 
government.11  
 
 Applicant talks to her relatives in Madagascar, but on a very limited basis. 
Usually it is on holidays and other special occasions.  
 
 Applicant owned a small piece of land in Madagascar that she inherited from her 
mother. It is adjacent to land owned by a brother. Applicant relinquished the land to her 
brother in 2010 so he would have more property for his home. Applicant has no 
intention of going back to Madagascar to live.12  
 
Applicant is her immediate family’s primary means of support due to her 
husband’s disability. All of their assets are in the United States. She stated she pledged 
her allegiance to the United States. She has been a law-abiding citizen since coming to 
the U.S.13  
 
Madagascar14 
 
 The Malagasy Republic was proclaimed as an autonomous state within the 
French community in 1958. A provisional government ended with the adoption of a 
8 Id. 
 
9 Tr. 31-40. 
 
10 Tr. 32-40. 
 
11 Tr. 34-40. 
 
12 Tr. 62-64. 
 
13 Tr. 68-69. 
 
14 HE I. 
 
5 
 
 
constitution in 1959 and full independence in 1960. Madagascar became a French 
Protectorate in 1985. 
 
 Madagascar has been marred by a recent period of upheaval. In 2009, protestors 
demonstrated in the capital and the president signed power over to the military, which in 
turned conferred the presidency on the elected mayor of its capital city, Antananarivo, 
and the leader of the demonstrators. The last presidential elections were held in 
December 2006. There is currently no legitimately elected president of Madagascar.  
 
 The United States has condemned the unconstitutional and undemocratic 
change in power and considers the events that led up to the installation of the present 
government to be a de facto military coup. As a result, the United States has suspended 
all assistance programs that directly benefit the government as well as all non-
humanitarian assistance.  
 
 Madagascar’s human rights record is troubling. There are numerous human 
rights problems, such as unlawful killings and other security forces abuses, harsh prison 
conditions, arbitrary arrest and detention, censorship, intimidation, arrest and violence 
toward journalists, societal discrimination, violence and trafficking in woman and 
children, and forced child labor. 
 
 There are reports that government agents committed arbitrary and unlawful 
killings and the police continue to use unwarranted lethal force during arrests. 
  
 After the de facto military coup, the United States has had limited engagement 
with the defector authorities, There is continued political unrest and the country’s limited 
resources severely constrain its ability to confront a potential terrorist threat.  
 
 There are no current travel warnings issued by the United States for 
Madagascar. U.S. citizens visiting should not expect any hostility or aggressions based 
solely on their citizenship. However, there are warnings about crimes against tourists in 
general and recommendations to take appropriate precautions.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
 
6 
 
 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern. I 
have considered all of them and the following two are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” necessary to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The 
totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie 
must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”15 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.”16 Friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, or the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. Madagascar’s poor human rights 
record, the unconstitutional and undemocratic change of power resulting in a de facto 
military coup, and the country’s limited resources constraining their ability to confront 
potential terrorist threats creates a heightened risk.  
 
15 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s father, stepmother, four brothers, and sister are citizens and residents 
of Madagascar. These facts potentially create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and also create a potential conflict of 
interest. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. Department Counsel withdrew the allegation 
against Applicant’s adopted daughter. Therefore, none of the above disqualifying 
conditions apply to her. 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following three are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant has had minimal contact with her family since she left Madagascar in 
1981. She returned one time in 1996 for her sister’s funeral. She telephones family 
members only on special occasions. None of her family have visited her in the United 
States. However, because Applicant still maintains contact with them her family ties are 
more than casual. Therefore, I find AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply.  
 
 The United States presently does not have diplomatic ties with Madagascar, 
except for humanitarian purposes. The United States has condemned the 
unconstitutional and undemocratic change of power through a de facto military coup. 
Madagascar’s human rights record is poor and troubling. There are reports that 
Government agents committed arbitrary and unlawful killings and the police continue to 
use unwarranted lethal force during arrests. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress 
is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S.  
 
Applicant was born in Madagascar, but moved to the United States in 1981 and 
married her husband, a U.S. Marine. She has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 
1988. Her eldest daughter and grandchildren were born in the United States. She has 
 
9 
 
 
returned to Madagascar only one time to attend her sister’s funeral. She stayed until 
she could complete the procedure to adopt her sister’s child and bring her back to the 
United States. The only asset Applicant had in Madagascar was a small piece of land 
that is adjacent to her brother’s land that she inherited from her mother. She 
relinquished this land to her brother. Applicant does not intend on returning to 
Madagascar. Only one family member, her brother, who retired from the military, has 
any ties to the government. There is no indication that Applicant’s relatives are in 
positions or involved in activities that would place Applicant in a position of having to 
choose between her family interests and those of the United States. There is no 
indication that Madagascar targets or exploits its own citizens to obtain intelligence. It is 
unlikely that intelligence officials would attempt to pressure Applicant’s relatives in 
Madagascar to gather valuable or classified information from the United States through 
Applicant. In addition, I find that considering Applicant’s deep and longstanding 
relationship and loyalties to the United States, that any potential conflict of interest that 
may arise would be resolved in favor of the United States. I find mitigating conditions 
AG ¶¶ 8 (a) and 8(b) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has 
been a loyal and dedicated citizen of the United States since 1988. Her husband is a 
retired Marine. Her eldest daughter was born in the United States and her adopted 
daughter has lived with her since 1996. Applicant left Madagascar in 1981 and has only 
returned once for her sister’s funeral. She talks to her family occasionally. Although she 
has family contacts in Madagascar, her loyalty and commitment is to the United States. 
 
10 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for Foreign 
Influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
