 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05812 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 20, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 9, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B 
(Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 25, 2011, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. I received the case assignment on April 29, 
2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 3, 2011, for a hearing on May 24, 
2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 9, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
 
2 
 
 
(Tr.) on June 3, 2011. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until June 
7, 2011, to submit additional matters. On May 31, 2011, he submitted AE C and D, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record closed on June 7, 
2011. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to India.1 The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit I (HE I). The 
facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact.  
 
Amendment to the SOR 
 
Pursuant to Additional Procedural Guidance ¶¶ E3.1.2, E3.1.3, E3.1.7, and 
E3.1.13 of the Directive, Department Counsel moved, by letter dated April 21, 2011, to 
amend the SOR issued to Applicant by adding: 
 
2. Guideline E: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers 
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process. Available information raising this concern shows that: 
 
a. You falsified material facts on a Questionnaire For National 
Security Positions, dated June 16, 2010, in response to “17.d. In the last 7 
years, have you ha[d] an active passport that was issued by a foreign 
government.” You answered “No”, [sic] whereas in truth, you deliberately 
failed to list that you had an active Indian passport issued in October 25, 
2000 that was destroyed on June 7, 2010.  
 
 b. You falsified material facts on a Questionnaire for Sensitive 
Positions electronically transmitted on May 06, 2009, in response to “20B-
6. Ever Held/Hold [F]oreign Passport.”; You responded that you 
surrendered your foreign passport to the Indian Consulate at the time of 
your previous security clearance. Passport [sic] cancelled because you 
received US citizenship, the Indian passport has been 
cancelled/surrendered after you received citizenship: whereas in truth, you 
deliberately failed to list that you had an active Indian passport issued in 
October 25, 2000. 
                                                          
1 The Government failed to present information or argue that there was any heightened risk associated with the 
United Arab Emirates.  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant had no objection to the amendments and I granted the motion. (Tr. 10-
11.)  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR under Guideline B, with explanations. He denied the allegations under Guideline 
E. He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a 
security clearance. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old, married, and has two children. Applicant was born in 
India and obtained his undergraduate degree from an Indian college. Applicant came to 
the United States in 1991 to obtain a master’s degree in computer science. Applicant 
became a U.S. citizen in 2001. His wife also became a U.S. citizen in 2001. Both of his 
children were born in the United States. Applicant has lived in the United States for 
more than 19 years. (GE 1; GE 5; Tr. 25-26. 37, 52-57.) 
 
Applicant has a U.S. passport and does not have a valid Indian passport. When 
he became a U.S. citizen, he assumed that his Indian passport was invalid. He renewed 
his Indian passport in October 2000, prior to becoming a U.S. citizen. He placed it in the 
back of a safe, along with his other old passports and those of his family, and then 
forgot about them. His son lost the key to the safe and it remained locked for an 
extended period of time. In 2004, when Applicant was in the process of completing his 
first security clearance application, he ordered a new key for the safe. He discovered 
the passport, reported it to the investigator, and sent it to the Indian Consulate to be 
invalidated. It was marked “canceled” and returned to Applicant. He provided a copy of 
the canceled passport. When he completed his May 6, 2009 Questionnaire for Sensitive 
Positions and his June 16, 2010 Questionnaire for National Security Positions, Applicant 
assumed that the stamp indicating the passport was “canceled” invalidated the 
passport. He indicated on each of the Questionnaires that he did not have an active 
foreign passport. Further, he surrendered his Indian passport to his DoD security 
manager on June 7, 2010. His canceled Indian passport was destroyed by his security 
manager. (GE 1-9; AE B; Tr. 39-46, 61-66.) 
 
Applicant’s father and mother are citizens and residents of India. They are 
approximately 75 and 70 years old, respectively. His father is a retired textile engineer. 
He formerly worked for a private Indian company. Applicant sponsored his parents for 
permanent residency in the U.S. but his parents returned to India to live because they 
were more comfortable there. They are supported by their own savings. Applicant 
testified India does not have any form of public retirement assistance. As a matter of 
economic convenience, Applicant also has an Indian bank account with a balance of 
approximately $500, which he uses to help his parents if they need it. The most 
Applicant has given his parents totaled approximately $8,000, which is the equivalent to 
one year’s living at a comfortable lifestyle in India. He speaks to his parents by phone 
on a weekly basis. Applicant acknowledged that “My parents are the only leverage” that 
could be used to coerce him, but indicated he thought he had the “quality and integrity” 
 
4 
 
 
that should assuage the Government’s concerns. (GE 1; GE 4; GE 6-9; Tr. 28-29, 33-
39, 69, 76, 79, 81-82.) 
 
Applicant’s sister is a citizen of India, residing in the U.S. She is married to a U.S. 
citizen. Her children are U.S. citizens. She works for and international agency and gets 
benefits from the agency based upon her foreign citizenship, such as a housekeeper 
and private schools for her children. She maintains her Indian citizenship. She has been 
in the U.S. since 1992. Applicant talks to his sister approximately once-per-week by 
phone. (GE 1; GE 5; GE 9; Tr. 30-31, 69-71.) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law lives with her son (Applicant’s brother-in-law) in India. 
They are both citizens and residents of India. Applicant’s father-in-law is deceased. His 
father-in-law owned his own business, a general merchandise store, and left it to his 
wife and son. They run it and are financially well off. Applicant communicates quarterly 
with his mother-in-law and once a month with his brother-in-law. (GE 1, GE 5; GE 7; GE 
9; Tr. 31, 52, 71-74.) 
 
Applicant also has a sister-in-law who is a citizen of India, but resides in the 
United Arab Emirates (UAE). Her husband was hired to work in the UAE as a marketing 
manager for a pharmaceutical company. She works as a teacher in a private school. 
Applicant stated that he is “not at all close” to his in-laws. Applicant’s wife has applied 
for a “green card” for all of her family members. (GE 1, GE 5; GE 7; GE 9; Tr. 32, 74-
76.) 
 
Applicant visits his parents in India approximately annually. When he travels 
there, he often encounters distant relatives. Applicant has a number of extended family 
members in India and he socializes with them when he is in India. Applicant also has a 
friend in India. They were high school classmates. His friend is a permanent resident of 
the U.S. Applicant estimates he has spoken to this friend three-to-four times in the past 
twenty years. (GE 7; Tr. 32-34, 78-79.) 
 
 Applicant owns two properties in India. The first property was purchased five 
years ago as an investment because of the rise in real estate prices in India. It has a 
current market value of $200,000. Applicant intended to sell the property for a profit and 
quickly return the funds to the U.S., however, the Indian market declined and he would 
suffer a loss if he sold the property now. He has a broker in India to help him sell the 
property when the market improves. Applicant does not consider his broker a friend or 
associate. He has no other ties to the broker except as it relates to the potential sale of 
this property. The second property was purchased by Applicant’s father. It was 
purchased in Applicant’s name to avoid bureaucracy and corruption in India. It is valued 
at approximately $400,000. Applicant’s lists his total net worth as $3,400,800. He owns 
nine properties in the U.S. and has cash assets totaling $328,800. (AE D; Tr. 34-37.) 
  
 Applicant’s children were exclusively educated in the United States. Applicant 
indicated that he considers himself an American. He testified: 
 
 
5 
 
 
. . . When I took that pledge, it meant something. It changed something 
inside me. I had two kids here in the U.S. They’re not going to go back to 
India ever. So you know this is your new home. And that’s how things 
changed. (Tr. 50.) 
 
Applicant also submitted three character statements from colleagues. All 
statements indicate Applicant is honest, reliable and trustworthy. Each statement 
conveys the author’s trust in Applicant and his professional competency. (AE A.) 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding India. (HE I) India has 
a democratic constitution and is a republic. It has a multi-party, federal, parliamentary 
system of government. The national legislature is a bicameral body. The population of 
India is 1.1 billion people. In 1947 India became an independent republic. 
 
In late November 2008, terrorist attacks in Mumbai, targeted areas frequented by 
westerners. There is a continuing threat from terrorism throughout India and the U.S. 
State Department has issued travel warnings to U.S. citizens regarding the ongoing 
security concerns in India and possible threats of attack on targets where U.S. citizens 
or Westerners are known to visit. 
 
India has had human rights issues that concern the U.S. and international 
groups. Those include persons being killed while in police custody, disappearances of 
persons, torture, and rape. Corruption is also pervasive. 
 
The U.S. has had several cases since 2004 of persons and companies illegally 
exporting and selling equipment to India. The equipment involved includes electronics 
directed missile technology, nuclear testing, and defense equipment. Legal actions 
against companies and individuals were cited in the government administrative notice 
reports.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
6 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following four conditions are potentially applicable. 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 Applicant’s parents, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, broker, and extended family 
members are all citizens and residents of India. His sister and sister-in-law are citizens 
of India living in the U.S. and UAE, respectively. He has a friend who is Indian, but is a 
permanent resident of the U.S. with whom he has had contact. Applicant traveled to 
India annually. He also shares living quarters with his wife, who has ties to her family in 
India. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) requires both the presence of 
foreign contacts and a heightened risk. I find there is sufficient evidence regarding 
terrorist activities in India and the Indian government’s human rights abuses to establish 
a heightened risk. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply.  
 
 Applicant owns an apartment in India that he purchased five years ago for 
investment purposes. He will sell it when the value increases. Applicant estimates the 
current value at $200,000. His parent’s house is also in his name and it is valued at 
$400,000. Applicant has a bank account in India with about $500 in it. Applicant has 
sufficient financial interests in India. I find AG ¶ 7 (e) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Four are 
potentially applicable. 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
 
8 
 
 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property  
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
 Applicant’s ties to his parents and sister are strong. He has allowed his parents 
to title their home in his name. He calls his parents and sister weekly, and he has a 
bank account in India for convenience to help provide support for his parents. His 
contribution for their support has equaled a year’s worth of income in India. He intends 
to maintain the bank account so that he can provide for them in the future. His ties to his 
in-laws are not as strong as his bond to his own parents; however, he also had the 
burden to show that his wife, with whom he lives, does not have strong ties to her 
parents that could create a risk. He failed to present such mitigating evidence. Due to 
the unpredictable nature of terrorists, who are active in India, it is impossible to say 
these relationships are of a nature that it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position 
to choose between them and the interests of the U.S. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant has lived in the U.S. for 19 years. The majority of his financial wealth is 
in the U.S. Applicant’s children were born in the U.S. and grew up here. He indicated 
they are thoroughly Americanized. However, his contacts with India and his family living 
there are more than casual. He keeps in close contact with his parents. He provides 
them financial support. He is unwilling to sell his investment property in India at this time 
due to a decline in value and he cannot sell his parent’s property because they live 
there. He has strong ties to his parents in India that are not outweighed by his emotional 
ties and wealth he has amassed in the U.S. AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s apartment, parent’s house, and bank account in India are of minimal 
value when compared to his U.S. property and financial interests. They will not cause a 
conflict for Applicant. He wants to sell the apartment when he can realize a financial 
gain by doing so. Applicant’s financial interests in India are not significant enough to be 
used to influence, manipulate, or pressure Applicant because of his total financial 
holdings and his stated desire to terminate the foreign holdings when the market is 
more advantageous for him. AG ¶ 8(f) applies to Applicant’s financial interests.  
 
 
9 
 
 
 The mitigation established through application of AG ¶ 8(f) does not mitigate the 
over-arching concern with respect to Applicant’s familial ties in India. His monetary 
investments in India are unlikely to place him in a vulnerable situation, but the same 
cannot be said with respect to his strong bond to his parents. Applicant acknowledged 
that his parents were the “only leverage” that could be used to coerce him.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant’s answers in his Questionnaire for National Security Positions, dated 
June 16, 2010 and his Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions electronically transmitted 
on May 6, 2009, are potential security concerns. On both of these documents, he 
indicated he did not have an active Indian passport. Applicant testified that he thought 
the passport was invalid in 2001 when he became a U.S. citizen, but that he sent the 
passport to the Indian Consulate in 2004 to be officially canceled after he discovered it 
in his safe. Applicant produced a copy of his passport bearing stamps indicating that it 
had been “canceled” by the Consulate. He further provided that he surrendered the 
canceled passport to his security manager in 2010 for destruction. His testimony is 
credible and well documented. I find he did not deliberately falsify either questionnaire. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
10 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits. Under AG ¶ 2(c), 
the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has close ties with India 
and a close relationship with his parents. His close ties have led him to invest in India 
and to support his parents who reside there despite their permanent resident status in 
the U.S. Applicant visits India frequently. Although he has a large amount of assets in 
the U.S., his close connections in India are significant and create a heightened risk.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign 
influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
______________________ 
JENNIFER I. GOLDSTEIN 
Administrative Judge 
