 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00133    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Remand Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 22, 2010, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel prepared a 
file of relevant material (FORM) on March 8, 2011. On March 14, 2001, Applicant was 
mailed a complete copy of the FORM and advised that she could file objections or 
 
2 
 
submit other material for consideration within 30 days of its receipt. Applicant received 
the FORM on March 23, 2011. The case was initially assigned to me on May 12, 2011, 
and contained no indication that Applicant submitted a response to the FORM. On June 
30, 2011, I issued a Decision denying Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
Applicant appealed my Decision and provided credible evidence that four 
character reference letters were submitted to DOHA within the prescribed period of time 
for her to respond to the FORM. In a reply brief, Department Counsel stated that 
expedited remand was the most equitable means of addressing this issue. On August 
18, 2011, the Appeal Board remanded that Decision for further processing. As noted in 
my original Decision, the Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 through 
8) were admitted into the record. Applicant’s four character reference letters have been 
marked as Applicant’s exhibits (AE) A through D and admitted into the record. 
Department Counsel and Applicant have not submitted any objections to the opposing 
party’s exhibits. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since May 1998. She obtained a bachelor’s degree from a major 
university in 1997. She married in September 2007 and divorced in March 2009. Her 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), submitted on September 1, 2009, 
does not list any children. She is applying for a security clearance for the first time.1 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent mortgages that were either charged off or past 
due in the approximate total amount of $285,478 and had balances totaling about 
$919,499. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the alleged delinquent 
debts, but denied the paragraph setting forth the Guideline F security concern. Her 
admissions are hereby incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
 In 2005, Applicant was dating her future husband/ex-husband. At that time, they 
discussed her moving to Town Y, where he was living, and later marrying. They were 
also planning for her to take time off work so that they could begin a family. Based on 
the advice of her future brother-in-law who was a real estate broker, she purchased four 
townhomes (Properties A through D) in 2005 with the intent of renting them. The 
townhomes were located in Town X (approximately 120 miles from her residence and 
approximately 330 miles from Town Y).3  After the purchase of these townhomes, she 
and her boyfriend changed their minds about moving. This was the first time that she 
purchased property and was unaware of the expenses (e.g., property taxes and 
homeowners’ association (HOA) fees) that were involved. Her future brother-in-law 
                                                          
1 Item 4.  
 
2 Items 1, 3.  
 
3 MapQuest was used to determine the mileage from Town X to her residence and from Town X 
to Town Y. 
 
 
3 
 
handled the leasing arrangements for the townhomes and picked the property manager. 
The property manager was also one of the tenants in the townhomes. Applicant claimed 
the property manager turned out to be a criminal who stole the “tenants’ money” 
(apparently the rent payments from tenants were stolen, but the amount stolen is 
unknown). She also provided documentation showing that other people claimed they 
were defrauded by the property manager. It is unknown what actions she took to 
monitor the properties to ensure the mortgages and other expenses were being paid on 
time.4  
 
 In about 2006, Applicant started falling behind on her mortgage payments “when 
the money was coming up short from my tenants and little did [she] know the HOA fees 
were not being paid as [she] thought they were.” She was sued by the HOA and hired 
an attorney to represent her. From approximately October 2006 to March 2007, she 
contracted with a real estate company in an attempt to sell the townhomes. No offers 
were submitted for these properties. She also contacted the mortgage companies 
seeking to dispose of the townhomes through Deeds in Lieu of Foreclosure and short 
sales. Due to the slow housing market, she was unable to sell or otherwise dispose of 
the townhomes.5 
 
 Due to HOA fee deficiencies, the HOA instituted legal action to auction the 
townhomes and transfer title pursuant to Assessment Lien Deeds. On February 6, 2007, 
the four townhomes were auctioned at the county courthouse and sold to the highest 
bidder. Property A was sold for $7,500, Property B for $7,000, Property C for $100, and 
Property D for $100. After the auctions, Applicant was given the right to redeem the 
properties from the purchasers. No evidence was presented that Applicant redeemed 
the properties.6 
 
 During an interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
on November 24, 2009, Applicant indicated that she does not owe any money to the 
mortgage companies and that she has received Form 1099-A’s for the mortgages. She 
also indicated that she was informed that the mortgages will continue to appear on her 
credit report until the allotted time has passed for them to be removed. Furthermore, 
she indicated that purchasing the townhomes was a terrible financial decision that she 
will never make again.7  
 
 In responding to interrogatories in June 2010, Applicant provided four Form 
1099-A’s (Acquisition or Abandonment of Secured Property) and one Form 1099-C 
(Cancellation of Debt). Each of these forms was for tax year 2007. These forms contain 
the following information: 
                                                          
4 Item 7.  
 
5 Item 7. 
 
6 Id.  
 
7 Id. Form 1099-A does not establish cancelation of a debt. See ISCR Case No. 09-05252 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec 3, 2010).  
 
 
4 
 
 
 a. Form 1099-A for Property A 
     Box 1. Date of lender’s acquisition or knowledge of abandonment:  03/06/07; 
     Box 2. Balance of principal outstanding:  $332,000; 
     Box 4. Fair market value of property:  $413,000; and 
     Box 5. Was borrower personally liable for repayment of debt?  Yes. 
 
 b. Form 1099-A for Property B 
     Box 1. Date of lender’s acquisition or knowledge of abandonment:  08/27/07; 
     Box 2. Balance of principal outstanding:  $324,000; 
     Box 4. Fair market value of property:  $440,000; and 
     Box 5. Was borrower personally liable for repayment of debt?  Yes. 
 
 c. Form 1099-C for Property B 
     Box 1. Date canceled:  04/17/07; 
     Box 2. Amount of debt canceled:  $80,557; 
     Box 3. Interest if included in box 2:  [Blank];  
     Box 7. Fair market value of property:  $00. 
 
 d. Form 1099-A for Property C 
     Box 1. Date of lender’s acquisition or knowledge of abandonment:  03/07/07; 
     Box 2. Balance of principal outstanding:  $331,539; 
     Box 4. Fair market value of property:  $354,755; and 
     Box 5. Was borrower personally liable for repayment of debt?  No. 
 
 e. Form 1099-A for Property D 
     Box 1. Date of lender’s acquisition or knowledge of abandonment:  03/06/07; 
     Box 2. Balance of principal outstanding:  $349,605; 
     Box 4. Fair market value of property:  $375,000; and 
     Box 5. Was borrower personally liable for repayment of debt?  Yes.8 
 
 Based on a review of the SOR, Form 1099-A’s, and credit reports, I find that the 
Form 1099-A for Property B is for the mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c; the Form 1099-C 
for Property B is for the mortgage alleged in SOR ¶1.b; and the Form 1099-A for 
Property D is for the mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. There were first and second 
mortgages on some of these properties. From the information provided, the remaining 
Form 1099-A’s noted above cannot be equated to specific allegations in the SOR.9 
 
 In the interrogatories, Applicant stated, “I feel overwhelmed and embarrassed 
and that I feel I can’t afford to make repayment.” In May 2010, a debt collection agency 
                                                          
8 Id.  
 
9 Items 4, 5, 7, and 8. The balance of the principal outstanding on the Form 1099-A for Property B 
matches the balance reflected in SOR ¶ 1.c. The account number on the Form 1099-C for Property B 
matches the account number the account number listed in SOR ¶ 1.b. The account number on the Form 
1099-A for Property D matches the account number listed in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
 
5 
 
for Property D contacted her, and she paid that agency $150 in June 2010. Evidence of 
further payments to that debt collection agency has not been provided. She also 
provided a canceled check showing a payment of $165, but it is unknown for which debt 
that payment was made. She provided a personal financial statement (PFS) dated June 
11, 2010, that reflects a monthly income of $4,885, monthly expenses of $2,717, 
monthly debt payments of $395, and a net remainder of $1,773. On the PFS statement, 
she listed a monthly payment of $150 to the debt collection agency, but no payments to 
the creditors holding the defaulted mortgages.10 
 
 In the interrogatories, Applicant also provided her federal income tax return for 
2007. This return reported the sales (i.e., foreclosures) of the four townhomes for 
losses. It also noted that she and her then-husband were due a refund for that tax year. 
Furthermore, she provided an Internal Revenue Service Final Determination dated April 
2010 that states: 
 
We considered your Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief, and 
have made our final determination. . . . 
 
For TAX YEAR(S) 2007 
 
You are granted relief. You will not be held liable for the balance owed.  
 
No explanation was provided as to why she submitted these tax documents or for what 
balance the IRS was not holding her liable.11 
 
 Applicant’s mother, former sister-in-law, former coworker, and longtime 
acquaintance have submitted character reference letters for her. Her mother indicated 
that she is a strong-willed, financially responsible individual. Her former sister-in-law has 
known Applicant for six years and describes her as highly intelligent, disciplined, 
dedicated, and dependable. Her former coworker has known Applicant for about 11 
years and indicated she is extremely well organized, efficient, and financially 
responsible. Applicant and the former coworker have worked together on many 
community service projects and served together in civil and fraternal organizations. The 
longtime acquaintance stated that Applicant demonstrates great fiduciary responsibility 
in both personal and business matters and indicated she is dependable and trustworthy. 
Applicant has served as the President of the Women’s Leadership Development 
Initiative. Each author of the character reference letters recommends her for a security 
clearance. Since she elected to have her case decided without a hearing, I was unable 
to evaluate in person her credibility, demeanor, or character. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
10 Item 7  
 
11 Id.  
 
 
6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 In 2006, Applicant defaulted on five mortgages. The properties were foreclosed 
in 2007. One of the alleged mortgage debts (SOR ¶ 1.b) has been cancelled. Contrary 
to her earlier assertion, a FORM 1099-A is not evidence of cancellation of a debt.12 
Based on the evidence presented, she is still financially responsible for the four alleged 
mortgages totaling about $838,841. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
                                                          
12 See ISCR Case No 09-05252 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec 3, 2010) (IRS Form 1099-A Applicant 
received is not evidence of the cancellation of mortgage debt).  
 
 
8 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has been continually employed since 1998. As an inexperienced 
homebuyer, she purchased four townhomes in 2005. The total amount of these 
properties was over $900,000. The properties were located about 120 miles from where 
she lived. She relied on others to manage the properties. This was a risky venture that 
failed.  
 
 Applicant’s property manager apparently stole rent payments and did not pay the 
HOA fees as required. The number of months that those payments were stolen and the 
exact amount stolen is unknown. The HOA fee deficiencies led to the property 
foreclosures. The theft of the rent payments was a condition beyond her control. Both 
her marriage and divorce occurred after the properties were foreclosed. To obtain full 
credit under AG ¶ 20(b), both prongs of that mitigating condition, i.e., conditions beyond 
the person’s control and responsible conduct, must be established. When she started to 
have problems in meeting the mortgage and HOA fee payments, she attempted to sell 
the properties. Due to a slow housing market, she was unable to sell or otherwise 
dispose of them. In 2007, the four townhomes were sold at foreclosure auctions. One 
mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.b, apparently a second mortgage) has been canceled. She remains 
financially responsible for four defaulted mortgages. Since the foreclosures, she has 
done little to resolve the remaining delinquent mortgages. In June 2010, she made one 
payment of $150 to a debt collection agency seeking payments on one of the 
mortgages. Even though she currently has about $1,773 in disposable income each 
month, she had not provided proof of further payments to that debt collection agency or 
to any of the other mortgage companies. Besides that one payment, no evidence has 
been provided that she has remained in contact with the mortgage companies in an 
attempt to resolve these debts. Her failure to establish that she has taken meaningful 
steps to resolve the outstanding delinquent mortgages since the foreclosures weighs 
against a determination that she has acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶¶ 
20(b) and 20(d) partially apply. 
 
 No evidence was presented that Applicant received financial counseling. Her 
financial problems are recent and ongoing and insufficient evidence has been presented 
to conclude those problems are being resolved or are under control. Based on the 
information provided, I am unable to determine that her financial problems are unlikely 
to recur or that they do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to SOR ¶ 1.b, 
the canceled mortgage.  
 
 
 
9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s mother and other 
acquaintances recommend her for a security clearance. They indicated that she is 
dependable, financially responsible, and trustworthy. Nevertheless, she has defaulted 
on a number of significant mortgages that remain unresolved. She has not established 
either a realistic plan or meaningful track record for addressing these financial 
problems. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.e:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
