                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04911 
  ) 
           ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant stored classified documents in a laptop, an external hard drive, and at 
home in violation of security rules and regulations. He then attempted to conceal his 
questionable behavior by deleting classified documents from his laptop prior to 
providing the laptop to Government investigators. He violated the trust and confidence 
placed in him by the Government. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
After reviewing the results of both criminal and security violations investigations, 
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to 
make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
On December 22, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
identifying security concerns under Guideline K (Handling Protected Information), 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline M (Use of Information Technology 
Systems) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
On January 20, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 20, 
2011, to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on May 25, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
June 28, 2011.  
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted without 
objection, except for GE 4 that was returned to the Government. I marked as GE 9 for 
identification, the Government’s excerpts of the pertinent security rules and regulations. 
Applicant testified, presented one witness, and submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 16, 
which were admitted without objection, except for AE 11 that was returned to Applicant. 
I marked as AE 17 for identification a document submitted by Applicant post-hearing. I 
considered both GE 4 and AE 11 (classified as NATO Restricted documents), as 
redundant and cumulative to other record evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on July 11, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all the SOR allegations, except for ¶ 1.a, which he partially 
admitted. He admitted that he stored two North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) 
Confidential documents in his house. His admission is incorporated here as a finding of 
fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having considered 
Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old Government contractor doing business with NATO 
since 1996. He married his wife in 1982, and they have a 24-year-old son. Applicant 
was commissioned as a U.S. Army officer in 1971, and served on active duty until his 
retirement in 1995. He retired as a field grade officer, and his time in service was 
characterized as honorable. Applicant is a graduate of the Army War College, 
commanded a battalion during the Gulf War, and served with distinction in several 
important operational planning positions.  
 
During his military career, Applicant served 13 years overseas, which included 
several assignments to NATO. He was posted to NATO during his last military 
assignment prior to his retirement. While in the service, Applicant possessed a top 
secret security clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI). 
 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
There is no evidence that while in the service Applicant compromised or caused others 
to compromise classified information.  
 
In 1996, Applicant and his partner established a U.S.-based corporation to 
provide contractual services to NATO countries. Applicant’s secret security clearance 
was sponsored by the United States. He was afforded access to classified information 
under the provisions of the National Industrial Security Program (NISPOM). Applicant’s 
company has been successful doing business with NATO. As of the hearing day, it had 
handled over 300 contracts with NATO.  
 
In February and March 2007, Applicant was holding meetings in offices located 
within the NATO headquarters building. Both meetings were interrupted by U.S. Army 
counter-intelligence personnel (investigators) seeking a rogue wireless transmitter 
communicating with the embassy of a hostile government from within the NATO 
building. In March 2007, Applicant’s laptop was identified as the rogue transmitter. 
Applicant was asked for permission to inspect his laptop. He initially refused to allow the 
investigators to inspect his laptop. 
 
On April 17, 2007, Applicant set up an appointment to turn over his laptop to the 
investigators on April 20, 2007. A subsequent forensic analysis of Applicant’s laptop 
drive revealed that prior to turning over the laptop, Applicant conducted extensive 
searches and deletions of programs and documents from his laptop. On April 14-17, 
2007, Applicant searched his laptop drive seeking any documents containing the terms 
“confidential” and “secret.” He then deleted approximately 200 documents from his 
laptop drive. On April 18, 2007, he conducted another similar search of his laptop drive 
and deleted approximately 2,000 documents. (Tr. 252-253) 
 
The forensic analysis also revealed that Applicant backed up his laptop drive 
onto an external hard drive before deleting the documents. Forensic counter-intelligence 
investigators recovered 130 of the 2,200 documents Applicant deleted from his laptop. 
Approximately 100 of the recovered documents were classified NATO Confidential or 
above. (Tr. 246, AE 16) Three of the documents were identified as NATO secret 
documents, and two were identified as U.S. secret documents. (AE 16, Tr. 250-252, 
273-276) 
 
Applicant had not registered his laptop with NATO authorities, as he was 
required to do in accordance with NATO information security policies. (GE 3) Nor was 
he authorized to use a wireless modem from within the NATO building. Applicant 
registered the laptop with NATO authorities approximately six days after he was asked 
by the investigators for permission to inspect his laptop.3 (GE 6) The external hard drive 
was never registered with NATO authorities, and it was not authorized to handle NATO 
classified documents. (Tr. 247) Applicant transferred U.S. and NATO classified 
 
3 According to the investigation report, the investigators searching for the rogue transmitter asked 
Applicant whether his laptop was registered with NATO, and he answered “Yes.” The laptop was not 
registered with NATO authorities until six days later. 
 
4 
 
 
documents from the laptop to his external hard drive prior to deleting the documents 
from his laptop, and before he provided the laptop to investigators. The external hard 
drive with the classified documents was unsecured for approximately 14 months. (GE 3) 
Although Applicant possessed a U.S. secret clearance, and was authorized access to 
classified information up to NATO secret, he was not authorized to store documents 
classified NATO Confidential, NATO Secret, or U.S. Secret in his laptop, hard drive, or 
at his home. During the 2007 criminal investigation, Applicant admitted to knowingly 
loading and storing classified documents in his laptop without authorization. (GE 3) 
 
As a U.S.-sponsored contractor doing business with NATO, Applicant was 
required to update his U.S. security clearance yearly, to participate in yearly security 
clearance briefings, and to follow the NISPOM and NATO security procedures for the 
handling of classified information and documents. (Tr. 190, AE 11) In August 2005, 
Applicant signed a Personnel Security Clearance Form, stating that he had been briefed 
and understood the principles and regulations for handling and safeguarding NATO 
classified materials. (GE 3) 
 
On March 8, 2008, Applicant was arrested and charged with espionage by the 
host nation government. A search of his home revealed that he had stored in his home 
38 hard copies of classified documents. Applicant was not authorized to store at his 
home or to possess documents classified above the NATO Restricted classification. 
After a two-year criminal investigation, it was determined that no hostile intelligence 
services were involved, and the criminal charges were dismissed. In July-August 2008, 
Applicant’s access to NATO classified information was suspended because of his 
security violations and he was barred from NATO premises.  
At his hearing, Applicant admitted that prior to turning over his laptop to the 
investigators, he performed extensive searches for documents containing the words 
“confidential” and “secret.” He claimed he was surprised to find such documents in his 
laptop, and that he deleted them pursuant to NISPOM and NATO security procedures. 
He stated most of the documents were uploaded to his laptop, without his knowledge, 
during a March 2005 deployment when his laptop was used as the repository for 
documents produced during the deployment. He claimed that he informed the general 
officer in charge of the deployed NATO unit that his laptop was only cleared to handle 
NATO Restricted documents. As a field expediency measure, the general officer 
authorized him to store NATO Confidential documents in his laptop. (Tr. 104-105; 142-
159)  
After Applicant returned from his deployment, he did not delete from his laptop 
documents beyond the laptop accreditation. Nor did he notify security personnel that he 
had documents in his laptop beyond the laptop’s classification. Applicant admitted that 
he connected his laptop, which contained classified information, to commercial internet 
providers. At his hearing, he claimed that at the time of the internet connections, he was 
not aware the laptop contained classified documents. Applicant’s connections with 
commercial internet providers made the classified information vulnerable to 
compromise. 
 
5 
 
 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for storing and possessing documents beyond his 
and the laptop’s accreditation. He averred some of the documents were improperly 
classified, and that NATO has systemic problems declassifying documents. He claimed 
some of the documents’ classifications had been downgraded; however, he did not 
present documentary evidence to support his claims. Applicant also claimed NATO did 
not provide him with the training needed for him to properly deal with classified 
documents. Applicant averred he always “played by the rules,” and that he never had 
any security violations before this incident.  
 
Applicant testified that as a result of the criminal investigation against him, and 
the ongoing security clearance process, he now has a better understanding of his 
responsibilities for handling classified documents. His company implemented changes 
and is training its employees in the handling of classified information and security 
procedures to avoid similar issues. 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
 
6 
 
 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any expressed or implied determination about Applicant’s 
allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996); and ISCR Case 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010).     
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
The facts and circumstances raising security clearance concerns under 
Guidelines K, E, and M are substantially the same, with some exceptions. For the sake 
of brevity, they will be articulated under the Guideline K discussion, and incorporated by 
reference into the discussions under Guidelines E and M. The exceptions will be 
discussed in the pertinent guideline. 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
AG ¶ 33 articulates the security concern relating to handling classified 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to 
safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern.  
 
Applicant uploaded and stored NATO Confidential, NATO Secret, and U.S. 
Secret documents in a laptop that was not registered with NATO authorities and not 
 
7 
 
 
cleared for the handling of classified documents. He failed to safeguard the classified 
information when he accessed commercial internet providers while the laptop contained 
the classified documents. Applicant also uploaded and stored NATO and U.S. classified 
information on an external hard drive that was not registered or cleared for such 
information. The external hard drive was unsecured for 14 months. 
 
Before providing over his laptop to Government investigators in April 2007, 
Applicant conducted extensive searches for documents containing the terms 
“confidential” and “secret.” He then deleted approximately 2,200 files from his laptop. 
Government forensic investigators recovered approximately 130 documents classified 
NATO Confidential or above from his laptop and external hard drive. Three of the 
recovered documents were classified NATO Secret and two were classified as U.S. 
Secret documents. Additionally, Applicant stored in his home hard copies of 38 NATO 
and U.S. classified documents in violation of security rules and regulations.  
 
AG ¶ 34 provides three disqualifying conditions that raise a security concern and 
are disqualifying in this case:  
(b) collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or 
in any other unauthorized location; 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information on any unapproved 
equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or 
computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, 
"palm" or pocket device or other adjunct equipment; and 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information. 
AG ¶ 35 provides three mitigating conditions that could mitigate the Guideline K security 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 35(a) and (b) are partially applicable, but do not fully 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s questionable behavior stopped in 2007, as a 
 
8 
 
 
result of a Government investigation. As such, it could be considered temporally remote. 
Notwithstanding, considering the evidence as a whole, I find Applicant knowingly and 
willfully violated security rules and regulations. The security violations did not occur 
under unusual circumstances, and they continued during a long period. In light of 
Applicant’s maturity, education, and his extensive experience as a U.S. Army officer and 
NATO contractor, his past behavior continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s claims about his lack of training handling NATO 
classified documents; that some of the documents were improperly classified or have 
been declassified; and that a general officer authorized him to store classified 
documents in his laptop as a result of field expedience. I find Applicant’s explanations 
and claims not to be credible. As stated above, Applicant served in the U.S. Army as an 
officer in high-level, operational and planning positions. He was trained in the proper 
procedures for handling U.S. classified documents. The same basic security principles, 
rules and procedures he learned in the Army to handle classified documents applied to 
his handling of NATO classified documents. He was aware of U.S. and NATO security 
rules and procedures because of his years of military service, his assignment to NATO, 
his annual security briefings, and his experience as a U.S. Government contractor with 
NATO since 1996.  
 
Applicant testified that as a result of the investigation against him, he studied and 
is now aware of NATO security rules and regulations. He claimed that he now has a 
positive attitude toward the discharge of his security responsibilities, and he promised 
not to make the same mistakes in the future. Notwithstanding, I consider his security 
violations as serious offenses. Applicant knowingly and willfully violated security rules 
and procedures by uploading classified documents into both an unregistered laptop and 
an external hard drive, and by storing classified materials at home. Because of his 
education, age, and experience, Applicant’s actions are not mitigated. Considering the 
totality of the circumstances, his gross violations of security rules and regulations still 
raise serious security concerns.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
In addition to cross-alleging that Applicant violated NATO and U.S. security rules 
and regulations, the Government alleged under SOR ¶ 2.a that Applicant attempted to 
 
9 
 
 
conceal his unauthorized storage of classified information by deleting and overwriting 
the documents before providing his laptop to Government investigators.  
 
Applicant claimed that he had no knowledge that he had documents above his 
laptop classification stored in his laptop. When he conducted the searches and found 
the documents, Applicant claimed he destroyed the documents in accordance to NATO 
and NISPOM procedures. Applicant’s claims are not credible. Applicant’s laptop was not 
registered with NATO authorities until six days after he was asked by Government 
investigators for permission to inspect his laptop. Additionally, Applicant provided 
contradictory testimony. He testified that during a 2005 deployment he was asked to 
store documents beyond his laptop classification as a field expediency measure. Thus, 
he knew he had classified documents in his laptop. Furthermore, at his hearing, 
Applicant acknowledged that he failed to remove those documents from his laptop when 
the deployment was over, or to disclose to security authorities that he had unauthorized 
documents in his laptop. 
 
Applicant’s initial refusal to provide his laptop to investigators and his searches 
for documents containing the terms “confidential” and “secret” show that he was aware 
that he had stored such documents in his laptop. His deleting and overwriting of 2,200 
documents hours before providing the computer to investigators, coupled with his failure 
to disclose to the investigators that he had stored the classified documents in his laptop, 
demonstrate his intent to conceal his actions. Approximately 100 documents above the 
laptop’s clearance authorization were recovered by forensic investigators. It was not 
established that the classified documents were all from the 2005 deployment. I note that 
some of the documents have dates preceding and after the deployment.  
 
SOR ¶ 2.b alleged that around July 2008, Applicant’s NATO access to classified 
information was suspended and that he was barred from NATO premises. This 
paragraph does not allege any additional security-related misconduct by Applicant. It 
only states the actions were taken by NATO as a result of Applicant’s misconduct. I find 
for Applicant on this allegation. 
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, I find Applicant’s questionable behavior 
violated: 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in 
another country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or 
that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve 
as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or 
intelligence service or other group. 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could potentially mitigate the personal 
conduct security concerns:  
 
10 
 
 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 Having considered all the mitigating conditions, I find that none apply. Applicant 
did not disclose his questionable behavior before he was confronted with the facts. To 
the contrary, the evidence shows he attempted to conceal his security violations. AG ¶ 
17(a) does not apply. AG ¶¶ 17(b), (f), and (g) are not raised by the record evidence, 
and therefore are not relevant. For the same reasons discussed under Guideline K 
(incorporated herein), mitigating condition AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. Applicant’s 
behavior is a serious violation of security rules and procedures. His behavior did not 
occur under unique circumstances, but as a result of Applicant’s willful violation of 
security procedures. As such, it still casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and judgment. 
 
AG ¶¶ 17(d) and (e) partially apply, but do not fully mitigate the security 
concerns. Applicant’s questionable behavior stopped in 2007, as a result of the criminal 
investigation and the suspension of his clearance. Applicant claimed he has trained 
 
11 
 
 
himself in the proper handling of classified information, and his company has 
implemented procedures to prevent a similar situation in the future. Applicant expressed 
remorse for his past behavior. He promised to safeguard classified information in the 
future. Notwithstanding, because of his education, age, and work experience holding a 
security clearance, Applicant’s willful, repeated, and serious violations of security rules 
and regulations are not mitigated. Considering the totality of the circumstances, his 
security violations still raise serious security concerns about his trustworthiness, 
reliability, and judgment. 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
AG ¶ 39 articulates the security concern about the misuse of information 
technology systems: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information.  
 
 Applicant’s questionable behavior, as discussed under Guidelines K and E, also 
raise security concerns under AG ¶ 40(d) “downloading, storing, or transmitting classified 
information on or to any unauthorized software, hardware, or information technology 
system.”  
 
  AG ¶ 41 provides three potentially applicable mitigating conditions to the use of 
information technology systems concern:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one's 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and  
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor. 
 
 
12 
 
 
For the same reasons discussed under the Guidelines K and E mitigating conditions, 
incorporated herein, I find that none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines K, E, and M in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(c) were previously addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
Applicant honorably served 24 years on active duty in the U.S. Army. He 
commanded a battalion during the Gulf War, served in important operational planning 
positions, and possessed a top secret clearance during his service without any 
incidents. He served 13 years overseas, and his last assignment was at NATO. After his 
retirement, Applicant established a successful company and has performed over 300 
contracts for NATO countries. Applicant expressed remorse for his past behavior. He 
educated himself in the rules and procedures for the handling of classified information. 
He promised to discharge his security responsibilities and avoid future violations. 
Notwithstanding, the factors in support of not granting Applicant’s security 
clearance are much stronger. During his military career, Applicant was trained in the 
proper procedures for handling classified documents. The same basic rules and 
procedures he used in the Army to safeguard classified information applied to his 
handling of NATO classified documents. He was aware of U.S. and NATO security rules 
and procedures because of his years of military service, his assignment to NATO, and 
his 11 years of experience performing contracts for NATO.  
Applicant’s security violations are serious offenses. His actions established a 
pattern of violations in the handling of classified information. He aggravated his 
circumstances when he attempted to conceal his questionable behavior by deleting 
 
13 
 
 
classified documents from his laptop prior to providing the laptop to Government 
investigators. His overall behavior violated the trust and confidence placed in him by the 
Government. Because of his education, age, and experience, Applicant’s actions are not 
excusable as mistakes caused by inexperience or lack of training. Considering the 
totality of the circumstances, Applicant’s security violations were knowing and willful. His 
actions raise security concerns about his current judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 2.b:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline M:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:     AGAINST Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
