 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06819 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 14, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
On April 22, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on August 3, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
August 10, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on August 30, 2011. The 
 
2 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 that were admitted into evidence without 
objection.  Department Counsel’s list of exhibits was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) 1. 
Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through F, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The record was left open until September 13, 2011, to 
provide Applicant an opportunity to submit additional matters. Applicant did not submit 
any additional matters. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 9, 
2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since December 2009. She is a high school graduate. She is 
currently not married, but has been married and divorced three times. She has two 
daughters, ages 12 and 21. Her older daughter is living on her own. Applicant receives 
$500 per month in child support for her younger daughter. This is the first time that she 
has applied for a security clearance.1  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had 14 delinquent debts totaling about $30,883, 
and also had a mortgage that went to foreclosure with a deficiency balance of $203,162. 
These debts were listed on credit reports obtained on April 7, 2010; November 2, 2010; 
and June 9, 2011. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.o), but denied the security concern paragraph (SOR ¶ 1). Her 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial difficulties to the downturn in the housing market 
in 2008 and failed marriages in 2005 and 2009. From April 2001 to November 2008, she 
worked for a bank. She was first a customer service representative and then a 
mortgage loan officer. During that employment, her annual salary rose from $22,000 to 
$80,000. She voluntarily left that job for a better job opportunity as a mortgage loan 
officer. As the housing market collapsed in 2008, she began to struggle financially 
because her salary was based on commissions. From November 2008 to April 2009, 
she estimated her total income was $1,200. In February 2009, she married her third 
husband. Shortly thereafter, she discovered that he was using illegal drugs and 
drinking. She could not tolerate his behavior or expose her daughters to it. She 
separated from him in April 2009. In May 2009, she was unemployed for less than a 
month when her company closed. In May or June 2009, she received emergency 
medical treatment for abdominal pains and did not have health insurance to cover those 
expenses. From June to October 2009, she was employed as a mortgage consultant 
before moving to another state at the end of October 2009. In the new state, she held a 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 4-5, 27, 31-32, 40-41, 102-103; GE 1. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1-6. 
 
 
3 
 
temporary job for two months before obtaining her current employment. She was 
granted her latest divorce in September 2010.3 
 
 In May 2007, Applicant purchased a home. The home was financed with a 
mortgage of $203,162 (SOR ¶ 1.o). This was a 30-year fixed mortgage with a monthly 
payment of $1,477. In late 2008, she encountered difficulty making the mortgage 
payments but was able to negotiate with the lender to have two months of delinquencies 
added to the end of the mortgage. Starting in February 2009, her husband agreed to 
make the mortgage payments. He made the February payment. He told her that he 
made the payments in March and April 2009, but failed to do so. As noted above, they 
separated in April 2009. She vacated the home in May 2009. Foreclosure proceedings 
on the home began in November 2009 when the mortgage had a balance of about 
$215,665. The bank notified her that, if the home sold for less than the balance on the 
mortgage, she would be held responsible for paying the difference. At the hearing, she 
indicated that she did not know if the home was sold during the foreclosure 
proceedings. She indicated that, when she last spoke to a friend from her former 
neighborhood several months after vacating the home, the home had not been sold. 
The mortgage is not listed on her two most recent credit reports. She has not been in 
contact with the bank to confirm the status of the foreclosure proceedings. Insufficient 
information has been presented to conclude this mortgage has been resolved.4 
 
 Applicant incurred the delinquent debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.n from 2005 to 
2009. Since 2009, she has neither made any payments to those creditors nor contacted 
them to arrange settlements. She is meeting her current financial obligations and has 
not incurred any new delinquent debts since 2009. She has not used a credit card in 
years.5  
 
 Applicant has consulted with two bankruptcy attorneys. As a prerequisite to filing 
a bankruptcy petition, she completed a financial counseling course online in August 
2009. At the time of the hearing, she had not filed bankruptcy. She has been somewhat 
reluctant to file bankruptcy, but believes it is her only option and intends to do so. She 
plans to wait until January 2012 to obtain her tax refund to enable her to pay the 
bankruptcy filing fees and attorney’s fees.6 
 
 Applicant submitted four reference letters. Her manager described her as an 
extremely valuable asset with extraordinary people skills. The manager indicated that, in 
his 41 years of employment, he has never met anyone he would trust more than her. 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 27-40, 43-48, 70-73, 97, 106-110; GE 1, 2, 3; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. For October 
and November 2009, Applicant worked as a mortgage loan processor through a temporary employment 
agency. Her second marriage was from November 1997 to August 2005. 
 
4 Tr. at 41-56; GE 2, 5, and 6. 
 
5 Tr. at 62-68, 73-75, 100, 104-106; GE 4, 5, 6. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b has been delinquent since 
2005.  
 
6 Tr. at 53-62, 100, 103-104; GE 2, 3; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
 
4 
 
Her supervisor indicated that she is very reliable, conscientious, and customer oriented. 
Her supervisor recommends her for a security clearance and has confidence she can 
be entrusted to protect classified information. Two coworkers indicated that she is a 
trusted employee who has an exceptional work ethic. They recommend her for a 
security clearance. Applicant is involved in civic and charitable projects and received a 
Community Service and Volunteerism Award at work in 2011. Her employee 
performance review ending in September 2010 indicated that she performs at the “fully 
satisfactory” level.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
7 AE A-F. 
 
 
5 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to satisfy her obligations for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Since obtaining her current job in 2009, Applicant has been current on her bills 
and has incurred no new delinquent debts. Nevertheless, she has multiple delinquent 
debts that are ongoing and significant.  
 
Applicant’s failed marriages in 2005 and 2009, the downturn in the housing 
market in 2008, and her medical problem in 2009 were conditions beyond her control 
and contributed to her financial problems. To obtain full credit under AG ¶ 20(b), 
however, both prongs of that mitigating condition, i.e., conditions beyond the individual’s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Here, Applicant has failed to 
establish that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. In this regard, Applicant 
has taken no meaningful action to resolve the delinquent debts for over a year and a 
half even though she has been employed during that period. She provided no proof of 
payments or settlement arrangements for the delinquent debts. She has not contacted 
the creditors since 2009. She has consulted with two attorneys about filing Chapter 7 
bankruptcy and completed the requisite financial counseling for filing bankruptcy. 
However, she had not filed a bankruptcy petition prior to the hearing. These 
circumstances do not support a determination that she acted responsibly in addressing 
the delinquent debts since obtaining her current job. At the time of the hearing, her 
financial problems were neither being resolved nor under control. Moreover, based on 
the record evidence, I cannot find that her financial problems arose under 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur or that they do not cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(b) applies partially. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 
20(c), and 20(d) do not apply.8 
 
 At this point, Applicant has failed to take meaningful action to resolve her 
financial problems. Her delinquent debts remain a security concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
                                                          
8 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner 
when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). In that analysis, a factor to 
consider is whether the applicant maintained contact with his or her creditors and attempted to negotiate 
partial payments to keep his or her debts current. 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. I 
considered Applicant’s years of service to her employers. Her current manager, 
supervisor, and coworkers find her to be very trustworthy and reliable. They recommend 
that she be granted a security clearance. Nevertheless, she has not addressed her 
financial problems in a responsible manner and failed to provide sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the security concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
