                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04380 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 9, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 12, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 29, 2011. DOHA issued 
a Notice of Hearing on August 9, 2011, and the hearing was scheduled for August 30, 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
2011. On August 24, 2011, Applicant requested a continuance which was granted and 
the hearing was rescheduled for September 1, 2011.1 The Government offered Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 8. Applicant objected to GE 5 through 8. His objection was overruled 
and all of the exhibits were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf 
and offered Exhibits (AE) A through J, which were admitted into evidence without 
objections. The record was held open until September 9, 2011, to allow Applicant to 
submit additional documents, which he did and they were marked as AE K through P 
and admitted into evidence without objection.2 DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on September 12, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR except ¶¶ 1.d and 1.n. His 
admissions are incorporated in the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2004. He 
was in the Marine Corps Reserve from 1981 to 1983 and was honorably discharged. He 
enlisted in the Air Force and served from 1983 to 2003 and retired in the rank of E-5. 
Applicant married in 1985 and has two sons who are 22 and 15 years old. Applicant 
attended college beginning in 1997. He earned his bachelor’s degree in 2005. He is 
currently enrolled in a master’s program that his employer is funding. In the past ten 
years he has had no periods of unemployment. Applicant’s wife works as a dental 
assistant. Applicant has held a secret security clearance continuously since he was in 
the Air Force.3 
 
 Applicant lived in State A in 2003. In October 2003 he moved to State B until 
April 2004. His family remained in State A. He was then offered a transfer in August 
2004 that was a good career opportunity in State C. He and his wife made a family 
decision and he moved to State C, and she remained in State A. He believed she would 
move to State C in the next three to six months. They owned a house in State A that he 
continued to make the mortgage payments. They continued to maintain two households 
which impacted Applicant’s finances. In January 2006, Applicant purchased a house for 
$255,000 in State C. His family did not move to State C until July 2007. During this time 
Applicant was responsible for paying the two mortgages on the houses. Sometime 
before his family moved to State C, they sold the house in State A. Applicant used credit 
cards and consumer loans to pay his bills during this time. He had difficulty paying the 
credit cards and consumer loans and many of them became delinquent.4  
 
1 Applicant’s Continuance Request was marked as Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
2 Hearing Exhibit II is Department Counsel’s memorandum noting no objections to the submitted 
documents. 
 
3 Tr. 10, 126-128, 131-135, 146. 
 
4 Tr. 121, 147-151, 155. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 On October 2, 2008, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). 
In responding to Section 28, he indicated he had one debt for $144 that was over 180 
days delinquent. He answered “no” to the inquiry that asked if he had any debts that 
were over 90 days delinquent.5 During his interview with an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator on January 8, 2009, he was confronted with his 
delinquent debts. He indicated in his interview that he was not aware of exactly when 
some of the debts became delinquent, but he had been contacted by creditors about the 
debts. He indicated he was actively seeking credit counseling and was seeking 
professional advice. At his hearing, when asked why he failed to disclose all of his 
delinquent debts, he indicated he was not prepared at the time he submitted his SCA, 
and he was not certain how much delinquent debt he had. He stated he was not aware 
and stated he was not paying attention to “the bottom line.”6 He did not know the 
specifics of his debts. He stated he had no intention of deceiving the government.7  
 
 Throughout the hearing, Applicant acknowledged he had numerous credit cards 
and consumer loans. He acknowledged that he had difficulty paying the debts and 
eventually stopped paying them. He received notices from creditors that he was 
delinquent. He was aware he stopped paying debts he owed. Some of the debts date 
back to 2004 through 2006, when they were charged off. Based on Applicant’s 
testimony throughout his hearing, it is inconceivable that he was unaware of the more 
than $60,000 of delinquent debts he had, especially when he admitted he had difficulty 
maintaining two households and used credit cards to pay for some of his expenses. I 
did not find Applicant’s testimony credible and find he deliberately failed to disclose his 
delinquent debts.8  
 
 In December 2009 and January 2010, Applicant made small sporadic payments 
to three creditors. In March 2010, Applicant contracted with a debt consolidation 
company to help him resolve his delinquent debts. He made two payments of $400 to 
the company and decided it was not reputable. He was able to get his payments 
refunded. In May 2010, he contracted with another debt consolidation company. He 
indicated he began making monthly payments of $650 in May 2010. He provided proof 
that he made payments in October 2010 through March 2011, and May 2011 through 
Aug 2011. Nine creditors are included in the plan, but only two are being paid at this 
point. It appears that the plan pays off creditors as the funds become available based 
on settlement agreements. Not all of the creditors in the plan have agreed to 
settlements. In fact, two of the accounts listed are with the same creditor and they have 
indicated they will not deal with debt consolidation companies, but will only deal directly 
with the Applicant when settling the debts. The aggregate balance listed for the nine 
accounts is $45,725. Applicant does not know the status of each individual debt. 
5 GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. 105. 
 
7 Tr. 28, 101-105, 151-153. 
 
8 Tr. 34-37. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant obtained a credit report in May 2011. When asked why he did not get a credit 
report before then, he stated he did not take the issue seriously after his interview with 
the OPM investigator.9 
 
 Applicant purchased a new vehicle in 2005 for $28,000. He traded it in for a used 
vehicle in November 2010. His loan payment was reduced. He estimated that after he 
pays his expenses and the $650 towards his debts, he has about $200 remaining at the 
end of the month. He has about $150 in savings and $750 in checking. He has been 
contributing to a retirement account since October 2006 and estimated he has about 
$10,000 saved. He receives approximately $700 in retirement income from his military 
pension. He owes approximately $12,000 in student loans. They were deferred for a 
period and then he was delinquent for four months. He now makes monthly payments of 
$123.10  
 
 The following is the status of the debts alleged in the SOR.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is a credit card debt ($10,531). It became delinquent 
sometime in late 2006 or early 2007. He did not make a payment on the debt once it 
was in a delinquent status. He has no current settlement offer for the debt. It is not paid 
or resolved.11  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($113) is a collection account for phone service. Applicant 
contracted for the phone service for his son in 2005 or 2006. His son changed providers 
and did not tell Applicant. He learned of the delinquent account in May 2011 when he 
obtained his credit report. Applicant stated he paid the debt when he learned of it. He 
did not provide documented proof that he paid the debt.12 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($15,070) is a consumer loan Applicant obtained in 
August or September 2007. He used the money to pay other debts. The debt became 
delinquent in about September or October 2008. He is attempting to negotiate a 
settlement with the creditor. This debt is included in his credit consolidation plan but no 
payments have been made to resolve it.13  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($1,548) is for satellite television. Applicant disputes the 
debt stating he has never contracted with this carrier. He contacted the creditor and filed 
a fraudulent dispute claim. He provided a copy of the dispute letter.14 
9 Tr. 29-32, 43-46, 112-120; GE 2, 3; AE G, H, O. 
 
10 Tr. 125-131, 135-145. 
 
11 Tr. 69-70. 
 
12 Tr. 38-46. 
 
13 Tr. 70-75; AE G. 
 
14 Tr. 28-29, 67-69; AE C. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($1,036) is a credit card debt. Applicant stated he settled 
the debt for $520 in April 2011. The debt was charged off in December 2004. He 
provided a copy of the letter noting he had provided a post-dated check to the creditor.15 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶ 1.f ($2,959), ¶ 1.g ($4,381), and ¶ 1.n ($4,730) are credit 
card debts. This creditor does not want to negotiate with third party debt consolidators 
and will only address the debt with the consumer. The debts in SOR ¶ 1.f and ¶ 1.g are 
included in the consolidated payment plan. However; no settlement has been 
negotiated because of the creditor’s policy. Applicant disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.n 
stating he paid it. Applicant’s credit report shows a fourth account with this creditor was 
previously paid, but this one remains delinquent. Applicant provided a document dated 
May 13, 2011, that shows he was to make a scheduled payment of $1,480 on the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.f by May 27, 2011. He did not provide proof that he made the payment. The 
debts remain unresolved.16 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($777) is a credit card debt. In Applicant’s statement to 
the OPM investigator he indicated he had contacted the creditor and would pay the debt 
by February 2009. He did not make the payment. This debt is included in his payment 
plan, but has not been paid. The debt is about four years old.17  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($5,839) is a credit card debt. It was charged off in 2006. 
Applicant indicated he received a settlement offer in February 2011 for $2,630. He 
made seven payments of $328 through his consolidated payment plan. He provided 
proof of the payments beginning in February 2011.18  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.j ($837) is a store credit card. It is approximately seven 
years old. The consolidated credit company contacted the creditor but they did not offer 
a settlement agreement. Applicant indicated he will pay the debt when he receives a 
settlement offer.19  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.k ($2,068) is a credit card debt. The current balance is 
$3,568. Applicant indicated that his consolidated credit company negotiated a 
settlement in May 2010 for ten monthly payments of $173. He did not provide 
documented proof of his payments or that the debt is resolved.20 
 
 
15 Tr. 52-56; AE F, M. 
 
16 Tr. 32-38; 76-86, 107-112; AE G, N; GE 5 at pages 2-4. The credit report also shows a fifth account 
with this creditor that is delinquent but was not alleged in the SOR. I have not considered this account for 
disqualifying purposes, but will consider it when analyzing the whole person.  
 
17 Tr. 86-89. 
 
18 Tr. 57-66; AE D, G, P. 
 
19 Tr. 90-91. 
 
20 Tr. 91-97; AE G. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.l ($4,202) is a credit card debt. It was forwarded to a 
collection account in November 2006. The creditor agreed to settle the debt for $1,922. 
Applicant was to make an initial payment of $400 and monthly payments of $152. He 
provided documentation to show he made three payments in June, July, and August 
2011.21 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.m ($12,625) is a credit card debt. It has been delinquent 
since approximately 2006. Applicant stated he was notified in 2007 that he was behind 
in his payments. He stated the payment amounts increased at that time and he was 
unable to make them. He stated he has contacted the creditor about a year ago and is 
negotiating a settlement. This debt is not included in the consolidated payment plan.22  
 
 Applicant attended financial counseling through his credit union in 2009 and 
2011. He regrets he did not plan his finances better, but stated he did the best he could. 
He was trying to do what was best for his family. He did not anticipate that it would take 
three and half years for his family to move and consolidate their households. He 
believes he is making progress on paying his delinquent debts.23  
 
 Applicant provided two character letters from a coworker and former coworker 
who have known him for four years and three years respectively. Applicant is described 
as a man with personal integrity, who is responsible and trustworthy. He is considered a 
leader and dependable team player who exercises good judgment.24 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
21 Tr. 47-52, 56; AE E, G, L. 
 
22 Tr. 98-101. 
 
23 Tr. 153. 
 
24 AE A, B. 
 
7 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 
8 
 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ration, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
Applicant accumulated numerous debts over several years that became 
delinquent and were unpaid. He used credit cards and a consumer loan to subsidize his 
spending. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following potential mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has been steadily employed during the past ten years. He and his wife 
chose to maintain separate households during a period of transition. Applicant did not 
anticipate that his wife would not make the move for more than three and a half years. 
These decisions affected their finances, but were totally within their control. He chose to 
purchase a house during this period. He accumulated consumer and credit card debts 
beyond his ability to make the payments. Applicant has many delinquent debts that are 
many years old and are not resolved. He has shown a consistent track record since at 
least 2004 of being financially irresponsible. In the past he made promises to pay his 
 
9 
 
 
debts and did not follow through. Under the circumstances, I cannot find that his 
behavior is unlikely to recur. I find his actions casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find that the conditions that resulted in Applicant’s 
financial problems were within his control. Therefore, I find AG ¶¶ 20(a) 20(b) do not 
apply.  
 
 Applicant attended financial counseling twice. However, considering the amount 
of delinquent debt remaining to be resolved, Applicant’s present financial status, and his 
past unreliability in paying his debts when he promised, I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) only partially 
applies. I am not convinced at this time that his financial problems are under control. 
Applicant has made some efforts to settle some of his debts, but many have not been 
resolved. I find AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies.  
 
 Applicant disputed some of the delinquent debts and provided one dispute letter 
for one of the debts, but did not provide any other documentation to substantiate the 
basis of his disputes nor did he provide evidence of action to show he is resolving the 
issue. I find AG ¶ 20(e) partially applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant intentionally and deliberately failed to disclose all but one of his 
delinquent debts on his SCA. Applicant had numerous debts that had been delinquent 
for years that he was aware were unresolved. I find the above disqualifying condition 
applies to Applicant’s personal conduct.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following potentially mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17: 
 
10 
 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. 
Applicant was aware of his financial problems and intentionally failed to disclose them 
on his SCA. His omissions are serious and he did not make a good-faith effort to 
disclose his delinquent debts until he was confronted by an investigator. His deliberate 
omissions cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find AG ¶¶ 
17(a) and 17(c) do not apply. There is insufficient evidence to support the application of 
AG ¶¶ 17 (b), 17(d) or 17(e).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
11 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but others warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant retired from the Air Force with an honorable discharge. He has been 
steadily employed for ten years. He and his wife made a decision to maintain two 
separate households during a period when Applicant accepted employment in a new 
location. This arrangement presented financial difficulties for him. He chose to use 
credit cards and a consumer loan to pay many of his expenses. Applicant accumulated 
significant consumer debt that he was aware he was not paying and it became 
delinquent. He was receiving notices from the creditors that his payments were 
delinquent. When he submitted his SCA he was aware he had many delinquent debts, 
but he only disclosed one small debt. His omissions were deliberate. Applicant has paid 
some of his delinquent debts, but many are unresolved. Applicant has not met his 
burden of persuasion. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guidelines for Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.d-1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.k:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.l:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.n:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
