 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01397 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald C. Syktus 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. Applicant mitigated the security concerns for 
criminal conduct and personal conduct. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On January 5, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to retain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. After an investigation conducted by the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued an interrogatory to Applicant to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying 
information in his background.  After reviewing the results of the background 
investigation and Applicant’s response to the interrogatory, DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative findings required to continue a security clearance. DOHA issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated February 10, 2011, to Applicant detailing security 
concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F, criminal conduct under 
Guideline J, and personal conduct under Guideline E. The action was taken under 
 
2 
 
 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of Defense 
on September 1, 2006. Applicant received the SOR on February 24, 2011. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 8, 2011. He admitted all the allegations 
under the three security guidelines, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 8, 2011, and the case 
was assigned to me on May 19, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 9, 
2011, for a hearing on June 22, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered 13 exhibits which I marked and admitted into the record without 
objection as Government Exhibits (Gov. Ex.). 1 through 13. Applicant and three 
witnesses testified. Applicant offered eight exhibits which I marked and admitted into the 
record as Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A through H. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
of the hearing on June 30, 2011.  
 
Procedural issues 
 
 Applicant’s attorney discussed the hearing date with Department Counsel prior to 
a Notice of Hearing being mailed on June 9, 2011. Applicant is entitled to 15 days 
advance notice of a hearing. (Directive E3.1.8.) Applicant was ready to proceed at the 
hearing on June 21, 2011, and he had sufficient time to prepare. Applicant, through his 
attorney, waived the 15-day notice requirement. (Tr. 6-7) 
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw the security concerns in the Statement 
of Reasons under Guideline F. Applicant did not oppose the motion. The motion was 
granted and the security concerns in Paragraph 3 of the SOR under Guideline F were 
withdrawn. (Tr. 43) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant admitted all SOR allegations with 
explanation. I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 52 years old and has been employed by a defense contractor for 
almost three years as a field electronic engineer. After Applicant graduated from high 
school, he enrolled in college for approximately three semesters. He then joined the 
Marine Corps and served eight years on active duty from 1979 until 1987. He received 
an honorable discharge. He then worked for defense contractors on the same contract 
from 1987 until 2003. He successfully held a security clearance since 1979, including 
access to top secret and sensitive compartmented information. He first married in 
January 1979 but divorced in February 1982. He married again in March 1982, and 
divorced in November 2004. During most of this time, he lived in State A. He separated 
from his second wife and moved to State B in 2003, while still working for a defense 
 
3 
 
 
contractor. After his divorce in November 2004, he married for the third time in 
November 2004. He moved to State C with his wife and children in November 2005 to 
open his own business. When that business failed, he returned to work with a defense 
contractor. He has three children or step-children living at home that he and his wife 
support. (T 9-11, 25-34; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated January 5, 2009; Gov. Ex. 2, 
Applicant’s Resume; App. Ex. C and D, DD 214, United States Marine Corps)  
 
The criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns arise from the 
same circumstances. After moving to State B and meeting his future wife in 2003, 
Applicant lived in her house with her and her children. At the request of his future wife, 
Applicant installed surveillance cameras in the house to observe her daughter. Also 
captured on the videos were two au pairs hired to care for Applicant’s future wife’s 
children. Applicant kept some of the videos on a computer hard drive. Applicant and his 
wife moved to State C for employment in November 2005, and sold the house. The new 
owners discovered the cameras and notified police. After the cameras were discovered, 
Applicant was arrested for child abuse but was found guilty of unauthorized video 
surveillance. He is on probation until February 2012. The two au pairs also sued 
Applicant and his wife for invasion of privacy. The criminal conduct security concern 
(SOR Paragraph 1) stems from the allegation of child abuse. The personal conduct 
security concerns (SOR Paragraph 2) arises from his conduct that led to the lawsuits 
filed by the two au pairs.  
 
When Applicant moved to State B in 2003, his divorce from his second wife was 
pending and he met his future third wife. While they dated, he moved in with her and her 
family. His future wife had an 11-year-old daughter with psychological problems 
stemming from the accidental death of her father a few years before. The daughter had 
self-destructive tendencies. She was disruptive, moody, depressed, and had set fires. 
The daughter’s psychologist told Applicant’s future wife that she had to be observant of 
the daughter’s behavior at all times. Applicant had experience while working for defense 
contractors with surveillance equipment. Applicant’s future wife asked him to install 
surveillance cameras in the house so they could observe the daughter wherever she 
was in the house. He encountered no problems in installing the cameras. He initially 
installed cameras in the daughter’s bedroom and bathroom. The cameras were 
activated by motion detection or by turning on lights. Any person entering those rooms 
would be observed. The images were recorded on a computer to be reviewed by 
Applicant or his future wife at a later time to determine if there was any inappropriate 
behavior. Their intent was to know what the daughter was doing and when she was 
doing it. There was extensive material so that it was difficult by a cursory review to 
determine if there were indications of behavioral problems for his wife’s daughter. 
Applicant or his wife deleted many of the images, but also moved some to files for later 
detailed review. Usually, they were held only for a few days. Applicant and his wife did 
what they could to delete any images that did not show inappropriate or destructive 
behavior. He believed all images had been deleted from the files. (Tr. 45-48, 62-64, 66-
73: Gov. Ex. 3, Response to Interrogatory, dated October 22, 2010) 
 
 
4 
 
 
During this time, Applicant’s wife employed au pairs from foreign countries 
through a State Department approved agency. The legal employment contract required 
that the au pairs work for only one year. When Applicant first installed the cameras, one 
au pair was observed a few times in the bathroom. Images of the next au pair hired 
were also caught by the cameras. The cameras also caught the images of Applicant’s 
underage niece who was visiting as well as the Applicant’s wife’s parents. As noted, the 
cameras were activated by motion or a light switch and caught the images of anyone in 
the rooms. The images on the computer were reviewed by Applicant or his wife. Some 
of the recordings were long, particularly if activated by the light switch and the lights 
were left on. Most of the recordings were deleted after review. Some were saved in a 
computer folder until they could be further reviewed. (Tr. 48-51; Gov. Ex. 4, Statement, 
dated July 23, 2010) 
 
Applicant and his wife observed images of people other than the daughter. One 
of the au pairs was from Russia and Applicant and his wife were suspicious of her 
activities. They contacted an agent from the Naval Investigative Service (NIS) who 
suggested that they keep the au pair employed and continue to observe her and her 
activities. NIS agents requested Applicant to install additional video cameras to keep 
track of the au pair. They also requested them to monitor her phone calls and mail. 
Applicant and his wife complied with the requests. Additional cameras were installed in 
the basement. The au pair was finally terminated when she had an automobile accident 
with the children in the car. She was not authorized to drive the car. (Tr. 51-56) 
 
When Applicant and his wife moved to State C in 2005, they sold their house 
which had the surveillance cameras. The cameras were not removed but Applicant 
informed his real estate agent of the cameras’ locations. He does not believe the new 
owners were informed by the real estate agent of the presence of the cameras. When 
the new owners renovated the house, they discovered the cameras. They notified the 
police, who seized Applicant’s computer equipment at his new home in State C. They 
discovered on the computer some images of Applicant’s underage step-daughter, his 
underage niece, and the au pairs. Applicant claims the images were not taken or 
retained for prurient interests or reasons. He did not know the images were still on the 
computer. He only installed the cameras at the direction of either his wife or the NIS 
agents. He researched the law in State C when he moved in 2005 and knows that he 
cannot install surveillance cameras in his home in that state. (Tr. 55-62, 77-78) 
 
 Applicant was initially charged in State B with the felony of child sexual abuse for 
the images of the step-daughter and the niece. On the advice of his attorney, he pled 
guilty to two counts of the misdemeanor offense of camera surveillance. He was 
sentenced to one year for each count but placed on unsupervised probation for five 
years. His probation runs until February 2012. The police officer who investigated the 
incident located the two au pairs and notified them of the cameras and the images on 
the computer. The two au pairs sued Applicant and his wife for invasion of privacy. 
Applicant’s wife was represented by her insurance company. Since Applicant and his 
wife were not married at the time the cameras were installed, the insurance company 
refused to represent Applicant or pay any judgment against him. The insurance 
 
5 
 
 
company settled the suits on behalf of the wife, paying each au pair $95,000. Applicant 
and his wife had no input into the decisions made by the insurance company. Since the 
insurance company was in charge and settled the case, Applicant had no choice but to 
pay his part of the suit. He paid one au pair $25,000, and the other $5,000. (Tr. 43-45, 
55-61, 119-120; Gov. Ex. $, Statement, dated July23, 201; Gov. Ex. 5, Settlement 
Order, dated June 12, 2008; Gov. Ex. 6, settlement Order, dated January 22, 2008; 
Gov. Ex. 7, Police Incident Report, dated February 7, 2006, Gov. Ex. 8, Criminal Court 
Records, dated February 6, 2007; Gov. Ex. 9 Camera Surveillance Statute) 
 
 Applicant’s wife testified that she is a supervisor in a military command and has 
worked for the Government for over 27 years. She has a security clearance. Her first 
husband died in an automobile accident in September 2000. Her daughter had 
psychological issues because her father’s death. Her misbehavior continued for a few 
years both before and after she met Applicant. She took her to a child psychologist 
because of her misconduct. The psychologist told her to keep a careful watch on all of 
her daughter’s activities. Someone set fire to her truck, so she determined that she had 
to more closely monitor the daughter. She was concerned that her daughter could 
engage in self-destructive behavior.  
 
 Applicant and his wife had been living together for about a year, so she 
requested him to install surveillance cameras in the home. They installed cameras in 
her room and in her bathroom. The bathroom camera was activated by the light switch 
and the room cameras by motion. They installed cameras in the downstairs bathroom 
used occasionally by her daughter. She knew Applicant and was not concerned about 
the images he would see of her daughter or others from the monitoring. She saw the 
same pictures and images Applicant saw. She knew Applicant was not looking at the 
images for prurient reasons. They did not look at the images on a daily basis but just 
when they suspected inappropriate behavior. After viewing the images, they deleted 
most but placed others in a folder on the computer until they had sufficient time to 
review the tapes. Sometimes they went back and reviewed the images and other times 
they did not. They would normally delete any images not involving her daughter. But if 
the images were of a long session and her daughter was not on the tapes initially, they 
would save the tapes in a folder for later review. Her daughter is now doing well. She 
seems to have gone beyond the self-destructive phase of her life and is no longer under 
psychological care. She is doing well in school and adjusted to her new environment 
when they moved in 2005. Applicant’s wife does not see a reason to continue 
monitoring of the daughter’s activities. They did not install cameras in their new home 
when they moved in 2005. (Tr. 94-104, 120-123)  
 
 Applicant’s wife was frustrated with the handling of the criminal case against her 
husband. The police would not talk to her or Applicant about the facts. She wanted to 
fight the case since Applicant was assisting her with caring for her daughter. However, 
she could not afford the costs associated with contesting the case. The insurance 
company’s attorney in the civil suit told her and Applicant that Applicant should take the 
plea bargain. She did not want to take it but left the decision to Applicant. (Tr. 104-109) 
  
 
6 
 
 
 She was suspicious of one of the au pairs that she hired. The girl was from 
Russia and behaved strangely. Because of her security clearance, she talked to NIS 
agents who asked her to continue monitoring the girl. She told the agents she had 
surveillance cameras in the house The NIS agents asked her to keep the girl in her 
employment and monitor her activities with the cameras. They also tracked her 
computer usage and phone calls as requested by NIS. (Tr. 109-118) 
 
 Applicant’s direct supervisor and manager testified that he has known Applicant 
since November 2008. He sees Applicant on a daily basis. Applicant is quiet and 
reserved but extremely intelligent. He has a great technical electronic expertise. His 
work is always top quality. He has talked with Applicant about the security allegations. 
He has no concerns about Applicant’s ability to safeguard classified information. (Tr. 91-
94) 
 
 The lead installer for Applicant’s employer testified that he has known Applicant 
since 1993. He saw him on a daily basis until about 2000. They did not work together 
for about eight months at that time but kept in contact. When his company needed a 
good technician, he contacted Applicant and the company hired him. Applicant’s 
reputation is very good. He is aware of the charges against Applicant and it does not 
affect his opinion of Applicant’s security worthiness. He considers Applicant to be 
among the most trustworthy people he knows.  
 
 Applicant’s performance reviews are excellent. They show he is regarded as an 
excellent technical instructor who understands complex security systems. He is rated as 
either meets or exceeds expectations. (App. Ex. A and B, Performance Reviews, 2010 
and 2011)  
 
Policy 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
7 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concerns for criminal conduct and personal conduct in this case are 
raised from the same incident. The security concerns for both, as well as the 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, are so similar that they will be 
discussed together. Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations (AG ¶ 30). Personal conduct 
involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 15)  
 
At the request of his future wife, Applicant installed surveillance cameras in her 
home to monitor the potential self-destructive activities of his wife’s daughter. The 
cameras captured images of people other than the daughter to include two au pairs 
employed by his wife. He was found guilty of improper use of surveillance cameras in 
violation of a state law, and sued by the two au pairs for invasion of privacy. The 
criminal conduct that creates a security concern is Applicant’s improper use of 
surveillance cameras in violation of the state criminal statue. The personal conduct 
security concern is created by Applicant’s conduct that led to lawsuits filed by the two au 
pairs as well as his criminal conduct. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s use of surveillance cameras in violation of state law is sufficient 
information to raise Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 31(a) (a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses), and AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted). Applicant was placed on five years of unsupervised probation 
for his conviction. The probation runs until February 2012. This raises the disqualifying 
condition at AG ¶ 31(d) (individual is currently on parole or probations). 
 
This criminal activity as well as the conduct leading to the lawsuits filed against 
Applicant by the au pairs for invasion of privacy for monitoring them by surveillance 
cameras raises Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 16(c) (credible adverse 
information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse 
determination under any single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safe guard protected 
information); and AG ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information. This includes but is not limited to consideration of: (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations). Applicant’s conduct leading to a conviction for violating 
state statutes and a judgment against him for invasion of privacy indicates conduct 
involving questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. This raises concerns about Applicant's reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.   
 
I considered Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 32(a) (so much time 
has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and Personal Conduct Mitigating 
Condition AG ¶ 19(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment). I find that these mitigating conditions apply. The criminal and 
personal conduct activity took place in 2004 and 2005 when Applicant installed the 
surveillance cameras. Of more concern is that Applicant still had some of the images 
still on his computer. This led to the criminal and civil charges. Both Applicant and his 
wife testified that she asked him to install the cameras for a legitimate family reason. 
The mistake made by Applicant and his wife was that they did not insure that the 
images were deleted from the computer when no improper conduct by the daughter was 
found. They deleted most but not all of the images after reviewing them and finding no 
useful information. The failure to delete the images was careless but not done to satisfy 
any prurient interests in the images. Both Applicant and his wife had access to the 
 
9 
 
 
images and both viewed them. The circumstances leading to the criminal and civil 
charges were unusual and unique in that they were monitoring the daughter for self- 
destructive behavior. The monitoring happened over five to six years ago and has not 
recurred. The daughter now appears to be well and is not under medical care. It is 
unlikely that further monitoring will be required, so the capturing of images will not recur. 
Applicant and his wife did not install cameras when they moved to their present house. 
  
I also considered for the personal conduct security concern AG ¶ 19(d) (the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur);and for the criminal conduct security concern AG ¶ 32(d) 
(there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of 
time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement). I find that 
these mitigating conditions apply. While Applicant and his wife both acknowledge that 
surveillance monitoring of the daughter was needed, but that they should have 
exercised greater care in how the system worked so that the system monitored only the 
daughter. They also acknowledged the need to be more careful in deleting and 
disposing of the images of others. They did not continue the monitoring when they 
moved and made a determination that they no longer needed to monitor the daughter 
for self-destructive actions. Applicant and his wife have not engaged in any further 
activities that could lead to criminal or personal conduct security concerns. Applicant 
presented sufficient information that he has learned from his experience with the 
surveillance cameras.  
 
Applicant is still on probation which runs for approximately five more months. He 
was placed on unsupervised probation for five years or 60 months. He has served most 
of that probation without incident. I find no evidence that will remotely indicate that 
Applicant will not continue to successfully complete the period of probation. Applicant 
presented sufficient information to mitigate the security concerns for criminal and 
personal conduct.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent 
to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
 
10 
 
 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s eight years 
on active duty with the Marines and his honorable discharge. I considered that he is 
regarded as an excellent worker with excellent skills. I also considered he successfully 
held a security clearance for almost the entire time since 1979 
 
 Applicant installed surveillance cameras in his wife’s home at her request to 
monitor her daughter for potential self-destructive activities. Unfortunately, images of 
other people were caught during the monitoring. Applicant and his wife disposed of or 
deleted most of the images. Some remained due to Applicant’s or his wife’s 
carelessness in deleting the images. The cameras were discovered by the new owners 
of the house, and a review of his computer showed the images were not totally deleted. 
Applicant was found criminally responsible for use of surveillance cameras, and sued by 
two of the people captured by the monitoring for invasion of privacy. Applicant’s intent in 
installing the cameras was reasonable and appropriate. However, he was negligent in 
not ensuring the monitoring would not include people other than the intended target. He 
was further negligent by not ensuring that all images were deleted from a computer. 
Applicant has not installed cameras in his new home and he has not continued to 
monitor the daughter since she no longer has mental health issues. Applicant knows the 
requirement in his new location in State C against installing surveillance cameras to 
monitor the activity of others even in his own home. He has provided sufficient 
information to mitigate security concern for his criminal and personal conduct. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. He established his suitability for access to classified 
information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
  
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
11 
 
 
 Paragraph 3: Guideline F:   WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.b  Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
