                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05750 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant, 23, has a three-year history of illegal marijuana purchase and use, 
highlighted by three brushes with the law: two for drug offenses and one for recklessly 
handling a firearm. He is currently on probation for the latter offense. He has not 
participated in substance-abuse counseling or treatment. He continues to associate with 
his marijuana-using friends and relatives. In light of his age and his failure to change his 
lifestyle, Applicant’s behavior continues to cast doubt about his reliability, judgment, and 
ability and willingness to comply with the law. Clearance denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 24, 2009. 
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
On March 24, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR) 
indicating security concerns raised under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and H (Drug 
Involvement) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
On April 13, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 3, 2011, 
to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on June 17, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on July 7, 
2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted without 
objection, except for GE 5, which was admitted over Applicant’s objection. Applicant 
testified, and he presented one exhibit (AE) 1, which was admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 14, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations under SOR ¶ 1.a. He denied the 
remaining SOR allegations: ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 2.a, and 2.b. His admission is incorporated 
herein as a finding of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having 
considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 23-year-old employee of a Government contractor. He graduated 
from high school in 2006, and he attended college from 2006 until November 2009, 
when he was expelled because of his conviction for recklessly handling a firearm (SOR 
¶ 1.b.) He has never been married, but has a three-year-old son living with him. 
 
Applicant testified he started his illegal use of marijuana during his senior year of 
high school. He used marijuana socially with his friends once or twice during the week, 
and then during the weekends. (Tr. 50) His marijuana use increased while he was in 
college, where he routinely smoked marijuana approximately four to five times every 
week until March 2007. He purchased marijuana for his and his friends’ consumption, 
but denied selling drugs. 
 
In March 2007, Applicant was sitting in a car parked outside of a night club with 
some friends. Police officers intervened with them because of a complaint filed against 
the driver of the car almost hitting a pedestrian. During a subsequent search of the car 
occupants, a police officer found a small bag of marijuana in Applicant’s jacket pocket. 
Applicant pled guilty to the illegal possession of marijuana charge, pursuant to a first 
offenders’ diversion program. He was found guilty and required to serve one-year 
probation, to perform 24 hours of community service, and to pay a fine and court costs. 
His driver’s license was suspended for six months. After fulfilling the terms of his 
probation, the possession of marijuana charge was dismissed. 
 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AG, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant claimed that he stopped using marijuana after the March 2007 incident. 
He was attending college under a scholarship program, and he was concerned about 
the termination of his scholarship and his expulsion from college, if he was involved 
again in any drug-related incidents. 
 
In October 2009, Applicant was carrying a gun (registered to his brother) for his 
protection. He explained that he was afraid of the numerous robberies and assaults 
occurring in his college campus. While he was trying to store the gun in the car before 
going into a bar, the gun discharged, the bullet went through the window of the car, and 
it hit Applicant’s friend in the stomach. When police officers approached him, Applicant 
threw the gun away into the bushes.  
 
Applicant’s wounded friend lied about how he got shot; however, the next day, 
Applicant went to the police station and confessed that he was the shooter. Applicant’s 
friend died, but as a result of the hospital’s negligence and not of the gun shot wound. 
On March 2010, Applicant was convicted of recklessly handling a firearm, a 
misdemeanor. (GE 5) He was sentenced to 12 months in jail, with three months 
suspended for five years, and to pay a fine.  
 
Applicant appealed the conviction. At his hearing, Applicant claimed that his 
March 2010 conviction was set aside. He testified that on January 28, 2011, he again 
pled guilty to the charge of reckless handling of a weapon, but under a prosecution 
deferment program. He was placed on probation, required to remain on good behavior, 
to perform community service by counseling young adults, and to participate in 
psychological treatment. Pursuant to his current plea agreement, if Applicant complies 
with all the court’s conditions, the charge could be dismissed as early as December 
2011, or at the latest, in January 2013. (GE 5) Other than the fact that he appealed his 
conviction, Applicant presented no documentary evidence to corroborate his testimony. 
 
In March 2010, Applicant parked his car in front of one of his friend’s home. He 
and three of his friends were talking in the car when, for reasons not clearly explained, 
police officers intervened. During a subsequent search of the car, a police officer found 
a small residue of marijuana in the back seat of the car. Applicant and his three friends 
were charged with illegal possession of marijuana. According to Applicant, neither he 
nor the three occupants were smoking marijuana or had marijuana in their possession. 
No marijuana was produced by the prosecution at trial. Applicant was found not guilty of 
the charge of possession of marijuana.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant admitted that one of the occupants of the car smoked 
marijuana with him when he was in high school. He also testified that he has occasional 
contact with other of his marijuana-smoking friends. Additionally, he has infrequent 
contact with an uncle and some cousins who currently smoke marijuana. Applicant has 
not participated in any substance abuse treatment or counseling. He has never been 
diagnosed as an illegal substance abuser.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant takes responsibility for his mistakes. He expressed remorse for his past 
use of marijuana. He repeatedly stated that he has not used marijuana since March 
2007. Applicant was hired by a Government contractor in May 2007 as a summer hire, 
and he is now a full-time employee. Because of his information technology position, he 
was granted access to classified information at the secret level in September 2009. 
Applicant likes his job. He is scheduled to deploy to Kuwait in support of deployed 
service members, and he needs a security clearance to retain his position. 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AG are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied 
in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
The facts and circumstances raising security clearance concerns under 
Guidelines J and H are substantially the same, with some exceptions. For the sake of 
brevity, they will be articulated under the Guideline J discussion, and incorporated by 
reference into the discussions under Guideline H. The exceptions will be discussed in 
the pertinent guideline. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the security concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt 
about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use spans from around 2005-2006 (at age 18) until March 
2007. He used and purchased marijuana on a frequent basis during his senior year of 
high school and during his first year in college. He was convicted of possession of 
marijuana in March 2007. Although the state dismissed the charge through a first 
offender’s program, that does not diminish the seriousness of Applicant’s drug related 
behavior. He also was charged with possession of marijuana in March 2010, and 
acquitted of the charge. Notwithstanding, security concerns are not totally mitigated 
because at the time of the arrest, he was associating with his drug-using friends from 
high school. He also continues to associate with several family members who use 
marijuana. Applicant’s October 2009 conviction for recklessly handling a firearm is also 
not mitigated. He is currently on probation and will continue to be on probation until at 
 
6 
 
 
least December 2011, or January 2013, if he does not comply with the conditions of his 
probation. 
 
Applicant claimed he stopped using marijuana in March 2007, because he was 
afraid of losing his scholarship and being expelled from college. He averred he has not 
used marijuana again, and he promised never to use illegal drugs ever again. 
Notwithstanding, Applicant continues the same lifestyle and associations that led to his 
illegal use of marijuana during high school and college.  
 
 Applicant’s overall behavior raises security concerns under AG ¶ 31(a) “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted,” and AG ¶ 31(d) “individual is currently on parole or probation.” 
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists four conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Considering the record as a whole, I find that none of the Guideline J mitigating 
conditions fully apply. Not enough time has passed for me to conclude that his 
questionable behavior is unlikely to recur, and there is no clear evidence of successful 
rehabilitation. He did not participate in substance abuse counseling, and he continues to 
associate with his drug-using friends and relatives. Moreover, Applicant is currently 
under probation. At this time, Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to establish that he 
has the ability and willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. His past 
questionable behavior still casts doubts on Applicant’s reliability and judgment. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant illegally used and purchased marijuana, with varying frequency, from 
2005 until March 2007. In March 2007, Applicant was convicted of illegal possession of 
marijuana. Although the state disposed of the charge through a first offender’s program, 
that fact does not diminish the seriousness of Applicant’s drug-related behavior. 
Applicant claimed he stopped using marijuana in March 2007, because he was afraid of 
losing his scholarship and being expelled from college. Notwithstanding his marijuana 
possession conviction, Applicant continues to associate with his marijuana-using friends 
and relatives and to live the same lifestyle that led to his use of marijuana. His 
association with drug-using friends led to him being charged with possession of 
marijuana in March 2010. He was acquitted of this charge. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case: AG ¶ 
25(a): “any drug abuse”3 and AG ¶ 25(c): “illegal drug possession . . . purchase, sale, or 
distribution.”  
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
3  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
8 
 
 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 For the same reasons discussed previously under Guideline J, incorporated 
herein, I find that none of the Guideline H mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s 
abuse of drugs spans a period of three years. He continues to associate with his 
marijuana-using friends and relatives and to live the same lifestyle that led to his use of 
marijuana. Not enough time has passed for me to conclude that his questionable 
behavior is unlikely to recur. His behavior still cast doubts on Applicant’s reliability and 
judgment.  
 
Considering his continued association with drug-using friends and relatives, 
Applicant did not demonstrate his intent not to use drugs in the future. Considering the 
totality of the circumstances, I also find there has not been an appropriate period of 
abstinence. Applicant did not participate and is currently not attending any drug 
aftercare treatment program, and there is no favorable diagnosis and prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional. Applicant’s favorable evidence, at this time, is not 
sufficient to mitigate the Guideline H security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
 
9 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 23 years old. He put 
himself through college for three years with the assistance of a scholarship until he was 
expelled as a result of his conviction for recklessly handling a firearm. Most of his 
questionable behavior occurred while he was attending high school and his freshman 
year at college. He stopped using marijuana after his March 2007 conviction for 
possession of marijuana. He was concerned further drug-related incidents would 
disqualify him for his scholarship and would get him expelled from college. He is now 
employed with a Government contractor and he wants to develop a career. These 
factors show responsibility, good judgment, and some mitigation. He expressed 
remorse for his past questionable behavior, and promised not to use illegal drugs ever 
again. 
 
Notwithstanding, Applicant has not participated in substance abuse counseling or 
treatment. His continued association with his drug-using friends and relatives do not 
convince me that he has changed his lifestyle. He presented no evidence of a recent 
diagnosis and a favorable prognosis. In light of Applicant’s age, lifestyle, and 
association with drug users, Applicant’s promise not to use illegal drugs in the future at 
this time is not is not sufficient to show it is unlikely his questionable behavior will recur.  
 
On balance, I conclude that Applicant’s favorable evidence is insufficient to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug involvement and criminal conduct. 
Moreover, Applicant is currently under probation for his conviction for recklessly 
handling a firearm. Overall, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
