 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case: 10-00313  
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On August 23, 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86). On April 6, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On May 2, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 8, 2011, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing ten Items, and mailed 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant a complete copy the same day. Applicant received the FORM on April 18, 
2011, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. She timely submitted additional information to Department Counsel, who 
had no objection. I marked said documents as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A, B, and C. On 
August 3, 2011, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegation in ¶ 1.a and admitted 
the remaining three allegations. Those admissions and her statements in response to 
DOHA interrogatories are incorporated in the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where she began 
working in 1989. She is a quality engineer. She is married and has two children. She 
has no military service but has held a security clearance since 1995. (Item 5.) 
  
 In October 2009, a government investigator interviewed Applicant about 
delinquent debts and unpaid state and federal income taxes for tax years 2005, 2006, 
2007, and 2008.1
 
 She indicated that from 2005 to 2006 and part of 2007 her husband 
underwent substance abuse treatment. As a consequence he was unemployed and 
unable to work in his painting company for periods of time. Their income decreased and 
they choose to pay their mortgage and other bills rather than their income taxes. (Item 
6.) Sometime in 2005 her husband filed a Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Petition that was 
closed in April 2007. (AE C.) Applicant indicated that she hired a tax firm in March or 
April 2009 to resolve their outstanding tax issues. (Id.) 
The April 2011 SOR alleged that Applicant failed to file a Federal income tax 
return for tax year 2008 and failed to pay taxes for 2005, 2006, and 2007, totaling 
$67,086. The 2008 tax return was filed in 2010 and contains evidence of $24,000 in 
gambling income. (Item 4 at 4.) None of the taxes for the four years are paid or 
resolved. As of September 2010 the tax firm continues to pursue a resolution. (Item 4 at 
6; AE A.) The Applicant has not participated in credit counseling. Applicant submitted no 
character references or other evidence tending to establish her good judgment, 
trustworthiness, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to 
be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant admitted that she owes taxes for 2008 and 2009. While those facts are not alleged as 
security concerns, they will be considered in the whole-person analysis. 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
4 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The evidence established security concerns under two Financial Considerations 
guideline DCs: AG & 19(a) an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;@ and AG & 
19(c) Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@ Based on her statements, 
Applicant has been unable or unwilling to satisfy outstanding tax issues for the years 
2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008. The evidence is sufficient to raise these two disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut or prove mitigation of those security concerns. The guideline includes 
four conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from financial 
considerations in AG ¶ 20. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be 
mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant’s 
outstanding income tax problems started in 2005, continued into 2008, and remain 
unresolved to date. Because the ongoing problems are not isolated and there is no 
evidence that the delinquent indebtedness is unlikely to recur, this condition does not 
apply.   
 
AG & 20(b) states that it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in 
the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant 
attributed her financial problems to her husband’s periods of unemployment, while 
undergoing substance abuse treatment during 2005 to 2007. Those may have been 
circumstances beyond her control. However, she admitted that she chose to pay her 
living expenses and not taxes. She provided no evidence that she attempted to act 
responsibly while the taxes were accruing or becoming due by having sufficient 
withholdings taken from her income. This MC marginally applies.  
 
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows that Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant established no mitigation under these 
two provisions. She failed to present evidence that she received credit counseling 
and/or that her outstanding tax liabilities are under control, as required under AG & 
20(c). She provided minimal evidence that she is attempting to establish a repayment 
plan for the taxes, as she has been engaged in negotiations since March or April 2009. 
AG & 20(d) has little application.   
 
 
5 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
is responsible for her voluntary choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns 
set out in the SOR. She demonstrated a five-year history of not meeting income tax 
obligations from 2005 to 2009, as well as a lack of good judgment and reliability. 
Despite learning of the Government’s concerns in October 2009 (which began in 2005), 
none of the unpaid taxes have been resolved to date. Applicant failed to demonstrate 
financial rehabilitation, so the likelihood of continuation or recurrence of income tax 
issues remains a concern. The record contains insufficient other evidence about her 
character, trustworthiness, or responsibility to mitigate these concerns. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:              For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b through 1.d:  Against Applicant  
 
 
6 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
