1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------------- )  ADP Case No. 10-05290 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carolyn Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Questionnaires for Public Trust Position (SF 85P) on 
August 8, 2009. On January 20, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued  Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness 
concerns under Guidelines G (Alcohol Consumption) and H (Drug Involvement), which 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
determination of trustworthiness, suitability, and eligibility for Applicant to hold a 
Sensitive Systems Position (ADP-I/II/III). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
 
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Systems Program Office 
(CHCSPO), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant 
2 
 
Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (ASD 
C3I) entered into a memorandum of agreement for DOHA to provide trustworthiness 
determinations for contractor personnel employed in Information Systems Positions as 
defined in the Regulation . 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 27, 2011.  She answered 
the SOR in writing on February 16, 2011, and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on February 22, 2011. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 7, 2011, and I received the case assignment 
on May 2, 2011, after it was reassigned from another administrative judge who was 
assigned it originally on April 20, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 5, 
2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 27, 2011. The government 
offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3, which were received without objection.  Applicant 
testified and submitted Exhibits A through E, without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 8, 2011. Based upon a review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all factual allegations of the SOR, 
with explanations. Those admissions are incorporated into these Findings. She also 
provided additional information to support her request for eligibility for a public trust 
position.   
 
Applicant is 54 years old, married, and has two daughters and one grandchild. 
She is a registered nurse and has been since 1985. She works for a defense contractor 
in the medical services industry, in which job she evaluates medical records of military 
members and does not treat patients. (Tr. 26, 58, 61; Exhibit 1) 
 
Applicant has a history of drug and alcohol use from 1973 to 2009. (Tr. 26-68; 
Exhibits 1-3, A, E) 
 
Applicant’s drug use started in high school before she graduated in 1975. She 
used heroin intravenously twice in 1974 and marijuana from 1973 to 1979. Applicant 
eventually decided she did not like marijuana and ceased its use. She used LSD once 
in 1974 and mushrooms the same year. Applicant ingested cocaine from 1977 to 1985 
when she became pregnant with her first child. Her next experience with drugs was the 
abuse of prescription medications in 1998 and 1999. Applicant stole prescription 
medications from patients in the hospital where she worked in 1999. The medications 
were Percocet, vicodin, and hydrocodone. She abused these medications while at work. 
She took about 100 pills over the course of a year. In July 2008 Applicant had a back 
operation and was prescribed pain medications. She did not disclose to her surgeon her 
prior addiction to medications or illicit drugs. She used these medications until she was 
ordered to take a urinalysis in January 2009 and subsequently discharged from work for 
violation of the drug free work contract. (Tr. 23, 26-32, 41, 46, 61-68, 71; Exhibits 1-3; A, 
E) 
 
3 
 
Applicant’s alcohol use started when she was 14 years old. She drank with high 
school friends at their homes once every few months. In college, Applicant drank beer 
every weekend. She drank to intoxication every four months. It took eight to ten drinks 
for Applicant to become intoxicated. Applicant drank at home and in social settings until 
1999. She suffered blackouts. She entered outpatient treatment then, and after 
discharge from her program she remained sober until 2007, when she resumed drinking 
with wine. By 2009 she was again identified as an abuser of alcohol, drinking two liters 
of hard liquor every two days. She hid alcohol in her house so her family would not 
know that she consumed that much alcohol. Applicant drank to relieve stress and after 
her family went to sleep each night. (Tr. 20, 24-26, 30, 33, 38, 39; Exhibits 1-3, A, E) 
 
Applicant has participated in two treatment programs. The first program, from 
1999 to 2004, resulted from her positive urinalysis for alcohol and drugs. Applicant 
admitted at that time she was a functioning alcoholic. She was suspended from work for 
three months and eventually her nursing license was placed on probationary status for 
five years. Applicant’s license was reinstated without conditions, according to her 
explanation. The first program was an out-patient program with a counselor with whom 
Applicant met weekly, then semi-monthly, and then monthly during the three-month 
program. Applicant stated the program was intensive with group meetings every other 
day. She also had random urinalysis during a five-year process. Applicant was 
diagnosed as alcohol and drug dependent by her counselor, whose professional 
credentials are unknown. During the next two years after the initial three-month period, 
Applicant attended weekly group meetings. She did not have a sponsor while in that 
program. She ceased attending meetings after two years because Applicant thought 
she had conquered her problem. In 2007 Applicant resumed drinking wine and later 
using prescription medications. (Tr. 29, 33-39, 41, 60; Exhibits 1-3, A, E) 
 
Applicant’s second treatment program was an inpatient program in February and 
March 2009 after someone at her hospital reported that she was not functioning 
properly as a nurse, evidenced in part by sloppy charting. She was ordered to take a 
urinalysis screening in January 2009, did so, and before the results came back to her 
supervisors she disclosed the results would be positive. Applicant regards that 
admission as self-reporting. She was suspended from work in January 2009 when the 
urinalysis results came back positive. Since 2009 Applicant attends Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) meetings three or four times weekly, meets her sponsor weekly and 
speaks to her sponsor several times during the week. She has home group meetings 
every Thursday. Applicant is a sponsor for other alcoholics. Applicant admits she is an 
alcoholic and there is no cure for her disease. She is candid at work about her problem. 
Applicant tries to keep her life simple and avoid stress. She does not have alcohol in her 
home. Applicant has been abstinent from alcohol and drugs for two years and four 
months as of the date of the hearing. Her sponsor’s letter supports this assertion. (Tr. 
20, 22, 42-59; Exhibits 1-3, A, E)  
 
Applicant’s treatment notes from the inpatient treatment program date from 
February 2, 2009, to March 19, 2009, when she was discharged. The diagnosis on 
February 2nd was polysubstance dependence. The discharge diagnosis on March 11th is 
again polysubstance dependence. The recommended treatment program after 
4 
 
discharge included three to five AA meetings weekly. The evaluator in the inpatient 
program attended by Applicant is a licensed clinical social worker with the professional 
designations of MSSW, MPA, and CSAC. The other entries in the notes track 
Applicant’s progress in discussing her addictions with family members and in the group 
sessions. (Exhibits 3, E) 
 
Applicant admitted she drove intoxicated when she was drinking. She also 
admitted she went to work “hung over” but never drunk. (Tr. 44, 45) 
 
Applicant submitted three character letters. Her AA sponsor, her pastor, and a 
counselor at her recovery program state that Applicant has the willingness and desire to 
sustain her recovery and abstinence. Her counselor at the recovery program has been 
in that work for 35 years and stated Applicant is deeply committed to her recovery 
process and maintains contact with the treatment staff on a regular basis. Applicant’s 
pastor states she participates in church leadership on the church council and as a 
Sunday school teacher. (Exhibits A, B, D) None of them have observed behavior that 
would indicate that she is abusing drugs or alcohol. They state her friends and family 
are committed to helping Applicant in her recovery program. 
 
Applicant submitted her 2009 and 2010 employee evaluations. Her supervisors 
rate her as meeting or exceeding expectations in each evaluation year. (Exhibit C)  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to Alcohol Consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
6 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
 Applicant admitted she drove while intoxicated during the years she drank 
alcohol and went to work “hung over.”  Applicant admitted she had “blackouts” in 1999 
and earlier because of her alcohol consumption. She also admitted she hid alcohol in 
her house so her family would not know her usage amounts. Before the inpatient 
treatment in 2009, Applicant admitted she did not acknowledge she had an alcohol 
abuse problem and that is why she resumed abusing alcohol in 2007. Applicant was 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent during her out-patient treatment program in 1999 by 
her counselor in that program.  After her relapse in 2007, and being identified again in 
2009 by a urinalysis by her employer, Applicant was diagnosed with polysubstance 
dependency by a licensed clinical social worker in a recognized alcohol treatment 
program. AG ¶ 22 (a), (b), (c), (e), and (f) apply to the facts admitted and demonstrated 
at the hearing.  
After the Government raised a potential disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG 
¶ 23 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate the security concern arising 
from illegal drug use: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
7 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant admits she is an alcoholic. She participates weekly in AA meetings, 
has a sponsor, and is a sponsor. Applicant has no alcohol in her home. Her sponsor’s 
letter, and two other letters from persons who know her participation in the rehabilitation 
program, support Applicant’s contention that she is abstinent and has the will to remain 
so. Applicant successfully completed her inpatient program, demonstrated a pattern of 
abstinence and received a favorable prognosis from a licensed clinical social worker in 
a recognized alcohol treatment program in 2009. AG ¶ 23 (b) and (d) apply.  
  
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to illegal drugs:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
8 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program. 
 
 Applicant has a history of alcohol and drug abuse, dating back to high school and 
through her early 20’s. The later illegal drug use included prescription medications she 
stole in 1998 and 1999 from patients at the hospital where she worked, and in 2008 and 
2009 medications prescribed for her pain resulting from her back operation in 2008. In 
1999 and 2009 she tested positive for illegal substance use. AG ¶ 25 (a) and (b) apply.  
 
 Applicant received a diagnosis in March 2009 of polysubstance dependence from 
a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program. AG ¶ 25 (e) applies.  
After the Government raised a potential disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG 
¶ 26 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
illegal drug use: 
 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
9 
 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Applicant demonstrates her intention not to abuse drugs in the future. She   
changed her work environment and reduced her stress from working in a hospital with 
medications in daily proximity near her to a file evaluation position with a defense 
contractor.  She established a two year and four month current period of abstinence. AG 
¶ 26 (b) applies.  
 
Applicant’s 2008 and 2009 abuse of prescription drugs occurred after a back 
operation and the resulting pain. She was prescribed medications that she had abused 
in 1998 and 1999 because her physician was not told of her prior abuse by Applicant.. 
The abuse ended in January 2009 when she was identified as abusing drugs through a 
urinalysis screening, and entered an in-patient treatment program. AG ¶ 26 (c) applies.  
 
Applicant satisfactorily completed a prescribed drug treatment program, including 
the aftercare requirements without a recurrence of abuse. Her favorable prognosis is 
from 2009 was not rendered by a medical professional but rather a licensed clinical 
social worker. AG ¶ 26 (d) has partial application because all the elements are not 
present in this mitigating condition to give it full effect.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s past drug and alcohol 
abuse was very serious. It compelled her to steal prescription medications from patients 
in the hospital at which she worked in 1999 and led to the probationary status of her 
nursing license from 1999 to 2004. She indulged herself in drug and alcohol use from 
10 
 
her high school years to 2009, a period of over 30 years, though there were periods in 
the time when she was abstinent voluntarily, such as when her children were young.  
 
Applicant was a mature, educated, and professionally licensed adult when she 
engaged in substance abuse during the past 15 years. She relapsed after the out-
patient program in 1999 because she did not admit she was an alcoholic and drug 
dependent. Applicant’s motivation for her conduct was pleasure, addiction, and self-
indulgence. All of these actions cast doubt on her good judgment and trustworthiness.  
 
Her candid admissions as to her drug and alcohol abuse and weekly 
participations in AA sessions decrease substantially the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress because of her alcohol and drug dependency. She has made 
permanent behavioral changes following her in-patient rehabilitation There is a 
decreased  likelihood of recurrence because of the admissions Applicant made to her 
family and employers, her church members, and other persons in her community who 
know her.  
 
Applicant’s frank, candid, and credible testimony about her dependencies, and 
her contrite expressions of the effect of her dependencies on herself and family, 
persuade me sufficiently in her favor.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from her alcohol 
consumption and drug involvement. I conclude the “whole-person” concept for 
Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
