 
 
 
 
1 
                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case: 10-00913 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
For Government: Paul Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
On November 24, 2008, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On December 9, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), 
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on or about January 29, 2011, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On March 24, 2011, DOHA 
assigned the case to me. On June 10, 2011, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, 
setting the case for June 29, 2011. The case was heard as scheduled.  Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 into evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified. She offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D into 
evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript on July 11, 2011. 
The recorded remained open until July 29, 2011, to give Applicant an opportunity to 
submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted a document containing 17 
pages that I marked as AE E and admitted into the record without objection.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, and 1.f. She denied the allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.d, 1.g, and 
1.h. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. She graduated from high school in 1980 and enlisted 
in the Air Force in 1981. She retired from active duty in October 2002 with an 
honorable discharge. She was a master sergeant and worked in medical logistics at 
the time of her retirement. After retiring, Applicant worked in real estate and 
construction. In March 2008 she started a position as a medical logistics 
superintendent for a defense contractor overseas, performing the same duties she 
did for the Air Force. (Tr. 24.) 
 
 Applicant has been married three times, and is now divorced. She was married 
to her first husband from 1982 to 1987. She has two children from that marriage, 
ages 25 and 28. She was married to her second husband from 1996 to 2008. She 
was married to her third husband from 2008 until 2011. She and her third husband 
lived separately, as he is a Peruvian citizen and resident, and she resided and 
worked in a foreign country shortly after they married. (GE at 10.)  
 
 In August 1996 Applicant and her second husband jointly purchased a home for 
about $114,000. (Tr. 32.) In April 2004 they secured a $90,000 home equity loan to 
remodel it. (Tr. 37.) In 2006 Applicant’s second husband moved out of the country 
and stopped paying household bills. In February 2008 the home went into foreclosure 
because she could not pay the bills on her monthly income of $2,500. (Tr. 32, 85.) In 
February 2008 they divorced. The house subsequently sold for about $90,000, 
leaving a $20,000 deficiency. According to the divorce decree, both Applicant and 
her second husband remain responsible for financial obligations not covered by the 
sale of the house. (Tr. 39, 41; Ex D.) She had been unable to locate him, until 
recently when he responded to an email, but provided no assistance in resolving the 
financial obligations. (Tr. 78, 85; GE at 13.) 
 Applicant stated that she has had difficulty resolving the mortgage or home 
equity problems because she lives in a foreign country and has been unable to 
personally speak to a representative of either creditor. (Tr. 45.) She attempted to hire 
 
 
 
 
3 
lawyers while overseas without success. (Tr. 84.)  Immediately after the hearing, 
Applicant hired a lawyer to investigate and resolve both issues. He sent letters to 
both creditors. (AE E at 8, 13.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated December 2008, November 2009, 
and November 2010, the SOR alleged eight delinquent debts totaling $134,158 of 
which $119,613 relates to the 1996 house purchase. These debts became delinquent 
between 2007 and 2009. The status of each allegation is as follows: 
 
1. (¶ 1.a) The $6,306 debt owed for a personal loan was paid in two 
installments in February and March 2011. (Tr. 27; AE A.) It is resolved. 
 
2. (¶ 1.b) The $91,310 home equity loan is being investigated by 
Applicant’s lawyer.  (Tr. 34; AE E at 8.) It is being resolved.  
 
3. (¶ 1.c) The $667 delinquent debt owed to a department store was paid 
in full in February 2011. (AE B.) It is resolved. 
 
4. (¶ 1.d) The $1,234 debt owed to a cellular company was paid on July 
26, 2011. (AE E at 11.) She initially disputed the debt. (Tr. 55.) It is 
resolved. 
 
5. (¶ 1.e) The $1,752 debt owed to a bank for a credit card account was 
paid on July 22, 2011. (AE E at 11.) It is resolved. 
 
6. (¶ 1.f) The $28,303 unpaid mortgage amount was owed to a bank for 
delinquent mortgage payments on the home purchased in 1996 and 
later sold through a foreclosure proceeding. Applicant’s lawyer is 
investigating the status of this account. (AE E at 13.) It is being 
resolved. 
 
7. (¶ 1.g) The $786 debt owed to an insurance company was paid on July 
27, 2011. (AE E at 12.) It is resolved. 
 
8. (¶ 1.h) The $3,800 owed to a credit card company is being paid 
through monthly installments. Applicant paid $1,000 on June 22, 2011, 
$500 on July 16, 2011, and will continue to pay $500 per month until it 
is paid in full. (AE E at 14.) It is being resolved.    
 
 Applicant submitted a budget as of October 2010. Her net monthly income is 
about $5,400. She has about $1,800 remaining at the end of the month. (Tr. 71.) She 
has not participated in financial management or counseling. (Tr. 82.) She testified 
candidly about her financial problems. She expressed strong dedication to her work.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and 
based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of 
legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of 
the applicant concerned.”  
  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
   Applicant accumulated a significant amount of delinquent debt from 2007 to 
2009 that she did not begin to address until early 2011. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those potential 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut and 
prove mitigation. AG ¶ 20 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate the 
above security concerns: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
 
 
 
6 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
There is evidence to support a partial application of AG ¶ 20(b).  Applicant=s 
delinquent debts arose after her second husband left in 2006 and stopped 
contributing to their joint financial obligations. Those circumstances may have been 
beyond her control. However, there is no evidence that she took responsible steps to 
manage those debts until 2011, which is necessary for the full application of this 
mitigating condition.   
The facts warrant a limited application of AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant has not 
participated in financial counseling; however, she has taken actions, albeit recently, 
to resolve her financial obligations and bring them “under control.” To-date, Applicant 
has paid five debts totaling $10,745 and paid $1,500 on the $3,800 debt through 
monthly installments. Her budget will continue to accommodate any additional 
payments. 
Based on those actions, AG ¶ 20(d) also has partial application as she 
demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve six of the eight SOR-listed debts. In July 
2011 she hired a lawyer to investigate and resolve the $119,613 relating to the 
previous mortgage and home equity loan, supporting a limited application of AG ¶ 
20(e). Full application of AG ¶ ¶ 20(c), (d) and (e) is not warranted because Applicant 
did not begin to address the financial concerns until recently.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the 
following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
 
 
 
7 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
honorably served this country for twenty years and has continued to serve the military 
in the same capacity for the past three years. Between 2007 and 2009 she began 
accumulating debt as a consequence of the deterioration of her second marriage and 
subsequent foreclosure of the marital home. At this time she has resolved $14,545 of 
the SOR-listed debts. The remaining $119,613 relates to the foreclosed property and 
is being investigated by her attorney. In the event said amount is due the creditors, 
she is responsible for half of it according to her divorce agreement. Given her budget, 
she should be able to manage the debt. While her lax attitude in aggressively 
addressing the financial security concerns is not condoned, her long military career 
and recent actions to resolve six of the eight debts, alleviate my concerns that she 
would engage in illegal activities to resolve the two outstanding debts. Furthermore, 
her knowledge that future financial delinquencies will jeopardize her employment 
diminishes the likelihood similar problems will occur in the future. 
  
Overall, the record evidence does not create doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant fully 
mitigated the security concerns arising under Financial Considerations and the Whole- 
Person analysis.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - h:      For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
