1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-00833
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
September 15, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On November 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
F and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 17, 2010, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
March 1, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 10, 2011, and I convened
the hearing as scheduled on March 29, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits 1
through 21, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf
and submitted Exhibits A through F at the time of hearing, which were also admitted
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on April 5, 2011. I
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until April 12, 2011, to submit
2
additional documents, and four additional documents that were received, have been
identified and entered into evidence without objection as Exhibits G through J. Based
upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 40 years old. He is married, and he has two children. Applicant was
married two previous times, from 1993 to 2001, and from 2007 to 2008. He served in
the United States Navy from 1993 to 1996, when he was released early on a
humanitarian Honorable Discharge. He also was a Navy drilling reservist from 2002 to
2008. Applicant is currently pursuing a Ph.D. Degree in Systems Engineering, and he
has previously earned a Bachelor’s degree and two Master’s degrees. Applicant is
employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in
connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 10 allegations (1.a. through j.) regarding overdue debts under
Adjudicative Guideline F. Applicant admitted all of the allegations in his RSOR.  The
allegations will be discussed below in the same order as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a judgement filed against Applicant
in the amount of $9,784. At the hearing, Applicant testified that this debt remains unpaid
(Tr at 47.) He further testified that this is one of three debts listed on the SOR to the
same creditor, (1.a., 1.h., and 1.i.), an automobile company, but there should only two
debts, and one is a duplicate. One of the debts is for a vehicle that he purchased and
the other was for the purchase of a vehicle by a friend, for which he cosigned.  He
averred that he contacted the creditor to try to set up a payment plan to resolve the debt
for the vehicle that he had purchased, but he has received no response. No action has
been taken on the other debt.
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a judgement filed against Applicant
in the amount of $3,887. Applicant testified that this debt remains unpaid (Tr at 47.) 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $164. Applicant
testified that this debt remains unpaid (Tr at 48.)
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $590. Applicant
testified that this debt remains unpaid (Tr at 48.)
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $1,055. Applicant
testified that this debt remains unpaid (Tr at 48.)
3
1.f. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $372. Applicant
testified that this debt remains unpaid (Tr at 48.)
1.g. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $65 Applicant
testified that this debt remains unpaid (Tr at 48.)
1.h. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $7,900. Applicant
testified that this debt remains unpaid (Tr at 48.) This is the second debt owed to the
vehicle company, referred to in 1.a., above. 
1.i. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $8,813. Applicant
testified that this debt remains unpaid (Tr at 48.) This is the third debt owed to the
vehicle company, referred to in 1.a., above. Although Applicant testified that there
should only be two not three debts to this company, he could not identify which of the
debts was a duplicate. 
1.j. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $126,000, for being in
arrears for child support. In Exhibit 18 and during his testimony, Applicant confirmed
that the amount he had actually owed had been $141,000. From August 2010 until the
time of the hearing, he reduced the overdue debt to $134,800, the amount currently
owed. Applicant testified that this debt has continued to increase because the amount
he paid for child support did not include all of the amount owed, so that each month,
despite paying approximately $4,000 a month, his debt grew by about $1,000 a month.
It also increased during periods of unemployment when he made no payments.
Applicant further testified that his current payment of $4,000 a month has been modified
to now include child support and arrearage. Applicant’s son is now 15 and his daughter
is 13. He anticipates being able to finally resolve this debt in 5 years when his daughter
turns 18. (Tr at 41-44.) 
Applicant testified that the majority of his financial problems occurred during two
eight month periods after he left the Navy, when he was unemployed and was unable to
make any payments toward his child support obligation. Applicant testified that he failed
to attempt to have his child support payments modified while he was unemployed, and
he had no reasonable explanation for this lack of action. He and his ex-wife also took
out a loan on their home for $40,000, of which they each received $20,000 to help them
pay the bills. The $40,000 has also been added to the total arrearage for child support.
(Tr at 44-47.) He also stated that he showed poor judgment by purchasing a new
automobile in 2003 for $23,000, an amount that was “more than I could really afford” so
that the car was voluntarily repossessed in 2007. (Tr at 71-73.) 
Applicant testified that he receives a loan for his graduate degree in the amount
of $20,000 a year. Since the cost of his education is $18,000 a year, he would be willing
to pay the additional $2,000 towards his other outstanding debts. (Tr at 54-55.) Thus far
he has not done this. Applicant’s Personal Financial Statement, created by Applicant in
July 2010, shows he had a monthly surplus of $842, but  Applicant could give no
reasonable explanation for why with this remainder he had not reduced more of his
debt. (Exhibit 16.)  
4
Applicant also testified that in December 2010, he took a cruise with his wife and
her two daughters. When asked the cost of the cruise, he estimated “a few hundred
dollars.” (Tr at 129.) In Exhibit I, it is established that he actually paid $868 for the
cruise. He was asked if he had considered using some of that money to pay off some of
his debts. He indicated that he wanted to use the money for his family, and it was “more
fiscally responsible” to spend the money on the cruise and not spend it on other family
pursuits. (Tr at 130.)  
Paragraph 2 Guideline E, Personal Conduct
2.a. The SOR alleges that on or about May 15, 2001, Applicant was terminated
from his employment for unsatisfactory performance, and that he was instructed to
repay a signing bonus of $25,000 that he had received. Applicant did not return the
money and the matter was referred to collections. In his RSOR, Applicant averred that
he received this bonus to pay for his moving expenses to another site for the company,
and that he was let go because his services were not needed. The office to which he
moved closed down three weeks later. He further wrote that he was informed by his
former employer that he was not required to return the money, and after he was let go,
he did receive unemployment compensation, which he could not have done if he had
been dismissed for cause. Finally, he wrote that his former employer is no longer in
business so there is no way he could return the money, even if he accepted that this
debt was valid. 
During Applicant’s testimony, he stated that he received a letter showing that he
had been terminated for poor performance, and he was required to return the $25,000
bonus, which disagreed with his RSOR reply in which he stated that he had never been
contacted by his employer to collect the $25,000.  Applicant testified that he had
disagreed with the reason for his termination, and although he signed the letter
indicating that he would return the bonus, he did not intend to do so. He stated that he
only signed the letter so that he could receive his final paycheck. Applicant stated that
he had an oral agreement with his supervisor to work at home two days a week since
there was not enough work to be done at the office so the claim for not reporting to work
was not valid. (Tr at 59-61.) 
Exhibits 1 and 2 are letters from his employer, in which they clearly informed
Applicant that he had been terminated for poor performance and failing to report to
work, and that he was required to return the $25,000 bonus. Applicant contended that
he had sent letters disputing Exhibits 1 and 2, but he no longer had them available to
submit in the hearing. (Tr at 66.)
At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the complaint adding the
following allegations under paragraph 2 that had been sent to Applicant on January 12,
2011. Based on the notice, I have allowed the SOR to include these amended
allegations.
5
2.b. Applicant used marijuana, at least 6 times, from approximately October 2000
until at least December 2001. Applicant admitted this allegation in writing on February
25, 2011.
2.c. On or about January 31, 2001, Applicant was arrested for False Report of
Crime. Applicant admitted this allegation in writing on February 25, 2011. 
2.d. On or about August 9, 2003, Applicant was arrested for Theft of Personal
Property. Applicant admitted this allegation in writing on February 25, 2011. 
Mitigation
Applicant submitted a number of documents to give more insight into him under
the whole-person concept. These include, but are not limited to: a letter dated March 20,
2002, from a clinical psychologist indicting that Applicant would be attending 12
sessions of group therapy for depression from March 7, 2002, to May 23, 2002. (Exhibit
B.)   A Navy And Marine Corps Commendation Medal issued to Applicant on December
20, 2005; a copy of a diploma establishing that Applicant received a Master of Science
degree in Systems Engineering in 2010; copies of Fitness Reports and Counseling
Records for periods 2004-2005 and 2007-2008, for both of which he received excellent
reviews; Performance Evaluations from his current employer establishing that his
annual salary, when he began employment on July 12, 2004, was $89,000, and by May
21, 2009,  it had been increased to $132,000.  (Exhibit E.)  
Finally, Applicant also submitted seven extremely positive character letters, in
which he was described as “a loyal and dedicated citizen of the United States.” (Exhibit
F.) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
6
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19 (a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19 (c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant has accumulated significant delinquent debt. 
7
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties: Under AG ¶  20 (b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As noted
above, Applicant testified that his financial problems resulted in part from his periods of
unemployment. However, I cannot find that he has acted responsibly. First, he failed to
attempt to adjust his child support during the time he was unemployed. Second, he
purchased a vehicle, which he conceded he was not able to afford, and which was
repossessed in 2007. Third, he took his family on a cruise in 2010, rather than use
some of that money to reduce his debts. Fourth, while he testified that he had reduced
the number of his debts, he failed to submit evidence to establish that he had resolved
these past overdue debts. Finally, despite Applicant’s monthly surplus of $842, he could
give no reasonable explanation for not reducing more of his debt. Based on all of these
reasons, I find that this mitigating condition is not a factor for consideration in this case. 
I also do not find that AG ¶  20(d) is applicable since Applicant has not contacted
or “initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue  creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”
I conclude that Applicant has not significantly reduced or resolved his overdue
debt, nor has he shown that he can maintain financial stability. Therefore, at this time he
has not mitigated the financial concerns of the Government.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
With respect to Guideline E, I find that Applicant was aware that his company
had terminated him for cause, based on Exhibits 1 and 2 and that they requested he
refund the $25,000 bonus. He also testified that even though he signed the letter
indicting he would return the bonus, he had no intention of doing so, and he only singed
it so that he could receive his final paycheck. Applicant has indicated that the company
may no longer be in business, but since the payment and request for a refund were
made in 2001, Applicant had many years to return the $25,000 that he received.  I do
not find that Applicant submitted any independent evidence to establish that he was not
required to return the bonus of $25,000. 
Based on the significant time that has elapsed, and the limited introduced
evidence regarding allegations 2.b. through 2.d., I find these allegations not security
significant. 
I find that Applicant’s failure to return the $25,000 bonus exhibits conduct that
supports Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(d) “a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability” under this guideline. I do not
find any Mitigating Condition under ¶ 17 is applicable.  I, therefore, resolve Guideline E
against Applicant.
8
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
  
I considered the potentially Disqualifying and Mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the Disqualifying Conditions apply and the Mitigating Conditions do not
apply under both Guidelines, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance
under the whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not
mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.b.-d.: For Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
