 
 
1 
 
 
                                                      
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                                      )  ISCR Case No. 10-09349 
                                                                      )  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the file and exhibits in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on February 11, 2010. On June 2, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
    
 Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR on June 16, 2011. He requested that 
his case be adjudicated on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 18, 2011. The FORM contained 
evidentiary documents identified as Items 1 through 10. Additionally, the Government 
offered three documents, marked as Items 11, 12, and 13, which were not evidentiary, 
but which contained facts for administrative notice. By letter dated July 21, 2011, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on July 25, 
2011. His response was due on August 25, 2011. Applicant did not submit any 
additional information or objections for consideration by an administrative judge. On 
September 15, 2011, the case was assigned to me for a decision.   
 
                                                      Findings of Fact 
 
 The single allegation in this case recites that, as of June 2, 2011, Applicant owed 
a mortgage debt pending foreclosure that was past due in the approximate amount of 
$27,660 with a high balance of $478,125. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the allegation. Applicant’s admission is entered as a finding of fact.  
(Item 1; Item 3.) 
 
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and by information provided by Applicant in his response to DOHA interrogatories and   
his Answer to the SOR. The record evidence includes Applicant’s February 11, 2010 e-
QIP; official investigation and agency records; Applicant’s responses to DOHA 
interrogatories;1 and Applicant’s credit reports of March 6, 2000,2 February 19, 2010, 
July 7, 2010, and July 18, 2011. (See Items 4 through 10.) 
 
 Applicant, who is 56 years old, is employed as a technician by a government 
contractor. He has worked for this employer for 28 years. He married in 1995, and he is 
the father of three children. On his e-QIP, he stated that he had not previously held a 
security clearance. (Item 5.) 
 
 In response to questions on his e-QIP about his financial record, Applicant 
admitted being over 180 days delinquent on his mortgage debt and stated that the debt 
would be satisfied by a short sale. (Item 5.)  
 
 In a personal subject interview with an authorized investigator in July 2010, 
Applicant stated that, in 1986, he purchased a home for $80,000. His monthly mortgage 
payments were $1,100. In 1999, Applicant refinanced the mortgage on the property in 
order to purchase another residence, which is where he has lived for the last twelve 
 
1Applicant was interviewed by authorized investigators from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on March 5, 2010 and July 29, 2010. On April 8, 2011, in response to DOHA interrogatories, 
Applicant reviewed the investigators’ reports, and he then signed a statement that the investigator’s 
reports accurately reflected his two interviews. (Item 8; Item 9.) 
 
2 Item 4 in the list of documents in the FORM identifies a credit report. The correct date for the credit 
report is March 6, 2000 and not January 1, 1955. (FORM at 3; Item 4.)  
 
3 
 
 
                                           
years.3 Applicant’s refinanced loan on the first property was interest only, and his 
monthly payments rose to $1,500. Applicant rented the property, but in 2009, the 
tenants moved out, and Applicant’s monthly mortgage payment on the property rose to 
$1,800. (Item 5; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant was unable to carry the higher mortgage payment on the rental 
property without tenants. He contacted the lender and sought a loan modification or a 
short sale of the property.4 Neither alternative was possible, and Applicant fell behind in 
his mortgage payments. The lender initiated foreclosure on the property. (Item 6; Item 7; 
Item 8; Item 10.) 
 
 In his March 5, 2010, interview with an authorized investigator, Applicant stated 
that his financial problems began in 2009 when the recession began, and he was 
unable to pay his mortgage on the first property. He stated that he moved out of the 
home and rented it to tenants, but the tenants soon moved out, and he had no 
additional income to pay the mortgage. He also stated that he was laid off and out of 
work for approximately six months. He stated that he had acquired a new job in the 
latter months of 2009 and believed he would be able to satisfy his bad debt in 
approximately three months. (Item 8.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he had been employed with his 
current employer since 1983. He also stated: 
 
I admit to . . . subparagraph ‘a’ listed on the statement of reasons that 
financial hardship and poor decision making have led to my current 
circumstances. I have an adjustable loan which caused the principal to 
increase to the point that I can’t afford to keep it. The property is in poor 
condition and has been vacated for over one year. I am unable to find a 
renter. My debts have increased significantly to the point that I am unable 
to keep up with my mortgage payments. I have tried every possible way to 
keep and maintain the property including traditional sale. The loan value is 
more than 50% over the current market value. Short sale and loan 
modifications were denied by the lender. All of these circumstances have 
led to my current financial hardships. 
  
(Item 3.) 
  
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that he had not paid the 
delinquent mortgage account for several reasons. First, he was paying the college 
expenses of two of his children. Second, the cost of living had increased. Third, he was 
 
3 In response to Section 11 on his February 11, 2010 e-QIP, Applicant stated that he had lived at the 
residence he purchased in 1999 from August 1999 to “Present.” (Item 5 at 10.)  
 
4 While Applicant told the authorized investigator that he had proposed either loan modification or a short 
sale to the creditor, he did not provide documentation to support these actions.     
 
4 
 
 
not being assigned as much overtime work as he once was. Fourth, his father-in-law 
had died, which resulted in increased expenses for him and his wife. And fifth, his 
mortgage payments on the rental property had increased, but he was unable to rent the 
property. (Item 9.) 
 
 Department Counsel provided for administrative notice facts about the anti-
deficiency law in effect in Applicant’s state of residence. Applicant failed to provide 
documentation to establish the current status of the delinquent loan, whether the 
provisions of the state anti-deficiency statute applied to his delinquent real estate loan, 
and whether a foreclosure or short sale had occurred. Moreover, he did not provide an 
IRS Form 1099-C indicating any financial gain he may have accrued as a result of the 
sale of the property and any cancellation of his mortgage debt by the lender. (Item 12; 
Item 13.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided a personal financial 
statement. He reported that his net monthly salary was $3,000 and his wife’s net 
monthly salary was $4,100, for a total net monthly income of $7,100. (Item 9.) 
  
 Applicant reported $3,900 in monthly living expenses. His monthly debt 
payments of $3,436 included the following: $2,668 on the home mortgage for the 
residence he purchased in 1999 and where he continues to reside; $209 for an 
automobile loan; $109 for tax and home owners’ association fees; and $450 in property 
tax for a time share and homeowners’ association fees. Additionally, Applicant reported 
a negative monthly remainder of $236. (Item 9.) 
 
 Applicant reported total assets of $31,000, distributed as follows: bank savings: 
$11,000; a car or boat: $15,000; miscellaneous: $5,000.  Nothing in the record suggests 
that Applicant has received financial credit counseling. (Item 9.) 
Burden of Proof 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the 
applicant carries a heavy burden of persuasion. The "clearly consistent with the national 
interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant's 
suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national security. 
  
             Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
 
5 
 
 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
    
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The financial considerations guideline notes conditions that could raise security 
concerns. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial 
obligations@ may raise security concerns. Applicant has accumulated delinquent 
mortgage debt which he has not paid. This evidence is sufficient to raise security 
concerns under ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) of Guideline F. 
 
The guideline also recites conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions could apply to the 
security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. Unresolved financial 
delinquency might be mitigated if “it happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” (AG ¶ 20(a)). 
Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the conditions that 
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control,” such as 
“loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” 
(AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might be applicable include 
evidence “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” (AG ¶ 
20(c) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns related to financial 
delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
 
Applicant’s delinquent mortgage debt on his rental property is recent. He asserts 
that current financial obligations prevent him from addressing the mortgage debt 
associated with the rental property. His current financial obligations leave him with a 
monthly net deficit of $236. These facts suggest that Applicant’s financial situation is 
 
7 
 
 
unstable and future financial delinquencies might occur. This raises security concerns 
about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Applicant cited the economic downturn in the housing market, his inability to find 
a tenant to rent the property he purchased in 1986, the poor condition of the property, 
and his increased familial financial obligations as reasons for his inability to pay his 
monthly mortgage obligation on the rental property. The economic downturn in the 
housing market may well have been a circumstance beyond Applicant’s control. 
Applicant apparently contacted the lender and tried to seek a loan modification or a 
short sale, two solutions that the lender rejected. However, Applicant then allowed his 
mortgage debt to accumulate, without payment or a payment plan, and he assumed 
additional financial obligations that caused him to run a monthly deficit of over $230.  
 
Applicant has not had financial counseling. He has been employed by his present 
employer for 28 years. Although he told an authorized investigator in March 2010 that 
he had been laid off for six months in 2009, he reported no periods of unemployment on 
his e-QIP. He failed to provide documentation to establish that he acted reasonably 
when confronted with financial problems. He lacks a clear and timely strategy to resolve 
his delinquent mortgage debt. Accordingly, I conclude that none of the Guideline F 
mitigating conditions fully applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. He is 
responsible for a mortgage account of $478,125, and he owes $27,660 in past due 
payments on that mortgage account. He claims he lacks the resources to pay his 
delinquent mortgage account, and there is no record evidence that the property secured 
 
8 
 
 
by the mortgage has been foreclosed upon or sold in a short sale. He has been steadily 
employed at his present position for 28 years, since August 1983. In a March 2010 
interview with an OPM investigator, he stated he would be able to satisfy his delinquent 
debt in three months. However, his mortgage delinquency remains unaddressed, and 
Applicant’s personal financial statement indicates that he is financially overextended. 
His failure to satisfy his mortgage creditor raises security concerns about his judgment 
and reliability. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
delinquencies.     
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                       Against Applicant 
 
                      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
