 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-03484 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 22, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 5, 2011, and requested an administrative 
determination. On May 3, 2011, Department Counsel exercised the Government’s right 
to request a hearing under ¶ E3.1.7 of the Directive. The case was assigned to me on 
 
2 
 
 
May 19, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 31, 2011, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on June 28, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 9, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s 
exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified but offered no 
documentary evidence. The record was held to allow Applicant to submit post-hearing 
evidence. Applicant timely submitted exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted into evidence 
without objection. Government Counsel’s transmittal letter is marked HE II. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 8, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations under Guideline 
H. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He is single, never married, and has no children. He 
has a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree in aerospace engineering. Since 2004, 
he has worked for a defense contractor. He has no military service and has not 
previously held a security clearance.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: using marijuana on 
multiple occasions from 1995 through September 2009; being arrested in December 
2009 for possession of drug paraphernalia and driving while impaired; being arrested in 
2000 for possession of marijuana and Psilocybin; using Psilocybin in 2000; and being 
charged with drug paraphernalia possession in 1994. (See SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e). 
  
 Applicant first began using marijuana in about 1994. He does not deny the 
charge of possession of drug paraphernalia, but he does not remember the incident. He 
graduated from high school and was entering college when he began using marijuana. 
He used marijuana about once a month during social events at college, such as 
fraternity parties and gatherings with friends. He purchased marijuana for his own use. 
He also used marijuana while attending graduate school, but his frequency of use 
dropped to about five times per year. While he was completing graduate school and 
began applying for jobs in the fall of 2003, he stopped using marijuana. He was hired by 
his current employer in 2004. He used marijuana again in 2009 while celebrating a 
friend’s birthday. He claims that was his only use since stopping in 2003.2  
 
 In August 2000, when Applicant was a college senior, he attended a three-day 
festival with some friends. During this festival, he purchased both marijuana and 
Psilocybin. He used the marijuana by smoking it about five times during the festival. He 
had not yet used the Psilocybin before he was arrested. He was arrested and charged 
with possession of marijuana, Psilocybin, and drug paraphernalia by an undercover 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 7, 8, 29-30; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 39-42; GE 1, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
police officer. He pleaded guilty to the drug paraphernalia possession and the other 
charges were dismissed. He used Psilocybin about four or five times before 2000. He 
claims not to have used it again.3 
 
 Applicant’s use in 2009 was the result of celebrating a friend’s birthday. He and 
his girlfriend and some friends went into the city to celebrate. They frequented several 
bars and Applicant had several alcoholic beverages. At one bar, marijuana was 
produced by his friend and Applicant smoked some. Applicant’s friend has a medical 
marijuana card and is able to obtain marijuana legally. The marijuana was smoked 
using a pipe that ended up in Applicant’s possession. After the night of partying, 
Applicant was driving his girlfriend home when he was stopped for speeding. He was 
arrested for driving while impaired and possession of drug paraphernalia (the pipe). He 
pleaded guilty to the impaired driving charge and the other charges were dropped. He 
was sentenced to six months of supervised probation, which included attendance at 
drug and alcohol awareness classes. He completed his probation.4 
 
 Applicant admitted that his girlfriend smoked marijuana in the past, but claimed 
she does not smoke any longer. He also admitted that he has several friends who have 
medical marijuana cards. He occasionally associates with these friends. He also 
provided a written statement declaring his intent not to use drugs in the future. Although 
he was drug tested before his employment, he is not aware if his company has a drug 
testing policy other than for hiring. He was not diagnosed as either a drug abuser or 
drug dependant and has not been through any drug treatment program.5  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 43-46; GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 26-28; GE 2, 3. 
 
5 Tr. at 54-56; GE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and considered the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession and possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant used marijuana and Psilocybin on a number of occasions. He also 
possessed both drugs, and possessed drug paraphernalia on multiple occasions. I find 
the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and considered the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s use of drugs was frequent and recent (last use December 
2009). The period of abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate Applicant’s intent 
not to use in the future. I am troubled by the fact that after he stopped using 
drugs in late 2003, he resumed use of marijuana in 2009 because he was with 
friends who could smoke marijuana legally. Additionally, he remains in contact 
with friends who have medical marijuana cards. He has not met his burden to 
establish his intent not to use marijuana in the future, despite his statement to the 
contrary. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply, and AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s statement 
of intent not to use drugs in the future. However, I also weighed that he used marijuana 
on numerous occasions, and as recently as December 2009 after an extended period of 
non-use. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
