 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 10-01773 
                       ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for foreign 
influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on February 1, 2008. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1
 
 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
  
 
 
2 
 On April 20, 2011, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) that 
specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2
 
 Applicant 
submitted a notarized Answer to the SOR dated May 11, 2011, in which he admitted the 
allegations. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 2, 2011, and the case 
was assigned to me on June 15, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 27, 
2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on Jul 28, 2011. I admitted three 
Government Exhibits, (GE) 1 - 3. Applicant testified, and offered six exhibits, which I 
admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through F. I granted Applicant's request to hold 
the record open to receive additional documentation. He timely submitted two 
documents, which Department Counsel forwarded without objection. I admitted them as 
AE G and H. The transcript was received on August 4, 2011, and the record closed on 
August 31, 2011. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 I take administrative notice of facts relating to Tunisia and Bahrain, set forth in 
ten U.S. government documents submitted by Department Counsel. The facts 
administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and not subject to 
reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 39 years old, is a U.S. citizen, born in Puerto Rico. At the age of five, 
he moved to the United States with his maternal grandparents, who raised him. He 
attended school in the United States until the age of 15, when he returned to Puerto 
Rico and completed his high school education. He then joined the U.S. Army in 1990, 
where he worked as a communications security repairman. He briefly returned to the 
United States in 1991, after joining the Army. He held a top secret security clearance 
during his nine years of service, without incident. He was honorably discharged as an E-
4 specialist in 1999. He earned some college credits while in the Army, but did not 
complete a degree. His first marriage, to a German citizen, ended in divorce in 1998. 
(GE 1; Tr. 25-31, 39, 42-43) 
 
                                                 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines that were implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines 
listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in 
which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
3 
Applicant lived and worked in Germany for seven years while serving in the 
Army. After his discharge, he worked as a civilian for the Army Exchange system. Later, 
he was unemployed for about nine months. In 2002, he began his current job with a 
U.S. defense contractor in Bahrain. He held a top secret clearance with this company 
from 2004. (GE 1, 2, 3) 
 
In 2004, Applicant also met his current wife, a 31-year-old Tunisian citizen. She 
was a flight attendant for a Bahraini airline, and later worked in public relations for 
private companies. They married in Bahrain in 2006. Applicant, with his wife and 
children, lives in Bahrain. Applicant's wife no longer works outside the home. Their 
three-year-old son and two-year-old daughter are dual U.S.-Tunisian citizens. 
Applicant's children have both U.S. and Tunisian passports. He intends to send both 
children to the U.S. school in Bahrain. He also intends to initiate the process for his wife 
to obtain alien registration status. (AE C – E, G, H; Tr. 26-36, 43, 44-47, 50) 
 
Applicant and his wife traveled together to Tunisia three times between 2004 and 
2006 to visit her family. Since 2008, they have visited annually, although Applicant did 
not visit in 2011. They stay two to three weeks. Applicant also has relatives in the 
United States, including a half-brother and an aunt. He has a close relationship with his 
half-brother, who is handicapped. He is also in touch with his aunt. (Tr. 36-39, 41-42)  
 
Applicant’s parents-in-law, sister-in-law, and brother-in-law are citizens and 
residents of Tunisia. His father-in-law is 62 years old, and his mother-in-law is 55 years 
old. His mother-in-law has always been a homemaker. His father-in-law receives a 
pension from his former position as supervisor of an olive oil factory. They have had no 
connection with the Tunisian government or the military. They are unaware of details 
about Applicant's job or his security clearance. (GE 2; Tr. 54-58) 
 
Applicant's wife calls her parents about weekly. Applicant does not speak with 
them because he does not speak the Tunisian language. None of her family was 
involved in the anti-government protests, which he testified took place in other areas, 
several hours away from her family. (Tr. 58-61) 
 
Applicant's brother-in-law and his family live in Tunisia. He studied agriculture in 
school. Currently, he does not have steady employment. He is married, with four 
children, and lives with Applicant's parents-in-law. Applicant's wife talks with him once or 
twice per month. Applicant's sister-in-law is a Tunisian citizen, living in Bahrain. She is a 
flight attendant. Applicant's wife sees her sister once or twice per week. (GE 2; Tr. 62-
63, 65-69) 
 
Applicant's wife bought a 1.5-acre parcel of land in 2005, before their marriage. It 
cost about 100,000 dinar at the time (Applicant could not estimate the value in US 
dollars). Her intent was to allow her brother to farm it. However, her brother could not 
use the land because of its location, and he was not able to farm it. Applicant's wife 
hopes to sell the property. (GE 2; Tr. 51-54, 57-58) 
 
 
4 
Applicant’s wife bought an rental property in Tunisia for $65,000. Applicant gave 
her $40,000 and she paid the remainder. Applicant estimates the undeveloped land is 
worth about twice as much as the rental unit. Applicant does not own property in 
Bahrain. He has assets in the United States, including his 401(k) and individual 
retirement account (IRA). He estimates the total value to be approximately $200,000. 
(GE 2; Tr. 51-54, 57-58) 
 
In 2004, Applicant opened two savings accounts in Iraq, depositing U.S. dollars 
in one and Iraqi dinar in the other. He expected that when the dinar rose in value, iit 
would generate a substantial return in U.S. dollars. The value of his U.S. deposit was 
$822. He did not make any further deposits after 2004. When he realized the account 
constituted a security concern, he notified the bank to close it and transfer the funds to 
his U.S. bank account. In May 2011, the funds were transferred and the foreign account 
was closed. (GE 2; AE B; Tr. 70-73) 
 
 Applicant's manager for the past nine years submitted a letter attesting to 
Applicant's patriotism and dedication. He noted his consistent progression, and that he 
was recently promoted to site lead. He describes him as “vigilant when it comes to 
security awareness” in a job that directly supports the war-fighter. He describes 
Applicant’s maturity, honesty, and integrity. Another of Applicant's managers 
commented that, “I can say, without any reservation, that Mr. [Applicant] is one of the 
most principled and honest individuals I have met.”  The assistant vice-president of a 
large defense contractor has known Applicant since 2004, when he was single. He 
describes him as maturing into a dedicated family man. He is a conscientious worker, 
an Army veteran who speaks fondly of his military service, and a man who 
demonstrates loyalty and discretion. (AE F) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Bahrain 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts.3
 
 The Kingdom of Bahrain 
achieved independence from the United Kingdom in 1971. It is a constitutional 
hereditary kingdom governed by the Al-Khalifa family. The country’s customs and laws 
are based on Islamic ideals and beliefs. The government includes a bicameral body, 
with the lower house consisting of an elected council of representatives. 
The Department of State (DOS) Human Rights Report indicated no arbitrary or 
unlawful killings or politically motivated disappearances in 2010. However, security 
forces have used torture to elicit confessions. The constitution provides for free speech 
and press, other than speech that infringes on public order or morals. The government 
generally welcomed visits by international human rights organizations. 
 
                                                 
3 The facts cited derive from the summary and documents submitted by Department Counsel. 
 
 
 
5 
The Bahrain and the United States signed a Defense Cooperation Agreement in 
October 1991, which gives U.S. forces access to Bahraini facilities. Legislation 
implementing a free trade agreement between the United States and Bahrain was 
signed in 2006. The United States designated Bahrain a Major Non-NATO Ally in 2001. 
Bahrain is the headquarters of the U.S. Navy’s Fifth Fleet.  
 
Although Bahrain experienced recent unrest, the U.S. DOS lifted the authorized 
voluntary departure status for the U.S. Embassy on May 13, 2011, because of 
continuing improvements in security in Bahrain. The DOS Travel Alert noted that the 
Embassy was operating normally, though the potential for civil and political unrest 
continued. It also commented that there were no indications that U.S. citizens were 
being targeted or threatened, but urged avoidance of all demonstrations. 
 
Tunisia 
 
Tunisia is a constitutional republic with a population of approximately 10 million. 
The United States and Tunisia maintain strong relations, which date back 200 years. 
The two countries have an active schedule of joint military exercises. U.S. security 
assistance has played an important role in cementing relations. However, the U.S. 
Department of State warns of Tunisia’s open borders with Libya and Algeria, because 
of the terrorist presence in those countries. Tunisia has a large, highly educated middle 
class, and a long history of encouraging women’s socioeconomic freedom. Islamist 
parties were banned by the former president, but some have gained recent legal 
recognition. 
 
Although the public voted in presidential election of 2009, procedural aspects of 
the election raised questions whether the voting was free and fair. Before and after the 
elections, the government imposed severe restrictions on speech, press, and 
association. Security forces, which reportedly tortured and detained prisoners, acted 
with impunity.  
 
In December 2010, political and social unrest in central Tunisia spread to the 
capital and other major cities. The president fled to Saudi Arabia in January 2011, 
following weeks of anti-government protests. There were no instances in which U.S. 
citizens or facilities in Tunisia were subject to terrorist attacks. Although the unrest was 
not directed at U.S. interests, the DOS warns travelers to be vigilant and remain alert to 
local security developments.  
 
In March 2011, the interim government announced elections in July of a national 
constituent assembly. It would be charged with promulgating a new constitution, 
followed by presidential and parliamentary elections. As of April 2011, the unrest had 
diminished and public order returned to many areas, including the tourist zones.  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4
 
 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
Guidelines. 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.6 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the 
national interest as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information in favor of the Government.7
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern pertaining to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
                                                 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 are:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties to persons in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives 
in a foreign country and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that 
relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.8
 
  
Here, Applicant lives with his wife, who is a Tunisian citizen. They share living 
quarters and he has, of course, close ties of affection and obligation to her. He has 
more limited ties to his in-laws, who are citizen-residents of Tunisia and Bahrain. 
Applicant’s wife owns undeveloped land in Tunisia, for which Applicant contributed a 
substantial portion of the cost. She also owns an apartment, which she bought as an 
investment. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 7(a), (d), and (e) apply. 
 
The foreign influence guideline includes factors that can mitigate security 
concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
                                                 
8 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). 
 
 
8 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the United States;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict 
and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure 
the individual. 
 
 Applicant's relationship to his wife, a Tunisian citizen, is close. However, the 
country in question is one that has a strong relationship with the United States that 
goes back 200 years. The recent civil unrest has diminished and public order has 
returned to many areas. The information provided for administrative notice did not 
indicate that the country targets the United States to obtain classified information. I 
conclude that it is unlikely that Applicant would be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of the Tunisian government and the interests of the 
United States. AG ¶8 (a) applies. 
 
The Appeal Board has held that “there is a rebuttable presumption that a person 
has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s 
spouse.”i9
 
 Here, Applicant has contact with his in-laws during annual visits to Tunisia. 
He does not provide them with financial support. He does not speak with them by 
phone during his wife’s calls to her family, as he does not speak their language. They 
have no knowledge or understanding of his job or his security clearance status. 
Applicant has rebutted the presumption of affection or obligation to his in-laws, 
because his conduct indicates that his contact with them is casual, and unlikely to 
create a risk of foreign influence. AG ¶8 (c) applies.  
Applicant opened a bank account in Iraq in 2004. It remained open, though 
inactive, for several years. Once he realized the account presented a security concern, 
he promptly took action to close it. He presented evidence that all funds have been 
transferred to his U.S. bank account. Applicant has property interests in Tunisia. He 
and his wife purchased a rental property worth about $65,000. She also bought an 
undeveloped parcel to provide her brother with land to farm. However, that plan has not 
worked, and she is now hoping to sell the land. Applicant could not estimate the value 
of the land, but expects it is about twice the value of the apartment, which would be 
about $130,000. However, Applicant has a 401(k) account and an IRA in the United 
                                                 
9 ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). 
 
 
9 
States worth more than $200,000. He has substantially more net worth in United States 
accounts than overseas. Finally, Applicant has been employed by U.S. companies 
since his discharge from the Army, and his salary from a U.S. company is an important 
U.S. asset as well. I conclude that Applicant's foreign property interest could not be 
used to influence, manipulate, or pressure Applicant. AG ¶ 8(f) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Foreign family ties raise security concerns because of the potential for 
exploitation. Here, Applicant has close ties to his wife that raise such concerns. 
However, they do not outweigh his ties to the United States. He spent 10 years here, 
from the age of 5 to 15, receiving his education. After graduating from a high school in 
Puerto Rico, he joined the U.S. Army, and served for nine years. He has been 
employed by U.S. companies since 2000. His managers, who have known him for nine 
years, attest not only to his excellent work performance, but to his honesty, integrity, 
and patriotism. He held a security clearance while serving in the U.S. Army for nine 
years without incident. He also held a security clearance during his work with defense 
contractors since 2004. The record contains no evidence of security compromise 
during these 16 years.  
 
 Applicant’s wife maintains two properties in Tunisia, but those assets are 
outweighed by his more substantial financial interests in his U.S. accounts and his U.S. 
employment. Given Applicant's ties to the United States, his military service, his 
contributions to supporting the war-fighter through his work with U.S. defense 
 
 
10 
contractors, and his many years of holding a top secret clearance without incident, I 
conclude that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised concerning Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.g.   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
