1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-00943
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties consisting of 32 accounts
totaling more than $40,000 in bad debt. Many of the delinquent debts stem from medical
bills, which raise little if any security concerns. None of the other bad debt, totaling
approximately $22,000, is resolved. Applicant failed to present sufficient evidence to
overcome the security concerns stemming from her problematic financial history.
Accordingly, as explained below, this case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The AG  were
published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace the
guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Exhibit A. 2
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on June 1, 2011,1
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons
(SOR) explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a
complaint, and it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline
known as Guideline F for financial considerations. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me July 14, 2011. The hearing took place August 4, 2011. The transcript
(Tr.) was received August 19, 2011.
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleged 32 delinquent accounts ranging in amounts from $42 to
$11,019 for a total of more than $40,000. In Applicant’s reply to the SOR, she admitted
all of the debts. Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact. In addition, the
following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 45-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She is married, and
she and her husband have three sons, ages 15, 13, and 12. She also has an adult
daughter from a previous relationship. She is employed as a housekeeper at an air
force base located in a western state. She earns $14.75 per hour working a 40-hour
week. She is seeking to obtain a security clearance for this job. She has not held a
security clearance in the past. In addition, she recently obtained a part-time job working
at fireworks shows. The work is irregular, and it pays about $150 to $200 per show. She
has received clearance from another federal agency to handle explosive materials for
these shows.2
Applicant and her husband are currently separated; she receives no financial
support from him; and she is the sole source of income for herself and three sons.  Her
husband has an unstable employment history consisting of odd jobs,  manual labor, and
unemployment. He is currently unemployed, as far as Applicant knows, but receives no
unemployment compensation because he quit his last job in about June 2010. In
addition, according to Applicant, there are outstanding bench warrants for his arrest for
domestic violence that happened in the last few years. 
 See Exhibits 1–7.3
 Exhibit 6. 4
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a5
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.6
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 7
3
Applicant has a long-term history of financial problems or difficulties.  She has3
not paid, settled, reduced the balance owed, or otherwise resolved any of the 32 debts
in the SOR. In December 2010, she sought assistance from Consumer Credit
Counseling (CCC) Services.  After reviewing her financial situation and developing a4
written budget, CCC recommended a debt-management plan consisting of paying $300
monthly, with the money coming from stopping a $300 monthly payment on a delinquent
auto loan. She has not implemented the CCC plan or any other plan to address her
indebtedness. She is hopeful that she can implement the CCC plan within the next few
months. 
Many of the 32 debts in the SOR stem from uninsured medical bills or medical
bills Applicant was unable to pay. Per the SOR, it is estimated that 17 debts totaling
about $18,000 are for medical bills (SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.j, 1.l–1.p, 1.ee, and 1.ff). The bills are
for medical care provided to Applicant or her family members. Applicant’s overall
financial situation can be described as living paycheck-to-paycheck, and she has no
financial assets to address her bad debt. 
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As5
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An7
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 8
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.12
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 13
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.32.1. 15
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.16
4
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  8
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting9
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An10
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate11
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme12
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.13
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.  Substantial evidence14
means “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”15
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it16
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 17
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant18
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  19
 AG ¶ 19(a).  20
 AG ¶ 19(c). 21
 See generally Liz Pulliam W eston, Why Medical Debts Shouldn’t Count, published Nov. 19, 2007, at22
http://articles.moneycentral.msn.com (available via a Google or Yahoo! search) (this is a personal-finance
article that discusses whether medical debt indicates that a creditor or borrower is high risk). 
5
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant17
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline18
F is: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  19
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information within the
defense industry.   
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. This history raises security concerns because it indicates
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial20
obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish21
these two disqualifying conditions. With that said, I attach little if any security
significance to the bad debt attributable to 17 medical accounts for approximately
$18,000, because it was not caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending or living
beyond one’s means, but for necessary medical care and treatment. Bad debt tied to
medical bills is not indicative of poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations. It is certainly debatable if such debt is a true reflection of
an individual’s ability or willingness to satisfy debts or a good predictor of risk.  22
 ISCR Case No. 99-0201 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999) (“[T]he concept of ‘good faith’ requires a showing that a23
person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.
Such standards are consistent with the level of conduct that must be expected of persons granted a security
clearance.”) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No. 02-30304 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (relying on a legally
available option, such as Chapter 7 bankruptcy, is not a good-faith effort) (citations omitted); ISCR Case No.
99-9020 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001) (relying on the running of a statute of limitations to avoid paying a debt is not
a good-faith effort). 
 
6
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F. Any of the
following may mitigate security concerns:
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control;
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;23
AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
AG ¶ 20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
I have considered all the mitigating conditions, and none, individually or in
combination, are sufficient to overcome and mitigate the security concerns. It is
probable that Applicant’s financial problems are due, in part, to her marriage, which is in
a state of flux, underemployment on her part, and her husband’s unstable employment
history. These are circumstances largely beyond her control. Nevertheless, the
evidence supports a conclusion that her financial house is in serious disrepair.
Discounting the bad debt due to medical bills, she is still facing 15 debts for about
$22,000, which includes two student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.q and 1.z). She has done little to
address the bad debt. Although she obtained a debt-management plan from CCC, she
has not implemented the plan, much less established a track record of adherence to the
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).24
7
plan. Given these circumstances, it is simply too soon to tell if Applicant’s problematic
financial history is a thing of the past or a harbinger of things to come. 
To conclude, the evidence of Applicant’s financial problems, past and present,
justifies current doubts about her judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following
Egan and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting
national security. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-
person concept  and Applicant’s favorable evidence. Applicant impressed me as a hard24
worker, and she was sincere and candid in her testimony. But her problematic financial
history is unresolved and ongoing, and that history is simply inconsistent with the high
standards that apply to those who are granted access to classified information. Perhaps
in the future when Applicant has made a good-faith effort to repay or resolve her bad
debt, or there are clear indications that her financial problems are being resolved or
under control, she can reapply for a security clearance with the sponsorship of an
employer. Based on the record before me, I conclude Applicant did not meet her
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.l–1.p: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.q–1.dd: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.ee–1.ff: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
