1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-04344
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: John N. Griffin, Esq.   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows he has five
traffic-related offenses during 2000–2009. On three occasions, courts issued bench
warrants for his arrest after he failed to pay fines. On one occasion during a traffic stop
in 2006, he provided  a false name to a police officer. He was arrested, charged, and
pleaded guilty to the misdemeanor offense of providing false information to a peace
officer, and he served about ten days in jail. He is still in the process of paying the fines
from the 2006 and 2009 offenses. When he completed a security clearance application
in January 2010, he disclosed his 2009 arrest, but he did not disclose his 2006 arrest.
He provided multiple and conflicting explanations for his failure to disclose the 2006
arrest. Accordingly, as explained below, this case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on January 24,1
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a complaint, and
it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline known as
Guideline E for personal conduct. 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned
to an administrative judge on April 20, 2011. It was reassigned to me June 10, 2011.
The hearing took place August 2, 2011. The transcript (Tr.) was received August 17,
2011.  
 
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleged Applicant’s five traffic-related offenses during 2000–2009, and
it alleged he gave a deliberately false answer in response to a question about his police
record when completing a security clearance application in 2010. In Applicant’s reply to
the SOR, he admitted all the allegations, but at hearing he explained that his omission
of a 2006 arrest was not a deliberately false answer. In addition, the following findings of
fact are supported by substantial evidence. 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is married and
has two children. He is seeking a security clearance for his employment as a technical
specialist for a company engaged in defense contracting. His spouse is employed by
the same company. He began working for this company in December 2009. Before that,
he worked for many years as an installer/supervisor in the tile, marble, and granite
business. He held an interim clearance for several months until it was withdrawn
pursuant to this action. He worked in Afghanistan in support of the U.S. military while he
held the interim clearance. 
Applicant does not dispute the five traffic-related offenses, and they are
summarized as follows:
1. In 2000, he was cited for or charged with speeding and fined $550.
Subsequently, his driver’s license was suspended and a bench warrant issued for
his arrest when he failed to pay the fine.
 Tr. 111–113; Exhibit F. 2
 Exhibit R. 3
 Exhibit 1. 4
 Exhibit 2. 5
3
2. In 2001, he was cited for or charged with speeding and driving with a suspended
or revoked license. He pleaded guilty and was fined $528. Subsequently, a
bench warrant was issued for his arrest when he failed to pay the fine.
3. In 2003, he was cited for or charged with driving with a suspended license and
no registration. He pleaded guilty and was fined $500. Subsequently, a bench
warrant was issued for his arrest when he failed to pay the fine.
4. In 2006, he was cited for or charged with providing false information to a peace
officer (a misdemeanor offense), driving with a suspended license, and no
registration. He was arrested during the traffic stop and held in jail for about five
days. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to ten days in jail and fined $500.
5. In 2009, he was stopped and then arrested pursuant to the 2003 bench warrant.
He was taken into custody, appeared in court, pleaded guilty, and was fined
about $1,400.   
Applicant has paid the fines for the 2000, 2001, and 2003 offenses, and is in the
process of paying the fines for the 2006 and 2009 offenses. He has a valid driver’s
license issued by the state of his domicile.  He also presented proof of auto insurance.2 3
Applicant completed a security clearance application in January 2010.  It was the4
first time he completed such a document. In response to Question 22 concerning his
police record, he answered “yes” to Questions 22a and 22b, thereby indicating that: (1)
he had been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in court in a criminal
proceeding against him; was on trial or awaiting trial on criminal charges; or was
currently awaiting sentencing for a criminal offense; and (2) he had been arrested within
the last seven years. He then explained that he was arrested in 2009 on a bench
warrant stemming from the 2003 traffic-related offense. He did not disclose his 2006
arrest in response to Question 22 or anywhere else on the application. 
Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in March 2011.  He5
provided additional details about his five traffic-related offenses and financial issues,
which were not alleged in the SOR. Concerning his response to Question 22 of the
security clearance application, he explained that: (1) he did not list certain offenses
because they occurred outside the seven-year period; and (2) for those offenses he was
required to disclose, he failed to do so due to oversight and he disclosed those that he
 Exhibit 2 at 3. 6
 Exhibit 2 at 5–6. 7
 Tr. 117. 8
 Tr. 118–119; 135–136. 9
 Tr. 136–137. 10
 Tr. 137. 11
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to12
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.13
4
recalled.  Later in the interview, he stated that he did not list the 2006 arrest because he6
assumed he was not required to list it.7
At hearing, he denied deliberately falsifying his answers to Questions 22a and
22b.  He explained that although he disclosed the 2009 arrest, he did not disclose the8
2006 arrest because the online application would not accept his answer without a ticket
or case number, which was then unavailable to him.  He admitted he was aware of the9
2006 arrest when he completed the online application, but was unable to input it.  He10
gave a non-verbal response to the question of why he was able to input the 2009 arrest,
considering that a ticket or case number is not listed on the application for that arrest.   11
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As12
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt13
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 14
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 15
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.18
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.19
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 20
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).21
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.22
5
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An14
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  15
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting16
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An17
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate18
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme19
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.20
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.21
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it22
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
 AG ¶¶ 15–17 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 23
 AG ¶ 15. 24
 AG ¶ 16(a). 25
6
Analysis
Under Guideline E for personal conduct,  the suitability of an applicant may be23
questioned or put into doubt due to false statements and credible adverse information
that may not be enough to support action under any other guideline. The overall
concern under Guideline E is:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations [that may] raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  24
A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and willfully). An omission
of relevant and material information is not deliberate if, for example, the person
genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or
genuinely thought the information did not need to be reported. 
This case presents two central issues under Guideline E. The first issue is
whether Applicant made deliberately false statements when answering two questions
about his police record on his 2010 security clearance application. Based on the
evidence, to include his hearing testimony, I am persuaded he made deliberately false
statements.  Initially, in his background interview, he claimed that he did not list the25
2006 arrest due to oversight; he also claimed that he assumed he was not required to
list it. At hearing, he claimed that he was aware of the 2006 arrest and tried to list it, but
the online application did not allow it without a ticket or case number. But at the same
time he was able to list the 2009 arrest without a ticket or case number. Given his
multiple and conflicting explanations, I conclude that he deliberately omitted the 2006
arrest because he believed the misdemeanor offense of giving false information to a
police officer would reflect poorly on him and might prevent him from obtaining a
security clearance. 
The second issue is whether Applicant’s series of five traffic-related offenses
raise questions about his security suitability. In addition to the offense of giving false
information to a peace officer, of concern here is the multiple bench warrants issued for
his arrest due to his failure to pay court-ordered fines. It is also notable that his five
traffic-related offenses took place over a period of several years, which suggests a
pattern of behavior rather than an isolated incident attributable to youthful inexperience.
Taken together, these matters reflect reckless and irresponsible behavior as well as a
 AG ¶ 16(c). 26
 AG ¶ 17(a)–(g). 27
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9). 28
 Exhibits A–R. 29
7
certain level of disregard for the law. These matters also support a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.  At present, it appears26
Applicant may have learned his lesson and he now takes responsibility for his actions.
Indeed, he has a valid driver’s license and is making progress in paying off his fines.
Nevertheless, given his series of five traffic-related offenses, combined with the recent
falsification of his security clearance application, it is too soon to tell if his history of
questionable personal conduct is a thing of the past or a harbinger of things to come. 
In reaching these conclusions, I considered all the mitigating conditions under
Guideline E,  and none, individually or in combination, are sufficient to overcome and27
mitigate the security concerns. Indeed, making deliberately false statements to the
federal government during the security clearance process is serious misconduct, and it
is not easily explained away, extenuated, or mitigated. 
 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due
consideration to the nine factors of the whole-person concept.  I also gave due28
consideration to his favorable evidence, which consisted of the testimony of five
character witnesses and extensive documentation.  Although these matters weigh in29
his favor, they are insufficient to overcome the security concerns. Accordingly, I
conclude that Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a
favorable clearance decision. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.i:  Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.            
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
