 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case: 10-08182 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John Griffith, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record as a whole, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On March 29, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 11, 2011, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2 
  Applicant answered the SOR in writing on or about March 23, 2011, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On April 20, 2011, DOHA assigned 
the case to me and issued a Notice of Hearing on May 17, 2011, setting the hearing for 
June 2, 2011. On that date, Department Counsel introduced Government Exhibits (GE) 
1 and 2 into evidence without objection. Applicant testified and introduced Exhibits (AE) 
A through L into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) 
on June 13, 2011. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to India. The request and the attached documents pertinent to 
India are included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) A, along with 16 attachments. 
The documents were admitted. (Tr. 14.) The facts administratively noticed are limited to 
matters of general knowledge and pertinent to India, and not subject to reasonable 
dispute. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.f of the SOR and provided explanations. Those answers are incorporated into 
these findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He was born in India. After completing high school, he 
graduated from an Indian university in July 1988 with a bachelor’s degree in commerce. 
He then worked as an account assistant until he immigrated to the United States on a 
work visa in 1998. (Tr. 28, 37.) He did not work for the Indian government or military 
while living in India, nor did he have friends working for the government. (Tr. 30.) He 
came to the United States to establish a “better life.” (Tr. 31.) Since January 2010 he 
has worked for his company, which subcontracts with defense contractors. (AE 1.) 
 
 After arriving in the United States, Appellant worked for a consulting company 
that provided services to the U.S. military. He worked for that company about three 
months. (Tr. 38-40.) He then moved for another position. (Tr. 41.) Between 2000 and 
2001, he asked his employer to sponsor him for permanent residency status. (Tr. 42.) In 
2003 he, his wife, and children obtained permanent residence status. (Tr. 44.) In August 
2008 he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Tr. 45.) He relinquished his Indian passport 
to the Indian consulate soon after becoming a U.S. citizen because he was “proud to be 
a U.S. citizen.” (Tr. 46, 53.) 
  
 In July 1996 Applicant married his wife in India. She was born there and earned a 
bachelor’s degree in commerce from an Indian university.  She immigrated to the United 
States with him in 1998. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in December 2008. 
Their two children, ages 15 and 17, were born in India. They became naturalized U.S. 
 
 
 
 
3 
citizens in June 2009. (GE 2 at 175.) His children have received high school awards. 
(AE I, J.) His wife and children renounced their Indian citizenship. (Tr. 74.)  
 
 Both of Applicant’s parents were born and raised in India. They are Indian 
citizens. His father, age 85, served in the Indian Navy and retired before Applicant was 
born. (Tr. 21.) His father subsequently worked as a mechanical engineer. (Tr. 20, 73.) 
His mother, age 62, is a homemaker (Tr. 20, 79.) Applicant’s father does not associate 
with anyone in the Indian military or government. (Tr. 21-22.) His parents own rental 
properties from which they derive some income. (Tr. 36.) Applicant has never sent them 
money. (Tr. 37.) They visited the United States three times, the last visit being in 2009, 
when they stayed a year and lived with him and also his brother. (Tr. 55, 62.) He 
sponsored them for permanent residence status and they recently received approval. 
They are in the process of moving to the United States and will live with Applicant. (Tr. 
56.) He speaks to them once a month. (Tr. 54.) 
 
 Applicant is the eldest of four children, all born in India. Appellant’s brother is a 
citizen of India, but resident of the United States since 2009. He works as an engineer. 
(Tr. 56; GE 2 at 175.) Both of his sisters are citizens and residents of India. They are 
homemakers. One of his brother-in-laws owns a business and the other brother-in-law 
is a doctor. (Tr. 58.) They have not been to the United States. He is sponsoring one of 
them for permanent residence status and intends to begin the process for the other 
sister. (Tr. 58.) He speaks to his sisters once a month. (Tr. 78.) 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law were born in India. They are farmers. 
Applicant did not discuss his plan to move to the United States until he purchased 
tickets. (Tr. 33.) He has never sent them money. (Tr. 37.) They visited the United States 
twice, in 2009 and once before that. They were here during the time his parents were 
visiting in 2009. (Tr. 71.) He talks to them once or twice a year. (Tr. 77.) 
 
 Applicant traveled to India four times since leaving in 1998: in December 2003, 
July 2005, December 2007, and September 2009. (AE 2 at 176.)   He stayed with his 
parents during these visits. (Tr. 52, 67.) He saw his sisters and in-laws while there. 
While there he was never contacted by anyone who wanted information about his 
government work. (Tr. 80.) He has not returned since 2009 because he has had no 
reason to return. (Tr. 53.) However, he testified that he was traveling there this summer 
to assist his parents with their interview at the U.S. Consulate’s office when they receive 
their U.S. permanent resident cards. (Tr. 56, 69.)   
 
 Appellant’s net U.S. value is about $365,000. In 2004 Applicant purchased a 
house that is now paid. (Tr. 78.) In 2004 he formed an IT consulting firm with his wife. 
(Tr. 49-50.) The company does not work or have clients in India. (Tr. 76.) It subcontracts 
work for defense companies. He has a retirement fund in the United States. (Tr. 78.) He 
does not have financial interests in India. (Tr. 61, 82.) 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
4 
  Applicant submitted character letters. A consulting project director wrote a letter 
of appreciation in March 2011 commenting on Applicant’s diligence and good work. 
Applicant received praise for a project that he completed in 1999 for a city college. (AE 
E.) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant credibly and sincerely expressed pride in his U.S. 
citizenship. (Tr. 46.) He has no intention to return to India, especially in view of his 
parents’ anticipated move here.  
 
India 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: According to its constitution, 
India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic. It is a multiparty, federal, 
parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament and a population of approximately 
1.1 billion.  
 
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but numerous 
serious problems remain. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial 
killings of persons in custody, disappearances, torture, and rape. The lack of 
accountability permeated the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere 
in which human rights violations went unpunished. A number of violent attacks were 
committed in recent years by separatist and terrorist groups. In November 2008, the 
terrorists coordinated an attack at a hotel in Mumbai frequented by westerners.    
 
The United States recognizes India as key to its strategic interests and has 
sought to strengthen its relationship with it. The two countries are the world’s largest 
democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by representative 
government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, in fighting 
terrorism, and in creating a strategically stable Asia. However, differences over India’s 
nuclear weapons program and pace of economic reform exist. There are also concerns 
about India’s relations with Iran, including its increasing cooperation with the Iranian 
military. 
 
There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual–use technology to India, including technology and equipment that 
were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Foreign 
government and private entities, including intelligence organizations and security 
services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology. In March 
2008, an American businessman pleaded guilty to conspiring to illegally export 
technology to entities in India.  
 
The United States views India as a growing world power with which it shares 
common strategic interests. There is a strong partnership between the two countries 
and they are expected to continue addressing differences and shaping a dynamic and 
collaborative future. The U.S. and India seek to elevate the strategic partnership further 
 
 
 
 
5 
to include cooperation in counter-terrorism, defense, education, and joint democracy 
promotion. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶¶ 
2(b) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
 
 
 
6 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
potentially disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1
 
and  
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s two sisters, parents, and in-laws are citizens and residents of India. 
His brother is a citizen of India, but resident of the United States. India is the world’s 
largest democracy, works closely with the United States on many matters, shares 
common strategic interests, and generally respects the rights of its citizens. But it also 
continues to have some human rights issues, has been victimized by terrorist attacks, 
and restricted, dual use technology has been illegally exported to India. This creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) have been raised by the 
evidence. 
 
 After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation. Three 
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
conditions raised in this case: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon that government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious 
problem in the country with crime or terrorism. India’s close, friendly relationship to the 
United States, its adherence to human rights standards and rule of law, its leading role 
in the suppression of terrorists, and the lack of evidence that India uses coercive tactics 
in its espionage targeting of the United States, all tend to negate a concern that 
Appellant’s relationship with his sisters, parents, or in-laws poses a security risk.  
Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) has some application.   
 
Applicant produced sufficient evidence to establish AG ¶ 8(b).  Based on his 
relationships and depth of loyalty to the United States, he can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interests. He, along with his family, has lived 
in the United States since 1998. He became a naturalized citizen in October 2008. His 
wife also became a naturalized citizen in 2008, and their two children became 
naturalized U.S. citizens in June 2009.  He has financial ties to the United States 
through his business and personal investments. He does not own property in India. His 
wife is a co-owner in his business. He has received praise from colleagues. He 
 
 
 
 
8 
considers himself to be a citizen of the United States and no longer a citizen of India. 
His immediate family has also renounced their Indian citizenship. His parents have 
obtained permanent U.S. residence status and are moving here. Based on those strong 
connections and loyalties to the United States, he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
AG ¶ 8(c) does not have application to the security concerns raised as a result of 
Applicant’s contacts with his sisters or in-laws residing in India because they are 
sufficiently frequent and cannot be considered casual. His contacts with his parents 
have been consistent and frequent. He has visited his family four times since 1998 and 
maintained communication with them over the years.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The Appeal Board 
requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal 
loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his 
[or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others 
raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 
2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Although this case pertains to Guideline 
B, the security concerns do not arise from any questionable conduct by Applicant, but 
rather from circumstances that warrant further analysis. Applicant is a 43-year old man, 
who was born in India, and has lived in the United States for about 13 years. He has 
been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 1998. His spouse and children have been living in 
the United States since 1998 and are also naturalized U.S. citizen. He and his wife have 
a successful business in the United States. His brother lives here. His ties to the United 
States are much stronger than his ties to family members living in India. There is no 
 
 
 
 
9 
evidence that he has ever taken any action that could cause potential harm to the 
United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously, and relinquished his 
Indian passport after he became a U.S. citizen. He expressed his allegiance to the 
United States and gave credible testimony in response to the security concerns alleged 
in this case.  
 
I weighed the totality of Applicant’s family ties to India, a strong U.S. ally, against 
his ties to the United States. Since 1998, he has traveled to India four times to visit his 
family. Both parents are in the process of immigrating here. He is currently sponsoring 
his sister, who has applied for permanent residency. He has contact with both sisters 
and in-laws living there.  Applicant’s work, assets, and established connections in the 
United States make economic coercion through any of relatives living in India extremely 
unlikely. In the event such a conflict arose, I am persuaded that Applicant would resolve 
the conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:            For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                             
         
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
