 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-03635 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 20, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 1, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 28, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 17, 2011. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on April 27, 2011, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on May 23, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which 
 
2 
 
were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through F, which 
were admitted without objection, and testified on his own behalf. The record was left 
open until June 15, 2011, for receipt of additional documentation. On June 15, 2011, 
Applicant submitted nine additional documents, marked AE G to AE O. Department 
Counsel had no objections to AE G to AE O, and they were admitted into the record. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 1, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The Government alleged that Applicant used marijuana, with varying frequency, 
between 1993 and 1997 (SOR 1.a.); that he used marijuana twice in June 2009 (SOR 
1.b.); and that his marijuana use in June 2009 occurred after being granted a security 
clearance (SOR 1.c.). The Applicant admitted each of the SOR allegations. 
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old employee of a defense contractor since 1998. 
Applicant’s use of illegal substances began in high school. He knew it was illegal to use 
drugs but chose to use it socially. He used marijuana approximately three times in high 
school and once his freshman year of undergraduate school. During his sophomore and 
junior years of undergraduate school, his use of marijuana increased to once-or-twice 
per month. However, in approximately 1997 during his senior year of undergraduate 
school, he stopped using marijuana. (GEs 1-5; Tr. 20, 26-30, 46.) 
 
 In 1998 Applicant was hired by his current employer. At that time, Applicant 
applied for his first security clearance. During the application process, he disclosed his 
past marijuana use on both his security clearance application and in his statement 
dated February 10, 1999. In his statement, he indicated “I have no intention of using 
such substances now or in the future.” He was granted a clearance and has held it 
since the background investigation concluded. He was aware that his company and the 
Federal Government had policies against drug use. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 31, 49-50.) 
 
 In August 2000 Applicant married. He had three children; a daughter, age 12 and 
two sons, ages 9 and 8, from his marriage. He also cared for his mother-in-law, who 
lived with his family. During the course of Applicant’s marriage, his wife experienced 
severe problems, including “alcoholism, bipolar disorder, and borderline personality 
disorder.” She was in rehabilitation six times, which placed a significant amount of 
stress on Applicant. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 21-23.) 
 
 In June 2009, between his wife’s fifth and sixth time in rehabilitation, Applicant 
discovered his wife was having an affair and was out drinking. Applicant’s mother-in-
law’s friend was a medicinal marijuana user. While confiding in his mother-in-law’s 
friend, who was visiting Applicant’s home immediately after Applicant learned of the 
affair, Applicant was offered marijuana. He “smoked the joint while opening up to [the 
friend] about [Applicant’s] situation.” Applicant remained in a depressed state, feeling 
“like [his] world fell apart” and a week later accepted marijuana again from the same 
individual. Applicant realized his marijuana use was wrong as he began to emerge from 
his “state of despair,” after this second use of marijuana. (GEs 2-5; Tr. 32-35, 46-48.) 
 
 
3 
 
 In February 2010 Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On his eQIP, he disclosed his marijuana use in June 
2009. He also went to his security officer in approximately February 2010, and disclosed 
his marijuana use to her. A letter from his security officer verifies this disclosure. (AE J; 
Tr. 35-37.)  
 
 At hearing, Applicant indicated: 
 
I take full responsibility for the mistake I made. I understand the severity of 
it. I find it very hard to dispute that it does raise some concerns as to my 
trustworthiness, as I honestly put forward the mistake I made. I hold 
myself accountable and do not make excuses for my behavior. (Tr. 22.) 
 
 Applicant separated from his wife in February 2010. His divorce was finalized in 
March 2011. He has full custody of his children. He has disassociated himself from any 
contacts that use illegal substances, including his mother-in-law’s friend who moved 
away. Applicant attended family and marital counseling for eight one-hour sessions. The 
counseling helped him understand his role as a co-dependent person and gave him the 
tools to take responsibility for his own actions. While the counseling did not focus on his 
illegal drug use, he did discuss it with his counselor. The counseling gave him the tools 
to manage stressful situations in the future. Applicant now focuses on exercise, eating 
right, and the things that he can control in life. He indicated that he will not turn to drugs 
again in stressful situations and he signed a letter of intent to abstain from future use of 
illegal substances. He also recognizes that it is a possibility that if he uses marijuana 
again he could loose custody of his children. (AE L; AE O; Tr. 23-25, 48-53, 55.) 
 
 Applicant’s therapist, a licensed marriage and family therapist (M.F.T.) wrote a 
letter on Applicant’s behalf. He opined: 
 
During the course of our therapy, [Applicant] disclosed that he had made 
the mistake of using marijuana when it was offered to him on the weekend 
on two occasions in June 2009. This occurred shortly after he has 
discovered his wife was having an affair, in-between her 5th and 6th 
alcoholic rehabilitation treatment programs. It is my professional judgment 
that [Applicant] made this mistake during a time of extenuating 
circumstances, when he was going through extra-ordinary challenges. I do 
not believe [Applicant] has or is susceptible to a drug problem, and believe 
this was an isolated issue that is unlikely to re-occur. . . As a licensed 
therapist, who regularly works with individuals who do have drug, alcohol, 
and mental illness problems, I am qualified to make this observation. (AE 
I.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by his co-workers, clients, friends, and former mother-
in-law. Each was aware of Applicant’s marijuana use and the problems he was dealing 
with when he used the marijuana in June 2010. However, all opined that Applicant has 
integrity and is trustworthy. His performance reviews show he does exception work. He 
has received a number of certificates of appreciation for his outstanding work. Applicant 
 
4 
 
is heavily involved in his children’s lives despite his challenging career. He coaches his 
children’s baseball and soccer teams. (AEs A-O.) 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR 1.a.-1.c.). Applicant began using illegal substances 
in 1993-1997 and used marijuana again in June 2009, after being granted a security 
clearance. The facts established through the Government’s information and through 
Applicant’s admissions raise a security concern under all of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant used illegal drugs from 1993 to 1997 and again in June 2009. He 
disclosed his prior marijuana use on his first security clearance application in 1998. His 
use in June 2009 occurred while he was in possession of a security clearance. His 2009 
drug use occurred twice with in an eight day period, while he was under the unusually 
stressful circumstance of discovering his alcoholic wife was having an affair.  
 
6 
 
In this case, Applicant has demonstrated a concrete and substantial change in 
his life since June 2009. He divorced his wife, obtained counseling, and disassociated 
himself from all drug-using associates.  
 
Applicant’s therapist has indicated Applicant does not have, nor is he susceptible 
to, a drug problem, and further believes this was an isolated issue that is unlikely to re-
occur. Applicant learned tools in therapy to help him deal with future stressful situations 
in a healthy manner.  
 
Applicant has signed a statement clearly indicating that he will not use drugs in 
the future. While he signed a similar statement in the past, he has now taken actions to 
support his promise including learning how to deal with future stressful situations in a 
healthy manner. His dedication to parenting his children full time is unquestionable. He 
is sincere in his pledge to not allow drugs to interfere with his job or the care of his 
children. He has felt the effects of having a wife who is dependent on alcohol, and his 
renewed commitment to remaining drug free is credible. His circumstances appear to 
have changed enough to support his current stated intentions to abstain from all future 
drug use.  
 
Available information is sufficient to mitigate the security concerns about 
Applicant’s past drug use while holding a security clearance. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Independent of my analysis under 
 
7 
 
Guideline H, I find that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under the whole-
person concept. 
 
Applicant’s life has drastically changed in the past two years. He has been 
awarded sole custody of his children and has divorced his wife. Applicant attended 
therapy.  
 
In addition, Applicant is well respected by his colleagues who were aware of his 
difficulties with his wife and his marijuana use. His co-workers and clients consider him 
to be trustworthy, despite his confessed past indiscretions.  
 
Further, Applicant displayed a great amount of remorse for his decision to use 
marijuana in 2009. He has been truthful about his marijuana use with the government 
and disclosed it on his first security clearance application in 1998, on his recent eQIP, 
and to his security manager in 2010. There is little potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress in this instance. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
