 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992, as1
amended (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-05278
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant failed to overcome the foreign influence security concern that arises
from her familial relationships in Iran. Clearance is denied. 
On March 24, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant.  The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline B (foreign influence).1
Applicant submitted an undated response to the SOR in which she denied the allegation
contained in SOR subparagraph 1.a, admitted the allegation contained in SOR
subparagraph 1.b, and requested a decision based on the record without a hearing.
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 26,
2011, that was mailed to Applicant on April 29, 2011. Applicant was informed she had
30 days from receipt of the FORM to submit her objections to any information contained
2
in the FORM or any additional information she wished to be considered. Applicant
acknowledged receipt of the FORM on May 23, 2011, but did not submit a response to
the FORM or object to anything contained in the FORM within the time allowed her. The
case was assigned another administrative judge on July 12, 2011, and reassigned to
me on July 25, 2011, due to caseload considerations.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admission to the allegation contained in SOR subparagraph 1.b is
incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I
make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 33-year-old woman who has been employed by a government
contractor, currently as a program analyst, since October 2008. As of June 2010,
Applicant was single and had no dependents. However she indicated in her security
clearance application and in an affidavit she submitted that she was engaged. The
record does not contain any information about her fiancé. 
Applicant was born in Iran and immigrated to the United States from Iran with her
mother and brother in December 1998. Iran initially refused to allow her father to
immigrate to the United States with his family. Applicant’s father was subsequently
granted permission and immigrated to the United States sometime in 1999. Applicant
and her parents became naturalized United States citizens in August 2005. Applicant’s
brother began the process to become a naturalized United States citizen in 2009. As of
June 2010, Applicant’s brother was solely an Iranian citizen.
Applicant attended a community college in the United States from September
1998 until August 2001, when she was awarded an associate’s degree. She attended a
university in the United States from January 2002 until August 2005, when she was
awarded a bachelor’s degree.
Applicant’s work history in the United States is as follows: July 1999 until
December 2005 - part-time cashier; November 2005 until April 2006 - full-time
administrative assistant/receptionist; November 2005 until December 2006 - full-time
customer service representative; January 2007 until October 2008 - full-time key entry
operator; October 2008 to present - full-time programer and program analyst; August
2001 to present - part-time assistant controller. 
Applicant resided with her parents in the United States from December 1998 until
May 2006. She purchased her own residence in May 2006, and she has lived there
since. It is unknown if she currently resides alone or not.      
  
Applicant’s father was employed by the Iranian Air Force in an accountant-type
position before he immigrated to the United States. He receives a $600 monthly pension
from that job that is deposited directly into an Iranian bank account. 
3
Applicant submitted a security clearance application in June 2009 in which she
disclosed that her grandfather, four aunts, and four uncles were citizens and residents
of Iran. She disclosed an additional relative who is a citizen and resident of Iran, but
whose relationship to her is not listed. Applicant also listed one uncle who is a citizen of
Iran but who resides in the United States. Applicant acknowledged having phone
contact with each of these relatives ranging from one to two times annually to as many
as three to seven times annually.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegation that she had “several
Aunts and Uncles who are citizens and residents of Iran.” She wrote at that time that
she only had one aunt and one uncle who resided in Iran and that her remaining aunts
and uncles all were either United States or Canadian citizens and they all resided in the
United States. She also clarified that while her grandfather is a citizen and resident of
Iran, he also has resident alien status in the United States and is 84 years old.
Applicant’s grandfather visits the United States about once every six months during
which Applicant visits with him. She also has telephone contact with him in Iran about
four times a year. 
Applicant visited Iran with her mother in June 2002. The visit lasted about one
week, during which they visited and stayed with several family members in and around
Tehran. They traveled to Sweden following their visit to Iran, where they visited with one
of Applicant’s aunts. 
Applicant has possessed a United States passport since September 2005. Her
Iranian passport expired in March 2007. She has retained the expired Iranian passport,
hoping to be able to renew it when and if she decides to travel to Iran. She does wish to
visit with her relatives in Iran at some unspecified time in the future. 
Applicant professes her loyalty and allegiance to the United States. However,
she also “hold(s) a place in my heart for Iran, as it is where I grew up and it is where I
still have extended family members. . . .” (FORM Item 6, p. 5) Applicant disapproves of
the current Iranian government because of its treatment of women and repressive policy
toward its citizens. However, if Iran were to develop a more democratic style of
government she would not only be willing to visit there but might possibly reside there
later in her life.       
U.S. Department of State publications provide the following information:
As of August 5, 2010, Iran was identified by the U.S. to be the most active
state sponsor of terrorism. 
Iran’s financial, material, and logistic support for terrorist and militant
groups throughout the Middle East and Central Asia had a direct impact
on international efforts to promote peace, threatened economic stability in
the Gulf and undermined the growth of democracy. (FORM Item V, p. 2)
4
The Department of State warns U.S. citizens to carefully consider the risks
of travel to Iran. Dual national Iranian-American citizens may encounter
difficulty in departing Iran. . . .
Some elements in Iran remain hostile to the United States. As a result,
U.S. citizens may be subject to harassment or arrest while traveling or
residing in Iran. Since 2009, Iranian authorities have prevented the
departure of a number of Iranian-American citizens, including journalists
and academics, who traveled to Iran for personal or professional reasons,
in some case for several months. Iranian authorities also have unjustly
detained or imprisoned U.S. citizens on various charges, including
espionage and posing a threat to national security. U.S. citizens of Iranian
origin should consider the risk of being targeted by authorities before
planning travel to Iran. Iranian authorities deny the U.S. Interests Section
in Tehran access to imprisoned dual nationals because Iranian authorities
consider them to be solely Iranian citizens; access to U.S. citizens is often
denied as well. (FORM Item XIII, p.1) 
The government’s poor human rights record degenerated during the year
(2009). . . . The government executed numerous persons for criminal
convictions as juveniles and after unfair trials. Security forces were
implicated in custodial deaths and the killings of election protestors and
committed other acts of politically motivated violence, including torture,
beatings, and rape. The government administered severe officially
sanctioned punishments, including death by stoning, amputation, and
flogging. Vigilante groups with ties to the government committed acts of
violence. Prison conditions remained poor. Security forces arbitrarily
arrested and detained individuals, often holding them incommunicado.
Authorities held political prisoners and intensified a crackdown against
women’s right reformers, ethnic minority rights activists, student activists,
and religious minorities. . . . (FORM Item VI, p. 1)
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Clearance decisions must be fair
and impartial decisions based upon relevant and material facts and circumstances, the
whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive.
Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against
clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Considering the
evidence as a whole, Guideline B (foreign influence), with its disqualifying and mitigating
conditions, is most relevant in this case. 
  
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).4
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.6
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 Id at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
5
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden2 3
of proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of
evidence,  although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet4
its burden of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a5
preponderance of the evidence.”  Once the Government has met its burden, the burden6
shifts to an applicant to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to
overcome the case against her.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of7
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard9
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access10
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.   11
   
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the
foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens
to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
6
Iran is a country with interests inimical to those of the United States. It actively
supports terrorism and is repressive to its own citizens. Iranian authorities have unjustly
detained or imprisoned United States citizens on various charges, including espionage
and posing a threat to national security. Iranian authorities deny the United States
Interests Section in Tehran access to imprisoned dual nationals because Iranian
authorities consider them to be solely Iranian citizens; access to United States citizens
is often denied as well. 
Applicant’s grandfather is an Iranian citizen and resident. Although he has
permanent resident alien status in the United States, he continues to reside in Iran and
only visits the United States about once every six months. The record does not indicate
how long those visits last. Applicant visits with her grandfather when he visits the United
States and has telephonic contact with him about four times a year. 
Applicant has at least one aunt and one uncle who are citizens and residents of
Iran. She has telephonic contact with them somewhere between one and seven times a
year. Applicant visited and stayed with her Iranian relatives in Iran in June 2002. She
hopes to be able to visit with them in Iran in the future. Applicant has retained
possession of her expired Iranian passport to facilitate her visiting Iran in the future if
she so desires. 
  
Disqualifying Condition (DC) 7(a): contact with a foreign family member . . . or
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country it that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion
applies. 
I have considered all mitigating conditions and find that none apply. Specifically,
Mitigating Condition (MC) 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the
country in which these persons are located . . . are such that it is unlikely the individual
will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual  . . . and the interests of the U.S. does not apply based on the nature and
history of the Iranian Government; the close relationship between Applicant and her
grandfather and more extended family as evidenced by her regular telephonic contact
with them despite having herself left Iran almost 13 years ago; and her expressed
desire to visit with relatives in Iran in the future.  
Likewise, MC 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person . . . is so minimal, or the individual
has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. does
not apply based upon Applicant’s continuing feelings for the country of her birth; her
expressed consideration of the possibility of returning to live in Iran later in her life if the
political environment changes; and her continuing contacts with her Iranian relatives,
most notably her grandfather.
7
MC 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation obviously does not apply because Applicant maintains regular telephonic
contact with her relatives in Iran and visits with her grandfather when he comes to the
United States. The remaining mitigating conditions have no applicability to the facts of
this case.
  
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this
case, the whole-person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the
Directive, and the applicable disqualifying conditions, Applicant failed to mitigate the
foreign influence security concern that exists in this case. She failed to overcome the
case against her or satisfy her ultimate burden of persuasion. Guideline B is decided
against Applicant. It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant
a security clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance is denied.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
8
9
