 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10430  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 10, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 7, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on July 
25, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 10, 2011, scheduling the hearing 
for August 30, 2011. The case was reassigned to me on August 30, 2011. The hearing 
 
2 
 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and submitted 
exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 6, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since April 2010. She served on active duty in the military or in the 
reserves from 1974 to 1990. She was honorably discharged. She seeks to retain a 
security clearance she has held for many years. She has a bachelor’s degree. She has 
never been married and has no children.1 
  
 Applicant worked for a defense contractor in State A from 1996 to 2002. She 
worked for the same contractor in another part of State A from 2002 to 2006. She 
moved to State B in 2006 to work with the same contractor. She moved because she 
wanted to be closer to her family.2 
 
 Applicant rented her home in State B until March 2008, when she bought a 
house. She paid $196,000 for the house, which she financed through a Department of 
Veterans Affairs (VA) 6% fixed-rate 30-year mortgage. Her February 2011 credit report 
lists the amount of the mortgage at $202,468, with a monthly payment of $1,683.3 
 
 Applicant refinanced the mortgage with another bank in January 2009. She 
stated that her broker called her and told her that the original lender “was possibly 
involved in some shady transactions and he advised [her] to refinance the loan.” Her 
new loan was also a VA 6% fixed-rate 30-year mortgage. Applicant stated that she 
“trusted [the broker] and learned the hard way.” She testified that her mortgage 
increased from $1,600 per month to $1,900 per month. Her February 2011 credit report 
lists the high balance of the mortgage at $211,403, with a monthly payment of $1,730. 
Applicant stated taxes and insurance increased the payment to $1,900.4 
 
 Applicant started having trouble paying the mortgage in mid 2009. She told an 
investigator in June 2010 that the account became delinquent in the summer of 2009. 
She stated that she had made one payment since then, in May 2010. Applicant testified 
that she had “[n]o real good reason” for why she was unable to pay her mortgage.5 She 
stated: 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 21-24, 48; GE 1.  
 
2 Tr. at 29; GE 1.  
 
3 Tr. at 25-28, 49-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3.  
 
4 Tr. at 26-29, 33-37, 51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2.  
 
5 Tr. at 24-25, 30-31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2.  
 
3 
 
I just got behind. I bought other things. I don’t have any credit cards, so I 
paid cash for the things that I wanted to have.6 
 
Applicant was asked why she did not make partial payments: 
 
I figured it wasn’t worth what I was going to pay for it, and I was going to 
move, and I was going to try to sell it.7  
 
 Applicant believed that her employer in State B was going to terminate her. The 
company lost a large contract and offered a voluntary layoff, which she accepted in 
February 2010. She received a severance package equal to one week’s pay for each of 
the 14 years she worked at the company. Applicant moved to State C in April 2010 and 
started working for her current employer the same month.8 
 
 Applicant’s February 2011 credit report lists the mortgage as $32,879 past due, 
with a balance of $210,168. Applicant stated that she attempted to sell the property, but 
the value of the property significantly declined. State B benefitted greatly from the real 
estate boom and was one of the areas hardest hit by the collapse of the market. 
Applicant submitted data from Zillow, an Internet site that provides estimated values of 
properties. Her house’s value was estimated at about $200,000 in 2008, but had 
declined to $132,000 by 2011. Applicant stated that the market had not yet started to 
decline when she bought the house in 2008. However, Applicant’s graph from Zillow 
shows her house’s estimated value in 2007 to be more than $250,000 before it started 
its steady decline.9 
 
 Applicant’s house is in foreclosure, but the process has not been completed. She 
is unsure how much the deficiency will be after the house is sold or auctioned. She has 
retained a bankruptcy attorney and attended the financial counseling required to file 
bankruptcy. She would prefer not to file bankruptcy. She stated that she will file 
bankruptcy if the bank attempts to collect on the deficiency balance of the mortgage. If it 
does not, she will let the status quo remain.10 
 
 The SOR also alleges two delinquent debts: one to a bank for $310 (SOR ¶ 1.c) 
and one to a collection company for $310 (SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant admitted the 
allegations, but she stated they represent the same debt. She stated that she called the 
bank, who told her that the debt had been transferred to the collection company. She 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 25.  
 
7 Tr. at 32.  
 
8 Tr. at 30-33, 37-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2.  
 
9 Tr. at 30-34; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2.  
 
10 Tr. at 33-36, 39-46; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
stated that she contacted the collection company and paid $85 online. The company 
returned the money and told her the company no longer owned the debt.11  
 
 Applicant is able to pay her other debts. She earns about $75,000 a year, which 
is slightly more than she earned at her previous job. She is renting her current home. 
She had other delinquent debts in the past, but they have been paid. The investigator 
asked her about those debts in June 2010. She was unable to provide a reason why 
they became delinquent.12 
 
 A coworker of Applicant testified that she is a trustworthy and reliable employee, 
who has good judgment. He recommended her for a security clearance.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
                                                          
11 Tr. at 53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
12 Tr. at 32, 38-39; GE 2. Any debts that were not specifically alleged in the SOR will not be used for 
disqualification purposes. They may be considered when assessing Applicant’s financial history, in the 
application of mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
13 Tr. at 56- 61. 
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant was unable or unwilling to pay her financial obligations. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 I find that the $310 debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c represent the same debt. 
Applicant attempted to resolve the debt, but it was transferred to another collection 
company. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the duplicate debt. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable to the 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c debts.  
 
 The real concern in this case is the foreclosed mortgage. Applicant bought a 
house in March 2008, financed through a VA 6% fixed-rate 30-year mortgage. She 
refinanced the mortgage with another bank in January 2009. It appears the amount 
owed on the mortgage increased slightly, likely because of closing costs. Applicant 
stated the terms of the mortgage remained the same. She stated that she was 
unsophisticated about finances, and she refinanced the mortgage because her broker 
told her that the original lender “was possibly involved in some shady transactions and 
he advised [her] to refinance the loan.” Her monthly mortgage payment increased. Her 
credit report states it increased from $1,683 to $1,730. Applicant stated that it was 
closer to $1,900 because of taxes and insurance.  
 
 It appears that Applicant fell victim to a broker who wanted an additional 
commission. However, Applicant was unable to state that the increase in her monthly 
payment was what caused her to stop paying the mortgage. In fact, she had no 
explanation for why she stopped paying the mortgage, other than the decline of the 
house’s value. State B has been devastated by the real estate collapse, and Applicant’s 
house is worth far less than she paid for it. That is the reason why she has been unable 
to sell the property for anything close to what is owed on the property. It has no direct 
connection to why she stopped paying the mortgage in the first place.  
 
 Applicant accepted a voluntary layoff after her company lost a large contract, 
because she believed she was going to be terminated. A loss of her employer’s 
business and subsequent layoff could constitute conditions that were outside 
Applicant’s control. However, she stopped paying the mortgage long before her 
 
7 
 
employment ended. I find that Applicant did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances, and AG ¶ 20(b) has minimal applicability.  
 
 Applicant received financial counseling as required to file bankruptcy. She has 
decided that she will file bankruptcy only if the bank pursues her on the deficiency owed 
on her mortgage. I find that Applicant’s finances are not yet under control. Her financial 
issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. 
They continue to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(c) has some applicability 
because of the financial counseling. I find that financial concerns remain despite the 
presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. However, Applicant 
stopped paying her mortgage and let the house go into foreclosure. She expects a large 
deficiency when the house is sold. Her plan is to do nothing unless the bank seeks 
payment for the deficiency. If that occurs, she plans to file bankruptcy. Applicant’s 
disregard of her financial obligations reflects poorly on her judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
