 
 
1 
 
 
                                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
In the matter of: 
          ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10999 
                                                            )                      
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
                       
                                                                        
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the written record in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                    Statement of Case 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on August 31, 2010. On June 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
010.   
                                           
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 28, 2011. With his Answer, Applicant 
provided additional information and requested a decision on the record in lieu of a 
hearing. The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 7, 
2011. The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 6. On July 15, 
2011, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit 
any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant 
received the file on July 25, 2011. His response was due on August 24, 2011. On 
August 3, 2011, he submitted a nine-page response to the FORM. Department Counsel 
did not object to the admission of Applicant’s response. On August 16, 2011, the case 
was assigned to me for a decision. I marked Applicant’s response to the FORM as Item 
A and entered it in the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains one allegation of disqualifying conduct under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement (SOR ¶ 1.a.). SOR ¶ 1.a. alleges: “You used marijuana from 
approximately March 2006 to at least February 2010.” In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the allegation. Applicant’s admission is entered as a finding of fact.  
(Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant is 25 years old, never married, and has no children. He attended a 
university and earned a bachelor’s degree in 2007 and a master’s degree in 2009. 
Since July 2010, he has been employed as a software engineer by a government 
contractor. He seeks a security clearance for the first time. (Item 5.) 
  
 In August 2010, Applicant completed an e-QIP. Section 23a on the e-QIP asks 
the following question: “In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any controlled 
substance, for example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.), 
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants (amphetamines, speed, 
crystal methamphetamine, Ecstasy, ketamine, etc.), depressants (barbiturates, 
methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants 
(toluene, amyl nitrate, etc.), or prescription drugs (including painkillers)? Use of a 
controlled substance includes injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, experimenting 
with or otherwise consuming any controlled substance.“ (Item 5 at 40; italics in original 
omitted.) 
 
 Applicant responded “Yes” to question 23a and provided additional information. 
He reported that he smoked marijuana five times from March 2006 until February 
12
 
1 On his e-QIP, Applicant reported that he was a full-time student from July 2003 until May 2006. From 
May 2006 until November 2007, he worked as an undergraduate research assistant at a university. From 
November 2007 until May 2009, he worked as a graduate research assistant at a university. From May 
2009 until December 2009, he was employed full-time as a research engineer by a federal contractor, 
and from December 2009 until July 2010, when he accepted employment with his current employer, he 
was unemployed. (Item 5 at 18-23.)   
 
 
3 
 
 
he did not resume his use of marijuana until he was a 
ollege student in 2006. (Item 6 at 4-5.) 
utomatic revocation of his clearance for any 
iolation. Applicant’s letter of intent reads: 
 
er way, any security clearance I possess shall be 
automatically revoked. 
Item 4, at 3-5; Item 6; Item A.) 
r evaluated as an abuser of drugs or dependent on drugs. (Item 4 at 
5.) 
                                           
 
 Applicant was interviewed about his illegal drug use by an authorized investigator 
from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in October 2010.2 In the 
personal subject interview, as summarized by the investigator, Applicant stated that 
began to use marijuana when he was a child in the fourth grade. He stated that he was 
a regular user of marijuana between fourth grade and seventh grade. During that time, 
his brother and friends provided Applicant with marijuana. Applicant’s brother and his 
friends also provided Applicant with methamphetamine, which he smoked as a fourth 
grader and continued to use until seventh grade. He stated that marijuana made him 
feel high and humorous and methamphetamine made him feel euphoric. He did not 
recall that his drug use affected his behavior or his relationships at school. Applicant 
told the investigator that he stopped using marijuana and methamphetamine when he 
entered high school because he decided to be a more serious student and a more 
religious person. He stated that 
c
 
 Applicant continues to have contact with his brother and one friend with whom he 
used marijuana, although Applicant, his brother, and the friend live in different states 
and do not see one another often. He told the investigator that he smoked marijuana 
“because he felt free to seek the pleasure of it with no fear of addiction.”3 In his answer 
to the SOR, he said he no longer associates with most of the individuals with whom he 
used illegal drugs, and he stated that he has no intention of using illegal drugs in the 
future. He stated that his illegal drug use occurred in another state and under 
circumstances he no longer endorses. With his answer to the SOR, Applicant included a 
signed and notarized letter of intent with a
v
I [Applicant] affirm that I will not abuse drugs in the future. This affirmation 
includes that I will not use illegal drugs, I will not misuse prescription 
drugs, and I will not possess, cultivate, process, manufacture, purchase, 
sell, or distribute drugs. I volunteer that if I violate this statement by using 
illegal drugs or any oth
 
 (
 
 Applicant’s Facility Security Officer (FSO) provided a letter for the record in which 
she stated that on July 6, 2010, Applicant passed a drug test administered by his 
employer. Applicant has not received any drug counseling or treatment. He has not 
been diagnosed o
6; Item 6 at 4-
 
2 On March 29, 2011, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant confirmed the accuracy of the 
information in the investigator’s report.  (Item 6, 4-7.) 
 
3 After reviewing the investigator’s summary of his October 2010 interview, Applicant amended the 
investigator’s summary by stating that he recognizes the serious risks of drug addiction. (Item 6 at 6.) 
 
4 
 
 
 use cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ood judgment. (Item A.) 
                                                   Burden of Proof 
t's suitability for 
ccess to classified information in favor of protecting national security. 
                         Policies 
 
Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
sions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
  
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant asserted that his childhood drug use was 
a consequence of immaturity and peer pressure. He stated that his adult drug use was 
infrequent, sporadic, and not a lifestyle choice. He stated that his illegal drug use 
occurred in the past under circumstances that were unlikely to recur. Applicant also 
denied that his illegal drug
g
 
  
 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the 
applicant then bears the burden of persuasion. The "clearly consistent with the national 
interest" standard compels resolution of any doubt about an applican
a
 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
the administrative judge applies these guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in 
the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is 
a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclu
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24(a) defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.” The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.” AG  ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.” 
 
Through Applicant’s admissions, the record establishes that he used marijuana, 
at least 5 times over a period of approximately four years, from March 2006 until at 
least February 2010. The record also establishes that Applicant, who is now 25 years 
old, used marijuana in his college years and after he began his professional career.  As 
recently as February 2010, he continued to use marijuana. This conduct casts doubt on 
his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. It also raises security concerns about 
his ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. I conclude that 
Applicant’s illegal drug use raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c). AG ¶ 
25(a) reads: “any drug abuse [as defined at AG ¶ 24(b)].” AG ¶ 25(c) reads: “illegal drug 
 
6 
 
 
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.” 
 
Two Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case. If Applicant’s drug use happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation. If Applicant demonstrated an intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future by (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used, (3) abstaining from drug use for 
an appropriate period, or (4) signing a statement of intent with the automatic revocation 
of his security clearance for any violation, then AG ¶ 26(b) might be applicable. 
 
Applicant claims his last use of marijuana was in February 2010, approximately 
1½ years ago. In October 2010, approximately one year ago, Applicant told an OPM 
investigator of his intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. He said he no longer 
associated with some of the individuals with whom he had used illegal drugs. However, 
he also stated that he continues to have contact with his brother and one friend with 
whom he used illegal drugs in the past. In his answer to the SOR, he provided a signed 
and notarized statement of intent with automatic revocation of his security clearance if 
he used illegal drugs in the future.  
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use is recent and occurred periodically over a period of 
four years. He used illegal drugs as a young adult and after beginning his professional 
career. Insufficient time has elapsed to demonstrate whether he will carry out his intent 
to abstain from illegal drug use in the future. He also failed to provide documentation 
establishing that he had abstained from drug use for an appropriate period or that he 
had disassociated from those with whom he had used drugs in the past. 
  
 I conclude that AG ¶ 26(a) and AG ¶ 26(b) do not fully apply in mitigation to the 
facts of Applicant’s case. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances raised by the written record in this case. While Applicant 
was candid in revealing his drug abuse when he completed his e-QIP and when he was 
interviewed by an OPM investigator, he failed to credibly demonstrate that he would not 
return to drug use in the future. Additionally, while he expressed an intent not to use 
illegal drugs in the future, he failed to document specific actions to demonstrate his 
intent. I am unable to conclude that he met his burden of persuasion in mitigating the 
Government’s allegations under the drug involvement adjudicative guideline.         
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his relatively 
recent involvement with illegal drugs. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                 Against Applicant 
 
                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                               
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
