 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10447 
                                                                     )  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the file and exhibits in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On July 8, 2010, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
  
 
2 
 
 
 9.) 
                                           
 Applicant responded to the SOR on June 8, 2011. She did not request a 
hearing. The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 14, 
2011. The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 10. By letter dated 
July 21, 2011, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to 
submit any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant 
received the file on July 25, 2011. Her response was due on August 25, 2011. Applicant 
timely submitted additional information. Department Counsel did not object to 
Applicant’s submission. On September 15, 2011, the case was assigned to me for a 
decision. I marked Applicant’s submitted materials as Item A and entered them in the 
record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations of financial delinquency under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.). The three alleged delinquencies 
total approximately $15,061. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the 
delinquencies and asserted that they had been paid, settled, or otherwise satisfied. 
Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact.  (Item 1; Item 3.) 
 
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and by information provided by Applicant in her response to the FORM. The record 
evidence includes Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; her July 2010 e-QIP; her adoption of 
the summary of a personal subject interview, dated February 18, 2011; her responses 
to DOHA interrogatories;1 and her credit reports of July 22, 2010, January 10, 2011, 
and July 14, 2011. (See Items 3 through
 
 Applicant is 24 years old, unmarried, and a high school graduate. She is 
estranged from her mother and stepfather and has supported herself since she was 
seventeen. She has pursued higher education but does not have a degree. Since 
December 2009, she has lived in a spouse-like relationship with her boyfriend, who is 
serving on active duty in the U.S. military. (Item 4; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is employed as an administrative assistant by a federal contractor. She 
has worked for this employer since April 2010, and she seeks a security clearance for 
the first time. (Item 4.) 
 
 When Applicant completed her e-QIP in July 2010, she identified three 
delinquent debts. She acknowledged that the $3,359 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. had 
been turned over to a collection agency and later charged off as a bad debt. She also 
acknowledged that an $8,559 delinquent account identified at SOR ¶ 1.b. and a $3,143 
 
1Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on August 2, 2010. On February 18, 2011, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant signed 
a notarized statement affirming that she had read the investigator’s summary of the interview and she 
adopted the investigator’s summary as accurately reflecting her interview. (Item 8.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
delinquent account identified at SOR ¶ 1.a. were also charged off as bad debts. (Item 
4.) 
 
 When she was interviewed by an authorized investigator, Applicant discussed 
the debts in further detail. She stated that she stopped paying the account identified at 
SOR ¶ 1.a. in December 2009 and had not had any further contact with the creditor. 
She identified the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. as a credit card opened in October 2006. 
She did not recall when the account was closed, and she said she had no contact with 
the creditor. Applicant stated that the account alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. was charged off as 
a bad debt in November 2009. She also stated that she had no contact with the creditor. 
(Item 8.) 
 
 In 2009, Applicant contacted a debt consolidation company. The company 
opened an account for her and provided her with documents. Applicant paid the 
company for one month of its services. Then, she concluded that her monthly payment 
was allocated to the company’s service fees and not to the payment of her debts. She 
stopped paying the company. The record does not reflect that Applicant has had any 
organized or consistent financial credit counseling. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant told the investigator that financial advisors at two banks she patronized 
had advised her in over-the-counter contacts not to pay her three delinquent accounts. 
Applicant said she was advised to let the accounts go into charged-off status because 
she was young and could rebuild her credit rating at a later time. In February 2011, 
Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories and discussed the three delinquent debts. 
In response to DOHA inquiries asking what she had done to resolve each of the three 
debts, Applicant responded three times: “From my understanding, this debt was 
charged off.” She also reported that she had been approved for a new credit card with a 
$300 limit, was using the card to make purchases, and was making regular payments 
on her accrued credit card debt. (Item 7 at 2-3; Item 8.) 
 
 Also in February 2011, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided 
a personal financial statement. She reported a net monthly income of $1,750. Her fixed 
monthly expenses totaled $1,662 in the following categories: food: $200; clothing: $150; 
utilities: $400; car expenses: $612; and miscellaneous: $300.2 Applicant also reported 
that she made a monthly payment of $100 on her new credit card debt. Applicant’s 
financial statement reflected that she spent approximately $12 more each month than 
she earned. (Item 7 at 4.)   
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that the three delinquent debts 
alleged on the SOR had been paid. In her response to the FORM, Applicant provided 
 
2 Applicant did not report a monthly expense for rent. She did not report any savings or other assets. 
(Item 7 at 4.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
documentation showing that on April 6, 2011, payment of $3,388.55 was authorized 
from an account for the payment of the creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.a.3 
   
 Applicant provided documentation establishing that the creditor identified at SOR 
¶ 1.b. agreed to settle the alleged debt for $3,423.66. She also provided a document, 
addressed to Applicant from the creditor, dated April 25, 2011, acknowledging receipt of 
a check for $3,423.66. Additionally, she provided a document reporting that in May 
2011, the account showed a zero balance. (Item A at 6-8.) 
 
 Applicant provided a July 27, 2011 offer from the creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.c. 
to settle the $3,359 debt for $1,750. Applicant also provided a checking account record 
showing that on July 29, 2011, a check had been authorized to pay $1,750 to the 
creditor identified in SOR ¶ 1.c.4 By letter dated August 1, 2011, the creditor informed 
Applicant that it had received her payment and considered the debt satisfied in full. 
(Item A at 9-11.) 
 
 In her answer to the SOR and in her response to the FORM, Applicant stated: 
 
The security clearance will give me the opportunity to grow and expand 
within my company and make a higher salary. I will be able to take on 
more responsibilities and be an even greater asset to my team. I 
respectfully request that you please reconsider my eligibility in light of this 
new information. 
 
(Item 3; Item A.) 
  
  
                                           
                                                  Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
 
3 Applicant’s name is not on the document provided, and the owner of account is not identified. (Item A at 
4.) 
 
4 Applicant’s name is not on the document provided, and the owner of the account is not identified. (Item 
A at 9.) 
 
5 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Additionally, security concerns are raised under AG 19(h), which 
reads: “unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living, increase in 
net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by subject’s known legal 
sources of income.” Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt, and the record 
reflects that she did not satisfy the debts for several years. Her financial statement 
revealed that she was financially overextended and had neither savings nor assets. 
Despite this, Applicant paid approximately $8,500 on her delinquent debts between April 
and July 2011. This evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under these 
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, [such as] loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence the person “has received or is receiving counseling for 
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control” (AG ¶ 20(c); that “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)); that “the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
 
7 
 
 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue” (AG ¶ 20(e)); or that “the affluence 
resulted from a legal source of income” (AG ¶ 20(f)). 
 
Applicant’s payments of her three delinquent debts are recent. Two of the debts 
were satisfied in April 2011 and the third was satisfied at the end of July 2011. The 
three debts were settled for approximately $8,500. While Applicant deserves some 
credit for settling her debts, however belatedly, her debt payments also raise questions. 
Applicant’s personal financial statement showed that she is financially overextended 
and spends more money than she earns each month. She reported no savings and no 
assets. It appears that she did not use her own financial resources to satisfy the three 
delinquent debts, and nothing in the record explains how Applicant could resolve her 
delinquent debts if she herself lacked the financial resources to do so. This raises a 
concern about Applicant’s good faith in paying the delinquent debts alleged on the SOR. 
DOHA’s Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
“good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’  
 
(ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. April 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-
9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
Applicant’s financial statement indicated that she had no savings or resources of 
her own to pay or settle her debts.  It is not clear whether she incurred additional debt or 
accepted gifts to satisfy the delinquencies alleged on the SOR. This raises concerns 
about her judgment, adherence to duty or obligation, and good faith in resolving her just 
debts. The record does not reflect a consistent pattern of debt resolution. Insufficient 
time has passed to conclude that Applicant has established a track record of 
responsible payment and can avoid the recurrence of financial delinquency in the future.     
 
I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c),  20(e), and 20(f) do not apply in 
mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. Additionally, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) 
applies only in part to mitigate the facts of this case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a resourceful and 
ambitious person who has been self-supporting from an early age. She wants to 
succeed in life, and this is admirable. She presented documentation showing that her 
three delinquent debts had been resolved. However, her own financial record suggests 
that she did not use her own resources to satisfy those debts but accepted transfers of 
money from someone else. She failed to provide documentation establishing how she 
obtained the resources to satisfy her delinquent debts and to demonstrate her own 
capacity to manage her income and pay her creditors. This raises concerns about her 
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  
 
Applicant requested a decision on the written record. While she provided 
additional documentation in her response to the FORM, her documentation raised 
concerns about the sources of the money she used to pay or settle her debts. The 
written record in this case is sparse. Moreover, without an opportunity to question 
Applicant and to assess her credibility at a hearing, I am unable to conclude that she 
met her burden of persuasion in mitigating the Government’s allegations under the 
financial considerations adjudicative guideline. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her 
financial delinquencies.  
 
                                                    Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c.: Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
                           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
__________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
