                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10056 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 24, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 15, 2011, and requested his case be 
decided on the written record. On July 12, 2011, Department Counsel requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 25, 2011. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 27, 2011. Applicant received the Notice of 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Hearing on August 4, 2011. He waived his right to 15 days from the date of the notice to 
the hearing. I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 17, 2011. The Government 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, and they were admitted into evidence without objections. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. He offered Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were 
admitted into evidence without objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
August 25, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR. I incorporated his admission into the 
findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 23 years old. He is not married. Applicant attended college from 
August 2006 to May 2010 and earned a bachelor’s degree. He worked as a summer 
intern for his current employer in 2009 and was hired upon completion of his college 
degree. He began full-time employment in July 2010. He will begin a master’s program 
in the fall of 2011.1  
 
 Applicant admitted that in June 2006 he used marijuana with some high school 
friends before going to college. While attending college he used marijuana 
approximately three times a year during the next four years. He used it in his dorm room 
or apartment with high school friends who visited him, and on one occasion he used it 
with his roommate. They watched movies while using it.2  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application on March 12, 2010. He 
admitted he used marijuana one time in May 2010, which was the last time he used 
marijuana. Applicant stated he was still in college when he used it in May 2010, and he 
did not think about the fact he had applied for a security clearance. Applicant 
acknowledged that he exercised poor judgment when he used marijuana and especially 
after applying for a security clearance.3  
 
 Applicant credibly stated that he does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. 
He is now focused on his long-term future. He provided a written statement of intent to 
never use any illegal drugs in the future and agreed to an automatic revocation of a 
security clearance if he does. He explained he is no longer in a college environment 
where he was less concerned about the impact of his decisions. Applicant explained 
when he started working he decided illegal drugs were in his past and he was more 
1 Tr. 20-21. 
 
2 Tr. 23-29. 
 
3 Tr. 16; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
conscientious about the ramifications and consequences of his decisions. He believes 
he has matured and intends on making good decisions in the future.4  
 
Applicant has some minimal contact with the high school friends, with whom he 
used marijuana, but it is indirect contact and usually through other friends. His current 
friends do not use illegal drugs. His current roommate works for a government agency 
and holds a security clearance. He does not use illegal drugs. Applicant only associates 
with non-drug users now.5  
 
Applicant’s family and friends are aware of his past drug use. He has no history 
of criminal conduct. He credibly testified that he has made changes in his life and is 
committed to abiding by the law.  
 
Character references describe Applicant as responsible and trustworthy. He is 
considered to be of high moral character and reliable. They describe Applicant as a role 
model, who is honest and exercises good judgment. Applicant’s supervisor considers 
him a hard worker and valuable contributor to the team. He views him as a man of 
integrity and is trusted by those who work with him. He is committed, loyal, and devoted 
to the success of the team.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
4 Tr. 16, 31; AE B. 
 
5 Tr. 16-19. 
 
6 AE A. 
 
4 
 
 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 
and conclude the following have been raised: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
5 
 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
Applicant admitted he used marijuana when he was in college. I find the above 
disqualifying condition applies. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 
26. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.  
 
Applicant used marijuana about three times a year during his four years of 
college. His last use was in May 2010, more than a year ago. After he left the college 
setting, he made a conscious decision to discontinue using marijuana or any illegal 
drugs in the future. He is focused on his career and long-term goals. He has matured 
and has a new appreciation for the consequences of using illegal drugs. He has indirect 
contact with his high school friends with whom he used drugs in the past. His current 
friends are non-drug users. He has signed a statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. I find both AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant 
graduated from college in May 2010. He occasionally used marijuana while in college. 
He stopped using it when he transitioned from being a college student to a career-
oriented adult. He no longer associates with his high school friends, who used drugs. 
His current friends are non-drug users. Applicant is a poised, articulate, young man, 
who readily admitted he made some poor decisions while in college. He has moved 
beyond that period of his life and is focused on long-term goals. I find under the 
circumstances a sufficient amount of time has passed since his last drug use. I found 
Applicant’s testimony and commitment to not using illegal drugs in the future to be 
credible. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline Drug 
Involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
