 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10271  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on July 27, 2010, to request a security clearance required as part of his 
employment with a defense contractor (Item 5). After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
On May 16, 2011, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Item 1), 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DoD directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DoD on 
September 1, 2006. The SOR specified the basis for its decision: security concerns 
 
2 
 
 
addressed in the Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the AG. 
Applicant answered the SOR by letter dated June 14, 2011. He denied one of the seven 
allegations (1.h), and requested a decision without a hearing. (Items 1-4) 
 
Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM)1
 
 in support of 
the Government’s preliminary decision to deny Applicant's request. The FORM was 
forwarded to Applicant on August 4, 2011, and he received it on August 15, 2011. He 
was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to file a response. Applicant did 
not submit a response. The case was assigned to me on September 26, 2011, for an 
administrative decision based on the record. 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, the FORM, and Applicant’s response to 
the SOR, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years of age. He was married and divorced in the mid- to late 
1980s. He married his current wife in 1988. He has two children, who are 18 and 19 
years of age. He has not served in the military. He received a bachelor’s degree in 
1997. As of the date of his security clearance application, July 2010, he was employed 
as a test technician by a defense contractor. (Item 5) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in August 
1998, which was discharged in January 1999. He also filed a Chapter 13 wage-earner 
bankruptcy petition in May 2000, which was dismissed in about August 2000. In 
addition, the SOR alleges six debts that are currently past-due, which total $37,319. 
Applicant admitted five of the six debts. He denies one debt of $11,060 (allegation 1.h) 
(Items 1, 4)  
 
 At his 2010 security interview, Applicant stated he was overextended on credit 
before 2008. After 2008, his expenses increased, the economy’s downturn affected his 
income, and his opportunity for overtime pay decreased. His wife’s job as a substitute 
teacher did not contribute greatly to their resources because she did not work during the 
summers. Since 2008, he has maintained the payments on his mortgage and secured 
loans, but has struggled with paying other debts. He made credit card payments until he 
was no longer able to continue. He did pay several credit card accounts using money 
from his retirement fund. (Item 6) 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in July 2011, “in order to get 
myself back on track.” The case is currently pending. He admits he became 
overextended on his credit card accounts, and regrets having to resort to bankruptcy to 
resolve his “financial ineptitude.” However, he cites his 28 years of experience in 
                                                          
1 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included 12 documents (Items 1 - 12) proffered 
in support of the Government’s case. 
 
 
3 
 
 
materials and structures testing, and opines that he has valuable expertise to contribute 
in the area. (Items 4, 8) 
 
 Applicant denies responsibility for debts to an animal hospital, stating that his pet 
was injured while being treated there (allegations 1.d and 1.e). He provided no proof 
supporting his claim. He also denies any knowledge of the $11,000 debt for an oil 
company credit card, alleged at allegation 1.h, but provides no further information or 
evidence that he has contacted the creditor or filed a dispute with the credit reporting 
agencies. The SOR debts appear in Applicant's credit reports of August 2010 and 
March 2011. (Items 4, 6, 7, 9, 10)   
 
 Applicant’s February 2011 personal financial statement shows net monthly 
income of $5,765 and expenses of $2,783. In addition, he listed debts payments of 
$1,975. Subtracting his expenses and debt payments ($4,758) from his income leaves a 
monthly remainder of $1,007. He did not list monthly payments on any of the SOR 
debts. The record contains no evidence that Applicant has sought financial counseling. 
(Item 7)  
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.2
 
 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest3
 
 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
                                                          
2 Directive. 6.3. 
 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
 
4 
 
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as her or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.5
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds.  
 
 Applicant has a history of delinquent debts. He sought bankruptcy protection in 
1998 and 2000. Since 2008, he has again become indebted. In 2011, he again sought 
Chapter 13 protection in a bankruptcy case that is still pending. His history of failing to 
meet his financial obligations supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a) 
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations). 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions can potentially mitigate security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
                                                          
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to pay his debts did not occur in the distant past, because his 
debts are still delinquent. He has filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, but the 
case is pending, and it is unknown whether his debts will be successfully discharged 
through that petition. His unresolved financial situation casts doubt on his reliability, and 
AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied. 
 
 Applicant stated his financial problems stem from the economic downturn, his 
loss of overtime work in 2008, and his wife’s lack of employment during the summer, 
and his overspending. However, his current difficulties are not new. The economic 
downturn was an event beyond Applicant's control. However, he did not explain 
specifically how that event affected him financially. Moreover, he has overspent and 
become financially insolvent in the past, as evidenced by his two prior bankruptcy 
filings. The file contains no evidence of other circumstances that might have prevented 
him from being able to resolve him current situation. Applicant receives only partial 
mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
 Applicant provided no documentary evidence that he has received financial 
counseling. Although he disputed three debts, Applicant did not provide evidence that 
he informed the credit reporting agencies of these disputes. It appears that he has not 
set up payment plans, or paid any of the SOR debts, despite a monthly net remainder 
which could have been used for this purpose. His only attempt to resolve his debts has 
been to state that he filed for Chapter 13 protection, although he failed to provide 
evidence of that filing. AG ¶¶ 20(c), (d), and (e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and presumed to be a mature adult. His significant 
debts led to his filing for bankruptcy protection in 1998 and in 2000. He has been aware 
that delinquent debts are a security concern since he completed his security clearance 
application in July 2010. However, over the past year, he has made no effort to resolve 
these debts. Although bankruptcy is a legitimate method to deal with overwhelming 
debt, Applicant's three filings, and his own admissions, indicate that he is unable to 
maintain a solvent financial status.  
 
 Applicants are not required to be debt-free; however, they are expected to act 
responsibly, develop a plan to resolve their debts, and provide evidence of “concomitant 
conduct” to implement the plan. Moreover, those who are irresponsible in their financial 
dealings may be likewise irresponsible in other important obligations, such as 
safeguarding classified material.  Applicant has not demonstrated the good judgment 
and trustworthiness required of those who protect the Government’s interests. Because 
protection of the national interest is paramount in these determinations, such doubts 
must be resolved in favor of the Government.6
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
