                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-10068 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct 
concerns. He used marijuana in 2001 and 2009 while possessing a security clearance. 
He failed to demonstrate that he will not use illegal drugs in the future. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On June 8, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made a 
preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information.1 The basis 
for this decision is set forth in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which alleges security 
concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 28, 2011 (Answer). He requested a hearing 
and, after coordinating with the parties, I scheduled the hearing for September 13, 2011.  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered two exhibits, which were marked and 
admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant testified, but did 
not offer any exhibits beyond the six exhibits he enclosed with his Answer.2 At the 
conclusion of the hearing, the Government moved to withdraw SOR, ¶ 2.a. I granted the 
motion. The transcript was received on September 22, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old, single, with no children. After graduating from college in 
June 2000, he was hired by his current employer, a government contractor. He filled out 
a security clearance application (SCA) and, shortly thereafter, was granted a security 
clearance.3  
 
Applicant used marijuana in 2001 and 2009 while possessing a security 
clearance. His employer has a policy prohibiting its employees from using illegal drugs 
and Applicant was aware of this policy when he decided to use marijuana. Applicant 
claims that when he used marijuana in 2001 and 2009 he only took two puffs from a 
marijuana cigarette that was being passed around by others. At the time he engaged in 
this conduct, he understood his use of marijuana was wrong and contrary to his 
employer’s drug policy.4 
 
 As part of his current periodic reinvestigation, Applicant filled out a SCA in July 
2010. Question 23.b of the SCA asked: “[h]ave you EVER illegally used a controlled 
substance while possessing a security clearance . . .?” Applicant revealed his August 
2009 marijuana use and stated that he “took a couple puffs to try it (marijuana) out”. He 
did not disclose his prior use of marijuana in 2001. Applicant claims this omission was 
unintentional. He testified that he simply forgot about his prior use when filling out the 
SCA and, if he did recall his prior use, he was simply confused by the question, as the 
other drug questions only asked him to go back seven years. Applicant first revealed his 
2001 use of marijuana during his August 2010 background interview.5 
 
 Applicant does not believe his limited use of marijuana raises a security concern. 
In his mind, a security risk only exists if an individual uses marijuana on a persistent or 
continual basis.6  
 
2 At the start of the hearing, Applicant provided me Enclosures 0 – 5, which were missing from 
the file copy of the Answer. I have attached these enclosures to the file copy of the Answer. 
 
3 Tr. at 33-34; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. at 27-28, 35-41, 48-53;GE 1; GE 2 at 87. 
 
5 GE 1 at 31-32; Tr. at 25-26, 41-47, 53-57. But see, GE 2 at 87 (Applicant tells agent that he had 
revealed his 2001 marijuana use during initial background investigation).  
 
6 Tr. at 39-40, 48, 52. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant submitted a statement promising not to use illegal drugs in the future. 
He claims to have not used marijuana since August 2009 and no longer associates with 
those who use illegal drugs. He submitted a drug screen that he took shortly after 
receiving the SOR, which was negative for the presence of illegal substances. His 
performance reports and employer awards demonstrate that he is a good worker.7  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  
7 Tr. at 50-52; Answer, Enclosures 2-5. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern regarding illegal drug involvement is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25. Appellant’s 
use of marijuana while possessing a security clearance establishes AG ¶¶ 25(a) “any 
drug abuse” and 25(g) “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.” 
 
 AG ¶ 26 sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the Guideline H 
concern. The following mitigating conditions warrant discussion: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use did not occur under unusual circumstances – both 
occasions involved social events where other individuals were smoking the drug and 
passed it around for others to use or not. There was no pressure or coercion involved. 
Applicant was a mature 32-year-old adult when he decided to use marijuana again in 
2009. By that point, he had held a security clearance and been working for a 
government contractor for nearly a decade. He used marijuana on both occasions 
knowing that it was wrong and contrary to his employer’s drug policy. He still does not 
understand that any use of an illegal drug – even just two puffs from a marijuana 
cigarette – is incompatible with holding a security clearance. Under such circumstances, 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
the mere passage of time, in this case just two years have passed since Applicant’s last 
use of marijuana, does not warrant the application of AG ¶ 26(a).8 
 
 Although Applicant submitted a statement promising not to use illegal drugs in 
the future, he failed to demonstrate that his involvement with illegal drugs will not recur. 
Applicant’s two uses of marijuana occurred after the government had placed its trust 
and confidence in him by granting him a security clearance. He also violated the trust of 
his employer by violating its drug policy on two separate occasions. I did not find his 
self-serving, contradictory explanations for why he failed to disclose his 2001 marijuana 
use on his current SCA credible. In light of Applicant’s failure to keep his previous 
promises not to use drugs, his inability to recognize that any drug use is incompatible 
with holding a security clearance, and incredulous explanation for why he failed to 
disclose his 2001 drug use on his SCA, he failed to establish the applicability of AG ¶ 
26(b). Applicant failed to mitigate the drug involvement concern.9  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 I incorporate my Guideline H analysis herein and, for similar reasons, find against 
Applicant under Guideline E.10  Applicant’s use of marijuana demonstrated poor 
judgment11 and was contrary to his employer’s drug policy.12 Applicant’s inability to 
8 See generally, ISCR Case No. 10-06480 (App. Bd. Aug. 19, 2011) (four year passage of time 
since last use of marijuana, with the last use being a puff from a marijuana cigarette, does not mitigate 
drug involvement concern). 
 
9 Id. at 3 (“The Board has previously held that use of marijuana following a pre-employment drug 
test and after submitting a SCA significantly undercuts an applicant’s claim to have demonstrated an 
intent not to use drugs in the future.”). See also, ISCR Case No. 06-18905 (App. Bd. Nov. 16, 2007) 
(application of AG ¶ 26(b) not warranted because, although applicant’s last marijuana use occurred two 
and half years prior the hearing, his use of marijuana occurred while holding a security clearance). 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 06-21537 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 21, 2008) (“the Directive does not provide that if 
conduct raises a disqualifying condition under a specific guideline, then that conduct is precluded from 
consideration under any other guideline. . . . The Board has held that an applicant’s behavior may have 
security significance under more than one Guideline.”). 
 
11 AG ¶¶ 16(c) and (d).  
 
12 AG ¶ 16(f) “violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to the 
employer as a condition of employment.” 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
appreciate the significance of his drug use – albeit limited as it was – and failure to keep 
his prior promises not to use drugs, leaves me with doubts as to his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.13 Applicant failed to meet his burden to mitigate 
the personal conduct concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).14 I have considered all the favorable and extenuating 
factors in this case. Applicant has worked for his employer for the past 11 years and by 
all accounts is a good performer. However, this favorable evidence, as well as the other 
mitigating record evidence, does not outweigh the security concerns at issue.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:         Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:          Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
13 See AG ¶ 17(c). The wording of this personal conduct mitigating condition is similar to AG ¶ 
26(a) and for similar reasons is inapplicable under the circumstances.  
 
14 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; 
(6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence. 
