 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    ISCR Case No. 10-10206 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 18, 2010. On March 
24, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline B. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR and initially requested a decision on the record. He 
timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The 
case was assigned to me on July 25, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 
 
2 
 
 
4, 2011, scheduling the hearing for September 1, 2011.  Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified, and 
submitted Applicant‟s Exhibits (AX) A through D, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 12, 2011. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Taiwan. The request and supporting documents are attached to the record as HX.  
Applicant did not object to documents. (Tr. 14) I took administrative notice as requested 
by Department Counsel. The facts administratively noticed are set out below in my 
findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and offered explanations. He provided additional 
information to support his case. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a native of Taiwan. He received his undergraduate degree in Taiwan. 
He served a mandatory service of two years in the military in Taiwan. He came to the 
United States in 1982 on a student visa and obtained an advanced degree from an 
American university in 1982. In 1987, Applicant obtained his doctorate degree. He has 
almost 22 years experience in the aerospace industry, and has been with his current 
employer since 2009. Applicant has not held a security clearance, but he has worked 
with sensitive information in the aerospace industry. He became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 1996. (GX 1) Applicant‟s Taiwanese passport expired in November 2001 and 
he did not renew it. (Tr. 29)  
 
Applicant‟s wife is also a native of Taiwan. They were married in April 1981, and 
they have no children. His wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen. Her parents live in the 
United States. Applicant‟s parents are both deceased. (GX 1) 
 
Applicant‟s brother is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. He is 62 years old and 
recently retired as a civil engineer for a government agency in Taiwan.   He is not aware 
of Applicant‟s work or his application for a security clearance. (Tr. 33) He has no current 
affiliation with the government. Applicant speaks to him on the phone once or twice a 
year.  Applicant‟s other brother died in February 2011. Thus, the first SOR allegation is 
modified to reflect the fact that Applicant has one brother. Also, the allegation 
concerning the sponsorship of that brother is withdrawn. Applicant last saw his brother  
at his other brother‟s funeral in 2011 in Taiwan. (AX D)  
 
 Applicant‟s sister is a citizen of Taiwan who has resided in the United States for 
the past 12 years.  She is 60 years old.  She owns an import/export business, importing 
fashion jewelry. She does not know that Applicant is seeking a security clearance. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant has contact with her once a month by phone. (Tr. 34)  They also email each 
other once every two weeks. Applicant‟s sister holds a green card.  
 
 Applicant‟s aunt is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. He believes she is 72 years 
old. She retired from a secretarial position.  He speaks to his aunt once every two or 
three years. In 2004, Applicant sponsored his niece, a citizen of Taiwan, into the United 
States. She studied at an American university where she graduated, receiving her 
undergraduate degree. She works for a university hospital in the United States and lives 
with Applicant and his wife. (Tr. 36) She holds an H-1 visa, and is applying for a green 
card. 
 
  Applicant and his wife own a home in the United States. The value of the home 
is approximately $500,000. He and his wife have savings and retirement accounts worth 
about $1.3 million. (Tr. 47) Applicant‟s home is mortgage-free. He and his brother own 
another home in the United States.  
 
 Applicant explained at the hearing that he came to the United States to receive 
an education.  He and his wife plan to live the rest of their lives in the United States. He 
has roots in the United States both professionally and personally.  Applicant has worked 
his entire adult life in the United States and has deep and long-term relationships. He 
has not held a clearance, but has been involved with sensitive information, providing 
service to the U.S. Government through his work with government contractors. 
Applicant was credible when he explained that if in the unlikely situation that there 
would be pressure on him or his family, he would immediately contact his facility 
security officer. (Tr. 18)  
 
 Applicant expressed his love for the United States. He also wants to give back to 
the community that has given him so much. He contributes part of his salary to a local 
volunteer organization. He wants to assume responsibility to help society in the United 
States since he lives a comfortable life. He swears to protect the United States from 
attack.  He realizes that he cannot “divorce” his relatives, but during his years in the 
United States he has not contacted any friends or contacts in Taiwan. He is a law-
abiding citizen who has never received a speeding ticket. He has worked hard to 
provide his family with financial security. He has saved more than 30 percent of his 
annual income over the years. He has no debt. He has a healthy lifestyle and is 
financially secure.  
 
 Applicant‟s former supervisor recommends him for a security clearance. He has 
known Applicant since 1988 and worked with him on four important projects in which 
Applicant was the analysis lead.  Applicant possesses excellent skills, work ethic, and 
experience. Applicant is a valued member of the team. In sum, Applicant is described 
as having the utmost integrity. (AX C) 
 
 The Director of the defense contract group, for whom Applicant worked prior to 
his current position, has known Applicant since 1988. He described Applicant as a very 
capable engineer with an excellent theoretical background who can solve the most 
 
4 
 
 
difficult structural mechanics problems.  Applicant is dedicated, hard working, and a 
good team player. He is a man of integrity, faithful to friends, trustworthy, and 
dependable.  Applicant is conscientious about deadlines and is well regarded by his 
peers. Applicant has been involved in some challenging projects and received positive 
feedback. (AX D) 
 
 Applicant submitted a letter of recommendation from the volunteer coordinator of 
a community organization where Applicant is greatly involved. The Director has known 
Applicant for four years. Applicant volunteers with animal rescue. He also is a fund 
raiser for the organization. He is described a kind man who is always willing to help. His 
compassionate, gentle spirit is vital to the animal project. He is a loyal person and a 
responsible member of the community. (AX B) 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts. Taiwan is a multi-party 
democracy that has significant economic contacts with China, and it has developed a 
strong economy since its separation from the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) in 1949. 
Despite substantial economic ties, the PRC did not hold any official ties with Taiwan 
from October 1998 until June 2008. Moreover, the governments of Taiwan and PRC still 
do not negotiate directly. The Taiwanese military‟s primary mission is the defense of 
Taiwan against the PRC, which is seen as the predominant threat and which has not 
renounced the use of force against Taiwan. The PRC‟s Ministry of State Security is the 
“preeminent civilian intelligence collection agency in China,” and it maintains intelligence 
operations in Taiwan through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals with Taiwan connections. 
 
Taiwan is known to be an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence, and the 
National Counterintelligence Center‟s 2000 annual report to Congress on foreign 
economic collection and industrial espionage lists Taiwan as being among the most 
active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary information.  However, this report is 
dated. There have been various cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal 
export, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to Taiwan.  
 
 The 2008 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage notes Taiwan, along with seven other countries, was involved in 
criminal espionage and export controls enforcement cases in 2008.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a „right‟ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
5 
 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge‟s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant‟s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant‟s  brother is a citizen and resident of Taiwan (¶ 1.a), 
Applicant‟s brother is employed as a civil engineer by the Taiwan government (¶ 1.b), 
withdrawn (brother deceased) (¶ 1.c), Applicant‟s sister is a citizen of Taiwan currently 
residing in the United States (¶ 1.d), and Applicant‟s sister is employed in the 
import/export business (¶ 1.e). Applicant sponsored his niece, a citizen of Taiwan, into 
the United States. (¶ 1.f). It also alleges Applicant‟s aunt is a citizen and resident of 
Taiwan, who is a retired secretary formerly employed by the government of Taiwan. 
(1.g). 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Four disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case.  First, 
a disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). Second, a disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual‟s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual‟s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b). Third, a security 
concern may be raised if an applicant is “sharing living quarters with a person or 
persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(d). Fourth a security 
concern also may be raised by “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in 
a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
 
7 
 
 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a 
nation‟s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant‟s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the government, an 
administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See 
generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to 
grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area 
where family members resided). 
 
 Applicant has lived and worked in the United States since 1982. He is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant‟s wife, who is a U.S. citizen, resides in the United 
States.  His mother lived in the United States until her death. His sister and niece live in 
the United States, but are citizens of Taiwan.   
 
Applicant‟s brother and aunt are citizens and residents of Taiwan. His sister and 
niece are citizens of Taiwan, but live in the United States. His parents are deceased. 
His wife‟s mother and father live in the United States. A[T]here is a rebuttable 
presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family 
members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 
8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has not rebutted this presumption.  
 
After considering the totality of Applicant‟s family ties to Taiwan as well as each 
individual tie, I conclude that Applicant‟s family ties are sufficient to raise an issue of a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
Applicant speaks to his brother once or twice a year on the phone. He saw his brother in 
2011 in Taiwan when he attended the funeral of his other brother. He speaks to his aunt 
on the phone every year.  Based on all these circumstances, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 7(a), 
(b), and (d) are raised.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). Taiwan engages in economic and industrial espionage, and it has 
been involved in incidents involving illegal importation of restricted, dual-use technology 
 
8 
 
 
from the United States. Applicant‟s brother is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. His aunt 
is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. His niece is living in the United States, as well as his 
sister, but they are still citizens of Taiwan. For these reasons, I conclude that AG ¶ 8(a) 
is partially established.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing “there is no 
conflict of interest, either because the individual‟s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant has been involved with sensitive information in the aerospace industry for 
more than 20 years without incident. He has worked with government contractors during 
this time. Applicant‟s financial interests are totally in the United States. He and his wife 
have personal assets, including a home, in the United States worth more than $1.3 
million. Applicant and his wife surrendered their Taiwanese passports and use their U.S. 
passports. Applicant‟s sister and niece possess green cards and have lived in the 
United States for a number of years.  I conclude that Applicant would resolve any 
conflict between the interests of the United States and his family in Taiwan in favor of 
the United States. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 8(b) is established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant‟s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant‟s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual‟s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen who has lived in the United States since 
1983. He and his wife reside in the United States, and are both naturalized U.S. 
citizens. He was articulate, candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. Applicant‟s 
home is in the United States. Applicant has been successful in the defense contracting 
 
9 
 
 
business for many years. He has worked in the aerospace industry without incident for 
more than 22 years. His current employer recommends him for his professionalism and 
integrity.  
 
 Applicant chose to leave his home and emigrate from Taiwan in search of an 
education and career opportunities. He wants to provide for his family in the United 
States. He has worked hard in the engineering field and has received praise for his work 
ethic and accomplishments. Applicant purchased a home and has maintained excellent 
credit. He has a net worth of more than $1.3 million. His family intends to remain in the 
United States. His sister and niece live in the United States.  
 
 There is no evidence any of the individuals at issue are involved with, or under 
scrutiny, by interests antithetical to the United States. Applicant returned to Taiwan in 
2011 for his brother‟s funeral. His family members in Taiwan do not know the specifics 
of his work.  
 
 Regarding Applicant‟s life in the United States, he is an American citizen, with a 
stable family, social, and professional life. His life is focused here. He is admired by his 
peers. He and his wife intend to continue their lives in the United States. There is no 
evidence indicating that he may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign power or 
interest. He credibly stated he would report any attempts to influence him to security. In 
light of these facts and the country at issue, I find that Applicant successfully mitigated 
foreign influence concerns.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude he 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:      WITHDRAWN 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.g:     For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
