 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
             )  ISCR Case No. 10-10631 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is granted. 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant requested a security clearance by submitting an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (SF 86) dated June 14, 2010. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request. On April 13, 2011, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of 
 
 
 
2 
Reasons (SOR), which specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed 
in the Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).2
 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, dated June 8, 2011, Applicant admitted six of the 
seven SOR allegations. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 23, 2011, and I received the 
case on July 5, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 27, 2011. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled on August 16, 2011. 
 
During the hearing, the Government offered four exhibits, which I admitted as 
Government Exhibit (GE) 1 through 4, and one demonstrative exhibit, which I marked 
as Hearing Exhibit I. Applicant testified, and offered nine exhibits, which I admitted as 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through I. I held the record open to allow Applicant to submit 
additional documentation. He timely submitted four documents, which I admitted as AE 
J through M. Department Counsel’s responses to Applicant's post-hearing submissions, 
dated August 31, 2011 and September 2, 2011, taken together, are marked as Hearing 
Exhibit II. DOHA received the transcript on August 24, 2011. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 At the hearing, I amended the SOR, sua sponte, to correct the numbering. The 
last SOR allegation, which follows allegation 1.f, was incorrectly labeled 1.h. The 
allegation is now numbered 1.g. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He has four biological children who are 20 through 29 
years of age. They do not live with him. He provides monthly support to his 20-year-old 
daughter, who is about to start college. Applicant lived with a girlfriend for about eight 
years. She had three children, and Applicant supported them until they separated. In 
2011, he married for the first time. His wife has four children, 17 to 22 years of age, all 
of whom live with Applicant. (GE 1; Tr. 25-30, 58)   
 
                                                 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines, which supersede the guidelines 
listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in 
which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
3 
Applicant is a high school graduate, and has received technical training as a 
welder. He worked part time for about a year and a half from 2003 to 2004. He was 
unemployed from August 2004 to August 2005. He began working for his present 
employer in 2005. He is a heavy equipment mechanic and also transports military 
equipment. In 2010, he was promoted to lead technician. This is his first application for 
a security clearance. His company plans to transfer him to Afghanistan following 
resolution of his security clearance status. (GE 1, 4; Tr. 25-30, 58)   
  
 Applicant's December 15, 2010 pay statement shows a year-to-date gross 
income of $45,602. Applicant’s June 2011 pay statement shows that his net monthly 
income is $2,738. Based on his testimony, he estimates his expenses are $1,455, 
leaving a monthly net remainder of $1,283. However, this estimate did not include other 
expenditure: his youngest daughter’s cell phone, the $100 monthly allowance he sends 
her, and the financial help he provides to his four grandchildren. He has approximately 
$10,000 in a 401(k) account. He does not use credit cards. (GE 2; AE I; Tr. 62-68, 75) 
 
 While Applicant lived with his girlfriend and her three children, from 2002 to 
approximately 2010, he co-signed on his girlfriend’s daughter’s cell phone account 
(allegation 1.a), her apartment lease (allegation 1.c), and her auto loan (allegation 1.g). 
He also co-signed on his own daughter’s credit card account (allegation 1.e). He 
testified that he has learned a lesson from the delinquencies that resulted from these 
actions, and, “That'll never happen again.” (Tr. 46-47) 
 
The debts listed in the SOR total $19,206. The current status of the debts 
follows. The debts appear in Applicant's credit bureau reports of March 2011 and June 
2010. (GE 2, 3) 
 
Allegation 1.a ($1,013) – cell phone – UNRESOLVED 
 Applicant agreed to co-sign on his girlfriend’s daughter’s cell phone account. She 
did not pay the amount owed, and the debt now appears on Applicant's credit report.  
Applicant had not paid the debt as of the date of the hearing. (Tr. 30-31, 41-42) 
 
Allegation 1.b ($10,217) – auto loan – RESOLVED 
 Applicant purchased a 1998 Ford in 2006 for $15,000. He voluntarily returned it 
when he could no longer make the payments. He was informed he would not owe any 
further balance, and he was not contacted by the creditor after returning the vehicle. 
After learning the debt was on his credit report, Applicant contacted both the creditor 
and the collection agency and learned that the car had been sold. The credit report 
listed the full amount of the loan as delinquent. Applicant disputed the debt with the 
creditor, and with the reporting agency. TransUnion shows the debt has been deleted 
from his credit report and Experian shows the debt as paid, with a zero balance. (GE 2, 
3, 4; AE D, E, F, H, M; Tr. 31-36) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Allegation 1.c ($1,774) – unpaid rent – UNRESOLVED 
 Applicant’s girlfriend and her daughter needed a place to live, and Applicant co-
signed on an apartment lease for them. He lived in the apartment with them temporarily. 
When he left, Applicant believed his $1,700 balance was covered by the $1,900 security 
deposit that the company retained. The apartment company filed suit for $1,774. When 
Applicant learned of the judgment, he contacted the apartment leasing agent and the 
apartment complex manager, who provided a record showing a debt of $3,681. He 
disputed the debt with the credit agencies. Equifax verified the debt as belonging to 
Applicant. (GE 2, 4; AE C, E, H, M; Tr. 36, 41-42) 
 
Allegation 1.d ($1,225) – credit card – RESOLVED 
 Applicant did not recognize this credit card debt, and disputed it with the credit 
reporting agencies. After Equifax verified the account as Applicant's, he negotiated a 
settlement of $387.24, to be paid in monthly payments of $129.08. Applicant provided 
proof that he has paid the debt in full. (GE 2, 3; AE E, G, H, K, M; Tr. 42-44) 
 
Allegation 1.e – ($1,005) – credit card – UNRESOLVED 
  Applicant gave this credit card, in his name, to one of his biological daughters as 
a gift. He testified that he thought he had one account, with two credit cards on it--this 
card and the one at allegation 1.d. He also believed that they were listed on his credit 
report as two separate accounts in error. He contacted the creditor and the collection 
agency. He disputed this account with the credit reporting agencies. He believed he had 
resolved both the debts at allegations 1.d and 1.e by paying 1.d. However, the credit 
report lists two separate account numbers and this debt is not resolved. (GE 2, 3, 4; AE 
E; Tr. 43-52) 
 
Allegation 1.f ($299) – medical debt – RESOLVED 
  Applicant believed his health insurance would pay this debt related to a hospital 
visit. He received a settlement offer of $204 from the collection agency. He provided 
evidence that he paid the settlement amount on August 18, 2011. (AE B, J; Tr. 52) 
 
Allegation 1.g ($3,673) – auto loan – RESOLVED 
 Applicant co-signed on an auto loan for his girlfriend’s daughter. After a year, she 
returned the car to Applicant because it was having mechanical problems. Applicant 
assumed the payments, but subsequently voluntarily returned it to the dealer. When 
Applicant learned of the delinquency, he contacted the dealer and was informed the car 
had been sold. He contacted the credit reporting agencies to dispute that he owed any 
additional balance. TransUnion responded on August 2, 2011, that the account was 
accurate, but Equifax’s response of August 26, 2011, indicates that the charged-off 
account is now paid with a zero balance. (GE 2, 3, 4; AE E, H, L. M; Tr. 53-57) 
 
 Applicant’s site manager provided a letter noting that Applicant has a strong work 
ethic, and his performance is integral to the company’s success. Another manager 
described Applicant as a person who goes above and beyond what is required. His 
 
 
5 
trustworthiness makes him one of the few employees that the company allows to 
transport military cargo. (AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be an impartial, commonsense 
determination based on examination of available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3
 
 Decisions must 
also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines. 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.6
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
3 Directive. 6.3. 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 Applicant accrued approximately $19,000 in debts over the past several years. 
Some debts remain unpaid. The record supports application of disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and ¶19 (c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations). 
 
 The Financial Considerations guideline also contains factors that can mitigate 
security concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20, especially 
the following:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and, 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Although Applicant's debts are not in the distant past, AG ¶ 20 (a) applies 
because they are unlikely to recur. Applicant testified credibly that he realizes the 
mistakes he made, has learned from them, and will not repeat them in the future. In 
addition, his supervisors noted that his current assignment is based on his 
trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant has been making efforts to resolve his financial situation. Although the 
SOR alleged that he owed $19,206, Applicant disputed the single largest debt of more 
than $15,000, and the credit agency has removed it from his credit report. Applicant 
has resolved more than 75 percent of the alleged debt. Applicant has made a good 
faith effort, resulting in substantial progress in resolving his financial situation. He has 
 
 
7 
paid or otherwise resolved four debts, amounting to $15,414, including the largest debt 
in the SOR. AG ¶ 20 (c) and (d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
  
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant has resolved more than 75 percent of the SOR debt. He has sufficient 
income to have a positive monthly net remainder to resolve the remaining debts. 
Although Applicant has not yet resolved every debt listed in the SOR, the Appeal Board 
has held,  
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “’meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrates that he has ‘…established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
 
 
8 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR.7
 
  
 Applicant credibly testified that he accumulated seven debts over the past few 
years primarily because he believed it was his duty to support his girlfriend’s children 
when they needed financial assistance. Three of the seven debts resulted when 
Applicant co-signed for her children, and one when he co-signed on an account for his 
own daughter. He realizes that these actions have led to serious financial problems, 
and he will not engage in that activity again. He has resolved more than $15,400 of his 
debts, and the remaining small amount does not raise a security concern. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                 
7 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
