 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01920 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 22, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence.1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
                                                          
1 The SOR referred to the previous Directive language as it listed the concern under Guideline B. My 
analysis was based upon the current concern language as stated in the AG dated September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 11, 2011, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on June 24, 2011. The FORM was mailed to Applicant and 
he received it on July 15, 2011. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant responded in writing 
on July 16, 2011. The case was assigned to me on August 3, 2011.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning the 
Pakistan.2 Department Counsel provided supporting documents that verify detail and 
provide context for these facts in the Administrative Notice request. See the Pakistan 
section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, for the material facts from 
Department Counsel’s submissions on Pakistan.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.3 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. Those 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He was born in Lahore, Pakistan and became a United 
States naturalized citizen on November 16, 2001. He is not married, having been 
divorced in June 1987. His former wife lives in Canada. He has one daughter who is 30 
years old. He is president of his own consulting firm and is seeking a security clearance 
through a defense contractor for whom he consults. He has never held a security 
clearance. He holds a doctorate degree. He has no history of military service.5   
  
 Applicant came to the United States in 1980 to further his education. He did this 
by attaining both a master’s degree and a Ph.D. He stayed in this country and worked in 
the private sector. In 1995, he was granted permanent residence status. He has been 
the owner and president of his consulting business since 1999. Since becoming a 
                                                          
2 FORM p. 3. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). 
 
4 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
5 Item 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
citizen in 2001, he has voted in state and national elections and appeared for jury duty 
on two occasions. He is also involved with various community service activities. His 
daughter, son-in-law, and two granddaughters all live in the United States.6 
 
 Applicant has the following relatives who are residents and citizens of Pakistan:  
 
 1. One brother who lives in Lahore and is a physician in private practice. He is 66 
years old. Applicant has contact with his brother by telephone about twice a year.  
 
 2. One sister living in Islamabad who is a housewife. She is 63 years old. 
Applicant has contact with her by telephone about once a month.  
 
 3. Two step-sisters, one lives in Lahore and one in Karachi. They are both 
housewives. One step-sister is 82 years old and the other is 67. Applicant has 
telephone contact with them about once every year or two.  
 
 4. One brother-in-law who is a retired brigadier general in the Pakistan Army. He 
is 70 years old. He retired from the military in the mid-1990s. 
 
Applicant visited Pakistan in 2005 and 2007. He visited family and friends during his 
trips.7 
 
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic with a population of more than 167 
million people. After September 11, 2001, Pakistan supported the United States and an 
international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom to remove the Taliban from 
power. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in the Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan and in the Balochistan Province, which 
borders Iran and Afghanistan. The leader of the Taliban operates openly in Pakistan, as 
are extremists from the Pakistani Taliban and Al Qaida. Taliban financing has been 
traced from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to 
strengthen its military and technical capabilities. Pakistan has intensified its 
counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has been mixed. 
 
The U.S. Department of State has defined several areas of Pakistan to be 
terrorist safe havens. The security situation in Afghanistan worsened in 2008, driven in 
part by insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous 
Afghan-Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide vital 
sanctuary to Al Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups. 
Al-Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the Afghan 
insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and Western interests 
                                                          
6 Applicant’s Response to FORM, dated July 16, 2011 (AR). 
 
7 AR; Items 4, 6, 7. 
 
 
4 
 
 
in Pakistan and worldwide. Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremists 
groups, Al Qaida uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare 
regional and transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and 
supplies. Al Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of destabilizing suicide 
attacks throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high-profile government, military, and 
western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in 2008 due to such attacks. 
In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan conducted at least 40 
suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed about 600 Pakistani 
civilians and security force personnel.   
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to 
Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several American citizens present in 
Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other personal reasons. The human rights 
situation in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, and disappearances 
occur. Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is widespread, and the 
Pakistani government maintains several domestic intelligence agencies to monitor 
politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
intelligence agents. Credible reports indicate that authorities use wiretaps and monitor 
mail without the requisite court approval, and also monitor phones and electronic 
messages. In addition, Pakistan continues to develop its own nuclear infrastructure, 
expand nuclear weapon stockpiles, and seek more advanced warhead and delivery 
systems. In the aftermath of Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United 
States cut off military aid to Pakistan for several years.  
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the United States in 
counterterrorism methods. Pakistan committed to elimination of terrorist camps on the 
Pakistan-Afghanistan border and subsequently sent thousands of troops and sustained 
hundreds of casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency 
efforts, and demonstrated determination and persistence in combating militants. The 
United States is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster Pakistan’s military forces and 
security. In 2003, President Bush announced that the United States would provide 
Pakistan with $3 billion in economic and military aid over the next five years beginning 
in 2005. On May 1, 2011, U.S. Special Forces personnel raided a large al-Qa’ida 
compound located in Pakistan where they found and killed Osama bin Laden, the leader 
of al-Qa’ida. He was found in a residential neighborhood in Pakistan.   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
5 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
 
6 
 
 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply because of Applicant’s relationships with his brother, 
sister, step-sisters, and brother-in-law, who are living in Pakistan. Applicant was born in 
Pakistan.      
 
Applicant communicates with his sister on a monthly basis. His contacts with his 
other relatives are not as frequent; however, there is a rebuttable presumption that a 
person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, their immediate family members. 
Applicant has not attempted to rebut this presumption. Applicant’s relationships with his 
relatives living in Pakistan are sufficient to create “a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” His relationships with 
residents of Pakistan create a concern about Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive 
information or technology” and his desire to help his relatives who are in Pakistan. For 
example, if the Pakistan Government or terrorists in Pakistan wanted to expose 
Applicant to coercion, it could exert pressure on his brother, sister, step-sisters, or 
brother-in-law. Applicant would then be subject to indirect coercion through his 
relationship with his relatives and classified information could potentially be 
compromised. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Pakistan 
is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has 
a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
 
7 
 
 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of Pakistan with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his relatives living in Pakistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist his relatives living in Pakistan who might be coerced by 
terrorists or other Governmental entities in Pakistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”8 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or his 
relatives living in Pakistan, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
Although Applicant’s communications with his relatives, other than his sister, living in 
Pakistan are infrequent, he continues to feel an obligation to them and affection for 
them. Applicant’s concern for his relatives is a positive character trait that increases his 
trustworthiness; however, it also increases the concern about potential foreign 
influence. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence to raise the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and 
further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), 8(c), and 8(f) have limited applicability. Applicant traveled to 
Pakistan in 2005 and 2007. Applicant has limited contact with his relatives, other than 
his sister, who live in Pakistan. The amount of contacts between an Applicant and 
relatives living in a foreign country is not the only test for determining whether someone 
could be coerced through their relatives. Because of his connections to his brother, 
sister, step-sisters, and brother-in-law, Applicant is not able to fully meet his burden of 
showing there is “little likelihood that he could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation.” It is evidence that he feels an obligation to his relatives’ welfare.    
 
Applicant has “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He 
has strong family connections to the United States. His daughter and grandchildren live 
in the United States. Applicant also owns a business in the United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationships in the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his relatives who live in 
Pakistan. There is no evidence that terrorists, criminals, the Pakistan Government, or 
those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his relatives in 
Pakistan to coerce Applicant or his relatives for classified or sensitive information. 
Applicant has not yet received access to classified information and as such, there is a 
reduced possibility that Applicant or Applicant’s family would be specifically selected as 
targets for improper coercion or exploitation. While the Government does not have any 
burden to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence was present, 
Applicant would have a heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign 
influence security concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ recent 
relationship with Pakistan, and especially Pakistan’s systematic human rights violations 
and most of the ever present danger from terrorists and those who seek to damage U.S 
interests. The conduct of terrorists in Pakistan makes it more likely that terrorists would 
attempt to coerce Applicant through his relatives living in Pakistan, if the terrorists 
determined it was advantageous to do so.     
 
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with his relatives living in Pakistan. Applicant is not required to 
report his contacts with his relatives living in Pakistan. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has some applicability. Applicant has substantial property interests in 
the United States, which include his employment in the United States, and the value of 
his business in the United States. However, this mitigating condition can only fully 
mitigate security concerns raised under AG ¶ 7(e), which is not raised in this case. 
Applicant does not own any property or have any investments in Pakistan or elsewhere 
outside the United States.   
 
In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant’s relationships with his 
relatives, who live in Pakistan. These relatives are readily available for coercion. 
Although the Pakistan Government’s failure to follow the rule of law further increases 
the risk of coercion, the major cause of concern is the prevalence of terrorists in 
Pakistan.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support denial of Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards approval of his clearance at this time. Applicant’s relatives live in Pakistan. 
Terrorists have killed hundreds of Pakistani citizens in the last two years, and would not 
hesitate to coerce Applicant through his relatives to obtain classified information.  
Therefore, he failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
 
10 
 
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
