 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00423 
                                                                      )     
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On October 4, 2010, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 16, 2011, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR, dated March 30, 2011, and 
requested that his case be determined on the written record. The Government compiled 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on May 17, 2011. The FORM contained documents 
identified as Items 1 through 9. By letter dated May 25, 2011, DOHA forwarded a copy 
of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information and/or 
objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on June 6, 2011. His 
response was due on July 6, 2011. Applicant did not submit additional information within 
the required time period. On August 17, 2011, the case was assigned to me for a 
decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains one allegation of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶ 1.a.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the 
allegation but denied it was of security significance. Applicant’s admission is accepted 
as a finding of fact. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
  
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and by information provided by Applicant in his Answer to the SOR. The record 
evidence includes Applicant’s October 4, 2010 e-QIP; official investigation and agency 
records; Applicant’s responses to DOHA interrogatories;1 and Applicant’s credit reports 
of March 8, 2011, and October 9, 2010. (See Items 4 through 9.) 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old, has a high school education, and has been married 
twice. He lists no children on his e-QIP. Applicant married for the first time in 1986. He 
divorced his wife in 1999, after 13 years of marriage, because he and his wife differed 
on financial matters and how they should spend money. Applicant believed his wife’s 
tastes were too expensive for their income. Applicant married for the second time in 
2002. The record does not reflect whether Applicant’s second wife is employed or 
whether she has an income. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is employed in information technology by a federal contractor. He has 
worked for his employer for 15 years. He was first awarded a security clearance in 
1999. (Item 5.) 
 
 In 2007, Applicant purchased a recreational vehicle, on credit, for approximately 
$347,000. Applicant told the OPM investigator that in about January 2009, the account 
became past due, and it went into collection status in March 2009. Applicant returned 
the vehicle to the creditor in a voluntary repossession. After the vehicle was sold by the 
creditor, Applicant owed a deficiency of approximately $197,000. Applicant’s credit 
report of March 8, 2011, shows the debt has grown to $203,000 and is in charged-off 
 
1Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on October 21, 2010. On February 18, 2011, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant 
reviewed the investigator’s report, corrected the record to show that he had three and not two sisters as 
reported in the interview, and then signed a statement that the corrected investigator’s report accurately 
reflected his October 21, 2010, interview. (Item 6.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
status. The debt, which remains unresolved, is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. (Item 1; Item 5; 
Item 6; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant told the investigator that in 2004, he purchased a home as an 
investment property. In 2008, the account became past due. Applicant owed $315,000 
on his first mortgage and $250,000 on his second mortgage. The property was 
eventually sold in a short sale, and the creditor bank charged off the second mortgage. 
Applicant told the investigator he has no plans to repay the debts. (Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant’s credit reports reflect that in March 2008, he took out a vehicle loan for 
$58,000. The credit reports also show that January 2011, he took out a vehicle loan for 
$43,000. (Item 8; Item 9.) 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant acknowledged that the debt alleged at SOR 
¶ 1.a. remains unresolved. He stated that he was in financial trouble “starting in 2008 
when I was faced with extenuating circumstances such as a[n] unassisted job 
relocation, the housing crises, and living in a higher cost of living state to name a few.” 
He stated that he had resolved “a significant portion” of his credit card debt in the past 
two years. Applicant asserted that he had been in contact with the creditor of the debt 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a., and he intends to settle the debt at an unspecified time in the 
future. (Item 4 at 1.)   
 
 Applicant did not provide a personal financial statement. The record is silent 
regarding his income, his wife’s income, their monthly expenses, their savings, and 
other resources he has available for satisfying his delinquent debt. Applicant stated that 
he has had financial credit counseling. He told the investigator that he was living within 
his means. (Item 6.)  
 
                                           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
   
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
5 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns.   
 
Applicant owes a delinquent debt of approximately $203,000. He has been 
steadily employed with his employer since 1996, but he has failed to demonstrate that 
he has paid his debt or negotiated a payment plan with his creditor. This evidence is 
sufficient to raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
   
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies. The debt alleged in the SOR 
remains unresolved. He has made no arrangements to pay or otherwise satisfy this 
financial delinquency, which is ongoing. Applicant intends to resolve this large financial 
delinquency at some unspecified future time. In determining an individual's security 
worthiness, the Government cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant might 
resolve his or her outstanding debts at some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 at 5 
(App. Bd. Jul. 12, 1999).  
 
Applicant claimed that his delinquent debt was the consequence of several 
conditions beyond his control: a job relocation that was unreimbursed by his employer, 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
the housing crisis and economic downturn, and residence in a state with a high cost of 
living. However, he failed to provide documentation to corroborate his claims. While 
Applicant has apparently had financial credit counseling, he failed to show that he had a 
plan in place to settle or pay his delinquent debt of $203,000. While he may have been 
unable to control the economic downturn that affected his investment property, he failed 
to show that he acted reasonably under the circumstances. 
 
Applicant has been steadily employed with his current employer since 1996. He 
provided no information on his family income, regular expenses, and resources 
available to satisfy debts. His $203,000 debt remains unresolved. Applicant failed to 
demonstrate that he made a good-faith effort to satisfy this delinquent debt. There is no 
evidence that his financial situation is under control. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 
20(c), and 20(d) do not apply in mitigation in Applicant’s case.2 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. He 
made an investment in real property, and his investment was affected by an economic 
downturn. He purchased a recreational vehicle, and when he could not make the 
required payments, he returned it to the creditor. The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. is the 
deficiency he owes on the repossessed recreational vehicle. He has had a steady job 
since 1996. He says he will pay his $203,000 debt in the future, but he provides no 
specific plan for doing so.  
 
 
2 AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
7 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                Against Applicant 
   
                                                          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
