  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03285 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has addressed all but one of her delinquent debts and is attempting to 
find assistance in addressing that final debt. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the 
security concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 1, 2011, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. On June 20, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
1 
and requested a hearing. On August 1, 2011, I was assigned the case. On August 15, 
2011, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing for the hearing held on August 31, 2011.  
 
 At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and 
submitted exhibits A through G, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. On 
September 15, 2011, additional material was submitted. Department Counsel had no 
objection to the material, which was admitted into the record as Ex. H through Ex. M. 
On September 9, 2011, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR she admitted the debts listed in SOR 1.a, 1.h, 
1.i, and 1.j. She denied owing the remaining debts. Her admissions are incorporated 
herein. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old administrative assistant who has worked for a defense 
contractor since September 2010, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. Applicant’s 
supervisor states she has diligent work habits, superior interpersonal skills, excellent 
leadership skills, and is well liked and respected. (Ex. G)  
 
 In 2000 or 2001, Applicant—then age 16—obtained her first job. (Ex. 4) From 
2003 until 2010, when Applicant obtained her current job, she had a number of part-time 
and full-time jobs while attending college. When she was not in school, she worked full 
time. (Ex. 4) 
 
 In 2003, Applicant obtained $12,000 in student loans when she enrolled at one 
university. She also had part-time jobs and summer employment to help her pay for 
college. (Tr. 44) In May 2005, she obtained her bachelor’s degree from that university. 
(Ex. 1) She was the first person in her immediate family to graduate from college. (Tr. 
46) Between August 2008 and December 2008, she incurred additional student loans 
when she enrolled in another university. She stated she had made one or two $40 
payments on her student loans before losing track of them. Applicant has now 
consolidated five student loans that total approximately $17,000. (Ex. A) She now pays 
$84 monthly on the promissory note, but that amount is increasing to $164. (Tr. 24)  
 
 Following college graduation, Applicant worked two jobs, but one job entailed a 
30-to-40 minute commute and the cost of transportation became too great. (Tr. 38) With 
her current job she is addressing her debts. In 2009, Applicant accumulated a number 
of debts when she moved from one state to another. She moved to improve her 
employment opportunities. (Tr. 37) Prior to reviewing her October 2010 credit bureau 
report (CBR), she was unaware of a number of her current creditors.  
 
 
2 
 Applicant’s yearly income is approximately $45,000. (Tr. 24) As of April 2011, her 
net monthly income was approximately $3,300. (Ex. 5, Ex. K) Her monthly expenses 
were $2,300 and her monthly debt payment was $360, which left her with a monthly net 
remainder of more than $600. (Ex. 5)  
 
 Applicant is current on her $318 monthly automobile loan for her 2004 Mazda 
automobile. (Tr. 32) She has $79 bi-weekly contributed to her company’s savings plan, 
which is now more than $1,400. (Ex. K) She also contributes $25 monthly to an IRA, 
which now has a balance of approximately $1,300. (Ex. L) She has talked with a money 
management company. She discussed being financially responsible, living within her 
means, and saving for emergencies. (Tr. 33) The sole remaining debt she needs to 
address is the Sallie Mae student loan. Since the money management company could 
not help her with that debt, she is no longer with the company. (Tr. 34) She is 
attempting to find assistance in addressing this debt. She has watched financial shows 
on television and gone online to read about financial planning. (Tr. 42)  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s delinquent accounts and their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a. Charged-off account for a 
credit card account.  
$820 Paying. She is making $25 monthly 
payments on this debt and has done so 
for four or five months. (Ex. 5, Ex. I, Ex. 
J, Tr. 26, 27)  
b. Student loan collection 
account. 
$7,613 
 
The five student loans have been 
consolidated into a single promissory 
note on which she makes monthly 
payments. (Ex. A, Tr. 24) The note is in 
good standing. (Tr. 47)  
c. Student loan collection 
account. 
$7,109 
 
Student loans have been consolidated 
into a single debt. See b. above.  
d. Student loan collection 
account. 
$4,523 Student loans have been consolidated 
into a single debt. See b. above. 
e. Student loan collection 
account. 
$3,296 Student loans have been consolidated 
into a single debt. See b. above. 
f. Student loan collection 
account. 
$693 Student loans have been consolidated 
into a single debt. See b. above. 
g. The Sallie student loan 
did not qualify for 
consolidation with her 
other student loans. 
$8,241 In March 2011, Applicant made a $25 
payment on this debt. (Ex. 5) She is still 
attempting to address this debt. (Tr. 29) 
 
 
3 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
h. Department store 
charged-off credit card 
account. 
$933 Paying. Applicant made five monthly 
payments on this debt. (Ex. 5, Tr. 29) 
She was unable to pay a lump-sum 
settlement offer. (Tr. 41)  
i Credit card collection 
account.  
$1,895 Paying. Applicant has made six monthly 
payments of $25 on this debt. (Ex. 5, 
Ex. H, Ex. M) 
j Collection account. 
 
$448 Paid. Applicant accepted and paid a 
$235 settlement offer. (Ex. 5, Tr. 30)  
k Collection account. 
 
$2,652 Paying. Since April 2011, Applicant has 
made five $30 monthly payments on 
this debt. (Ex. H, Ex. M) 
 Total debt listed in SOR $38,223  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
4 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had 11 collection 
accounts or charged-off accounts that totaled in excess of $38,000. Five of the 
collection accounts and one charged-off account were for student loans, which 
 
5 
represented 82 percent of her total delinquent debt. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 All but one of Applicant’s collection accounts or charged-off accounts have been 
addressed. She is still attempting to address her Sallie Mae student loan ($8,241). Her 
other five student loans have been consolidated into a single obligation on which she 
makes monthly payments. She accepted and paid a settlement offer on one collection 
account (SOR 1.j, $448) and has been making monthly payments on the remaining 
obligations for the past five or six months.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), 82 percent of the debt related to student loans. Applicant has 
completed college and has started to repay her loans. Shortly after graduation, she was 
working two jobs. With her current job she is addressing the majority of her past-due 
obligations. Additional student loans for college will not recur and since she is 
addressing the majority of her student loan obligation, her debts do not cast doubt on 
her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The mitigating condition in AG 
¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 20(b) has limited application. Following college 
graduation, Applicant was able to find only minimally paying jobs. With her current job 
 
6 
she is now addressing her debts. This shows she is acting responsibly under the 
circumstances. 
 
Applicant has gone online seeking financial counseling and viewed financial 
planning programs. She is putting money into her company’s savings plan and has 
additional money going to a retirement account. She is addressing all but one of her 
debts. The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 20(c) applies. She has received counseling and 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control. 
 
Applicant paid one debt and for the past five or six months she has been making 
monthly payments on four additional debts. She has made payments for a sufficient 
time that it is likely she will continue with these payments until the debts are fully paid. 
She is also repaying the majority of her student loans. The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 
20(d) applies. She has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Applicant has yet to address the final student loan, which did not qualify for 
consolidation with her other student loans. She wants to pay this debt. An applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that she has paid off each and every debt 
listed in the SOR. Nor is there a requirement that a plan provide for payments on all 
outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for the 
payment of such debts one at a time.  
 
How Applicant is addressing her other debts must be evaluated in determining 
the likelihood she will follow through on her assertion that she will pay the final debt. In 
evaluating financial consideration cases, the concept of “‘meaningful track record” 
includes evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. Applicant must 
demonstrate that she has established a plan to resolve her financial problems and taken 
significant actions to implement that plan. Because she has done so with ten of the 
eleven debts and has made a sufficient number of monthly payments, it is likely she will 
also address the remaining Sallie Mae student loan. The sole remaining debt to be 
addressed does not raise concerns about her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
8 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
types that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The SOR debts were not incurred on 
luxuries, but the majority was spent for student loans. Applicant went to college and 
incurred debts. Following, graduation she was able to obtain only low-paying jobs. 
Approximately a year ago, she obtained her current job and has since been addressing 
her debts. Applicant is not living beyond her means. She drives a 2004 Mazda 
automobile. The size of her credit card debt, which she is now addressing, does not 
give rise to a security concern.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all her debts are paid—it is whether her financial 
circumstances raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a—1.k:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
  
