                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-01325 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines 
F, Financial Considerations and E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 23, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 7, 2011, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 25, 2011. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on July 27, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 16, 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, and they were admitted into 
evidence without objections. Applicant testified on his own behalf and offered Exhibits 
(AE) A though J. They were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 25, 2011.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel amended the SOR to add ¶¶ 2.a 
through 2.g under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The amended SOR was marked as 
Hearing Exhibit I. Applicant was advised of his right to proper notice and I offered him 
the opportunity to delay the hearing for 30 days. He waived his right and elected to 
proceed with the hearing.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the original SOR except ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f. 
He admitted all of the allegations in the amended SOR. I incorporated his admissions 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 53 years old. He has been working for a federal contractor since 
November 2009. He served in the Navy from 1979 until 1999, when he retired as an E-
6. He married in 1981. He and his wife have two adult children, a son, age 30 and a 
daughter, age 23, who is in college.2  
 
Applicant admitted he did not pay all of his income taxes for tax years 2004, 
2006, 2007, 2009, and 2010. He explained that during some of this time he was working 
as an independent civilian contractor and he failed to handle his income taxes 
appropriately. He was unemployed from October 2005 to February 2006 and from 
October 2009 to November 2009.3  
 
 Applicant stated that for tax year 2004, he filed his tax returns, and he owed 
about $4,000. He did not pay the amount when it was due, but it was paid later as part 
of an installment agreement.4 It is unclear exactly when the debt was satisfied. In 2005, 
he timely filed his tax return. He stated he paid his taxes for 2005. He did not timely file 
his 2006 income tax returns. He did not pay his 2006 income taxes when they were 
due. His adjusted gross income for 2006 was $135,825. He owed $22,750 in taxes for 
that year. Applicant did not timely file his 2007 income tax return. He received an 
extension, but failed to file during the extension. He owed $24,813 for income taxes for 
1 Tr. 98-107. 
 
2 Tr. 83-84. 
 
3 Tr. 36-37. 
 
4 Tr. 31-32. The installment agreement was initiated in 2007. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
2007.  This amount included interest and penalties. He did not pay these taxes when 
they were due. In 2007, he contacted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to establish an 
installment agreement to pay his back taxes. He agreed to make monthly payments of 
$1,500. Applicant stated he filed his 2008 and 2009 income tax returns on time and did 
not owe taxes. He filed his 2010 income tax returns and owed $764, but did not pay it. 
He stated he added the amount to his installment agreement. From November 2007 
through May 2011, Applicant repeatedly made new installment agreements with the 
IRS. He would occasionally make a payment on each new agreement, but he never 
made consistent monthly payments as required. He repeatedly defaulted on the 
agreement. His installment agreement from November 19, 2010, requires him to make 
payments of $950 a month. He made four payments from December 2010 to March 
2011. He has not made any other payments. In July 2011, he made another new 
installment agreement with the IRS, and he stated he made the first payment of $950. 
He did not provide documented proof of this payment.5  
 
 Applicant does not know what the cumulative current balance is that he owes to 
the IRS. The documents he provided do not provide the total balance owed with interest 
and penalties. He explained he had no excuse for not paying his taxes. The latest 
installment agreement Applicant has with the IRS includes tax years 2006, 2007, and 
2010. Applicant’s credit reports list a federal tax lien filed in May 2009 for $50,197.6 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($216) was charged-off. Applicant provided proof that he 
satisfied the debt on June 28, 2011. He explained the debt was a judgment and he paid 
$3,000.7 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,664) is a state tax lien for unpaid taxes. Applicant 
admitted the debt in his answer to the SOR. At his hearing, he stated he disputed the 
debt two weeks ago, but did not provide documents to support his dispute. He stated 
there are two tax liens with the state. He arranged an installment agreement to repay 
one of the liens ($14,000) and disputed the remaining one that is in ¶ 1.c. The 
agreement provides for him to pay $301.80 a month beginning in April 2011. He stated 
he made one payment in June 2011. He has not made any other payments. He did not 
know how many tax years the state tax lien includes. He did not provide any documents 
to support his position.8 
 
5 Tr. 20-23, 29-47, 50-60; AE A-G. There is a detailed history of each time Applicant made a new 
installment agreement with the IRS in AE B, C, D and E.  
 
6 Tr. 23-24; GE 3, 4, 5.  
 
7 AE H. 
 
8 Tr. 24-25, 60-69. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 The judgment in SOR ¶ 1.d ($676) was filed in February 2008. Applicant paid it 
on August 5, 2011. He explained he did not pay it earlier because he did not have the 
money. The judgment is resolved.9  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($236) is a collection account for a cable company. 
Applicant paid the debt in August 2011. The debt was incurred in 2004. The debt is 
resolved.10 
 
 Applicant disputes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($471). He stated he spoke with the 
creditor and does not believe the debt belongs to him. He did not provide any 
documents to support his dispute.11 
 
 Applicant completed a personal financial statement (PFS) on March 14, 2011, 
that reflected his current finances. It reflects that after paying his monthly expenses he 
has $378 remaining. It reflects that he is paying $950 a month to the IRS. Applicant has 
not made that payment since March 2011. He stated he began a new installment 
agreement in July 2011 and resumed the payments, but did not provide proof. Applicant 
purchased a new car in 2007 that cost $50,000. His monthly car payments are $1,060. 
He also noted that his wife sends their daughter $1,000 a month for her expenses. This 
amount is not included in the PFS. He listed he spends $100 on miscellaneous items. 
He provided a copy of a partial monthly bank statement that reflects charges on his 
check card account. For an eight day period he accumulated over $128 in 
miscellaneous expenses for golf and purchasing coffee. Applicant has not participated 
in any financial counseling.12  
 
 Applicant’s wife has been steadily employed since 2003 and earns approximately 
$55,000. Before then she worked and earned about $36,000. Applicant receives 
approximately $16,800 in military retirement pay before taxes. He estimated he had 
about $3,200 in his bank accounts. Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 1999. 
He completed the repayment plan in approximately 2003. He explained he defaulted on 
a mortgage for a home he purchased in 1987. He owed a $38,000 deficiency on the 
mortgage for the foreclosed property. He purchased another house in 1997 and sold it 
in 2004. He made a $140,000 profit on the sale. He used $60,000 for a down payment 
on a new home. He paid the $38,000 deficiency he owed. He used $25,000 to pay off a 
car loan on a new car he purchased for $35,000 in 2002. He used the remaining money 
to pay bills. Based on the IRS documents Applicant provided, he and his wife had a 
combined adjustable gross income in 2006 of $135,825; 2007 of $114,268; 2008 of 
$55,897; and 2009 of $74,238.13  
9 Tr. 25-27, 69-70; AE I. 
 
10 Tr. 27, 70; AE J. 
 
11 Tr. 28, 70-71. 
 
12 Tr. 65-80, 86; AE J. 
 
13 Tr. 34-38, 85, 47-50, 88-97. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) on September 7, 
2010. He responded “no” to Section 26: 
 
(c) Have you failed to pay Federal, state, or other taxes or to file a tax 
return, when required by law or ordinance? (d) Have you had a lien placed 
against your property for failing to pay taxes or other debts? (e) Have you 
had a judgment entered against you? 
 
.     .     . 
 
(g) Have you had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency? (h) 
Have you had any account or credit card suspended or charged off, or 
cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? 
 
.     .     . 
 
(m) Have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)? (n) Have 
you been over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?”14 
 
 Applicant admitted he knew when he completed the SCA that he had financial 
delinquencies. He admitted he intentionally falsified his SCA. He stated he had no 
explanation for why he intentionally falsified his SCA.15  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
14 Tr. 98-108. 
 
15 Tr.106-108 
 
6 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
7 
 
 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose on his security clearance application that 
he failed to file his 2004 income tax return on time; that he failed to pay his 2006 income 
taxes; that he filed his 2007 income tax returns, but failed to pay the income taxes for 
the year; that he filed his 2010 income tax return, but failed to pay his income taxes. 
Applicant also failed to disclose he had a federal tax lien. He failed to disclose he had a 
state tax lien. He failed to disclose he had a judgment entered against him. He failed to 
disclose he had debts that were turned over to a collection agency. He failed to disclose 
he had an account charged off. He failed to disclose he had debts over 180 days 
delinquent; and he failed to disclose he had debts over 90 days delinquent. Applicant’s 
actions were intentional. I find AG ¶ 16 (a) applies. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions and conclude none apply. 
Applicant was aware of his financial circumstances and deliberately failed to disclose 
any of his financial problems. He did not promptly make a good-faith effort to correct his 
omission. His omissions are not minor, but rather are serious. There is no evidence to 
suggest that there were unique circumstances surrounding his omissions. His actions 
cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant 
acknowledged his actions were deliberate; however, there is no evidence to suggest the 
behavior is unlikely to recur or that he has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
 
8 
 
 
his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. Applicant intentionally 
concealed all negative information about his finances. He did this knowing he had tax 
debts and other delinquent debts.  
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns under AG & 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant admitted he failed to file his Federal income tax returns for 2004. He 
failed to pay his federal income taxes on time for tax years 2004, 2006, 2007, and 2010. 
He failed to pay his state income taxes timely. He had other delinquent debts that he did 
not pay until recently and others that are not resolved. I find there is sufficient evidence 
to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
9 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has been irresponsible with his finances. He repeatedly did not pay his 
federal income taxes. He repeatedly made installment agreements with the IRS then 
failed to make consistent payments. He only recently paid some of his delinquent debts. 
Based on his history of making agreements to pay his past federal income taxes and 
failing to make consistent monthly payments, I cannot find that his financial problems 
are unlikely to recur. I find AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant was unemployed and 
underemployed for a period of time. These conditions were beyond his control. For the 
full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. He did not do so. Applicant had years when his income was sufficient to 
resolve his past debts and he did not. I find AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies. There is 
no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. He did not convince me that 
there are clear indications his financial problems are being resolved or under control. He 
owes a large federal income tax debt. Based on his PFS and his history of spending, it 
does not appear he will be able to make his payments to the IRS. Applicant did not 
provide documented proof regarding some of his delinquent debts. He disputed a debt, 
but did not provide documents to substantiate his dispute. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d), and 
20(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
10 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant has delinquent federal taxes and state taxes. He repeatedly failed to abide by 
installment agreements he had with the IRS. He intentionally falsified his security 
clearance application. His budget does not reflect a realistic plan to resolve his debts 
and is incomplete. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines 
for Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.g:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
