 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00247 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 2, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
On May 11, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on August 3, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
August 10, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on August 30, 2011. 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s list of exhibits was marked as 
hearing exhibit (HE) 1. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through E, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was left open until 
September 20, 2011, for Applicant to submit additional matters. Applicant timely 
submitted AE F that was admitted into evidence without objection. Department 
Counsel’s memorandum forwarding the post-hearing exhibit was marked as HE 2. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 9, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer for about 14 months. She was home schooled and has a General 
Educational Development (GED) certificate. She recently started attending college. She 
is divorced and has two children, ages 6 and 13. This is the first time that she has 
applied for a security clearance.1  
 
 The SOR alleges eleven delinquent debts totaling about $21,201. These debts 
were listed on credit reports obtained on October 13, 2010, and January 22, 2011. In 
her answer, Applicant admitted each of the allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.k), but 
denied the security concern paragraph (SOR ¶ 1). Her admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant attributes her financial difficulties to a failed marriage and medical 
problems. She indicated that, before her marriage, she had no financial problems. She 
married in February 2009. Her husband was employed when they married, but soon 
thereafter lost his job. She stated that he liked to spend money and obtained credit 
cards in her name without her knowledge. She indicated her marriage started “falling 
apart” in November 2009. They separated in December 2009 and divorced in June 
2010. During the divorce proceeding, she attempted to hold him responsible for the 
credit cards that he opened in her name. A special master in that proceeding, however, 
advised her that she could not prove he opened those accounts. Her divorce decree 
indicates that each party is responsible for debts in their names. At the hearing, she 
indicated that some of the delinquent debts were hers or were incurred with her 
knowledge. Although she did not recall specifics about certain debts, she did not identify 
any specific debt as being a credit card that her ex-husband opened in her name 
without her knowledge.3 
 
 From January 2004 to October 2008, Applicant was employed as an office 
administrator at a medical rehabilitation center. In October 2008, she contracted Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever. Due to that illness, she was unable to work and was 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 3-5, 27-31; GE 1. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 3, 4; AE D. 
 
3 Tr. at 39-49, 65-69, 73-80; GE 1, 2; AE C. 
 
 
3 
 
unemployed from October 2008 to January 2010. This illness affects the central 
nervous system. She indicated that she had memory loss, tremors, and extreme fatigue. 
She could not care for her children and moved in with her parents so that they could 
care for her and her children. Unable to walk more than a couple steps at a time, she 
used a wheelchair to move around. She had no income during her illness, but received 
health benefits from October 2008 to March 2009. At that time, she was also receiving 
financial support from her parents and her church. She applied for disability benefits, but 
they were denied. She was told her illness was not a debilitating disease. She was sent 
to see a psychiatrist, but never appealed the denial decision. She was medically cleared 
to begin working again in January 2010 and started working the following month.4 
 
 Applicant provided no proof of payments or settlement arrangements for the 
delinquent debts. She indicated that she contacted the credit card companies to see if 
they would settle the debts or lower the interest rates. However, she found that the 
credit card companies were unwilling to work with her. She decided that the only way to 
move forward was to file bankruptcy. She acknowledged that issuance of the SOR got 
her “in gear” to file bankruptcy.5 
 
  On June 14, 2011, Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition without the 
assistance of an attorney. As a prerequisite to that filing, she received financial 
counseling. The petition reflects that her assets totaled $123,950 and her liabilities 
totaled $47,073. She initially stated that all of the debts were included in the bankruptcy. 
However, two debts (SOR ¶ 1.b and 1.c, medical debts for $442 and $291, respectively) 
could not be found in the petition. She later testified that she may have paid those two 
medical debts, but provided no proof of payment. At the creditors meeting, the 
bankruptcy trustee advised her that she did not properly fill out the sections in the 
petition concerning her home. She eventually decided to hire an attorney to assist her 
with completing the necessary bankruptcy documents. Her mother loaned her the 
money to hire the attorney. At the time of the hearing, the bankruptcy was still pending, 
but Applicant indicated it would soon be completed.6 
 
 Applicant stated she is meeting her current expenses. She also stated that she 
incurred no new delinquent debts since returning to work. However, a review of her 
latest credit reports reflected that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c were placed for 
collection in October 2010, which was after she returned to work. She currently has no 
credit cards and operates on a cash-only basis. The last time she opened a credit card 
was before she was married. She testified that she has paid some medical and hospital 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 31-37, 65-66; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 49-54.  
 
6 Tr. at 49-54, 70-72, 80-84, 92; GE 2; AE E. The debt in SOR ¶1.d, a credit card debt, is listed in 
the bankruptcy petition as a debt for wedding attire. See GE 2 at I-5. The bankruptcy petition lists a 
number of hospital bills that could possibly be the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. Applicant did not provide 
a bankruptcy discharge certificate in her post-hearing submission. 
 
 
4 
 
bills. Within the five months preceding the hearing, she stated that she paid $400 to her 
family doctor and her family doctor bills are now current.7 
 
 Applicant’s bankruptcy petition reflects that her average monthly income was 
$2,110 and her average monthly expenses were $2,037, leaving her a net monthly 
remainder of less than $100. Beside her salary, she also receives $50 per week in child 
support for her older child. She has not been able to locate the father of her younger 
child to obtain child support. Since October 2007, she has owned a home. She 
estimated that her home was worth $118,000, with a mortgage balance of $42,000. 
Throughout her financial difficulties, she has been able to pay the $375 monthly 
mortgage payments. At the time of the hearing, her checking account had a balance of 
about $1,000 and her savings account had a zero balance.8 
 
 Applicant consulted with a family financial advisor in May or June 2011. The 
financial advisor counseled her about budgeting and rebuilding her credit. Her 
supervisor indicated that she has a good work ethic and is a reliable employee. He 
considers her to be trustworthy individual who will protect controlled documents.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 52-54, 56-69, 85; GE 1, 2. 
 
8 Tr. at 27-31, 56-69, 85; GE 1, 2; AE E. 
 
9 Tr. at 86-88; GE 1; AE A. 
 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to satisfy them for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
6 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are not minor, and they are ongoing and 
unresolved. Due to health problems, she was unemployed from October 2008 to 
January 2010. During her illness, she had no income and relied upon her parents and 
her church for financial assistance. In 2009, she also experienced a failed marriage. 
These events were conditions beyond her control that caused her financial problems. 
To be fully applicable, however, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act 
responsibly under the circumstances. In January 2010, she was medically cleared to 
begin working again and, soon thereafter, found employment. She provided no proof 
that she has made any payments on the delinquent debts since returning to work; 
however, her salary only allows her to meet her current living expenses. Since starting 
her current job, she has incurred additional delinquent debts. She acknowledged that 
the issuance of the SOR prompted her to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy, which is still 
pending. Based on these circumstances, I cannot conclude that she has acted in a 
financially responsible manner since returning to work, that her delinquent debts are 
unlikely to recur, or that they do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment. I find that AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable, but ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable. 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling during the bankruptcy process and also 
consulted with a family financial advisor. Her bankruptcy petition was only recently filed. 
At this point, it is unknown whether she will obtain a bankruptcy discharge. Given these 
circumstances, it is also too soon to tell if she will resolve her outstanding delinquent 
 
7 
 
debts in a reasonable time and then continue to be a financially responsible person. 
Based on the record evidence, the likelihood of additional or continuing financial 
problems cannot be ruled out. I find AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable and ¶ 20(d) is not 
applicable. Since she admitted each of the delinquent debts, AG ¶ 20(e) is not 
applicable. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant found herself in a difficult situation when she contracted an illness that 
prevented her from working for over a year. She also experienced a failed marriage 
during that time period. Despite such mitigation, her financial problems remain a 
security concern. At this point, it is unknown whether her bankruptcy proceeding will 
resolve her financial problems. Additionally, she has incurred new delinquent debts 
since returning to work. In the absence of an established track record of meeting her 
financial obligations, insufficient evidence exists to conclude that her financial problems 
are behind her. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
