 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00391   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Palmer A. Hoovestal, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated personal conduct and alcohol consumption security 
concerns, but he has not mitigated drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 14, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
H (drug involvement), E (personal conduct), and G (alcohol consumption). The action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 12, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 2, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on August 10, 2011, scheduling the hearing for August 31, 
 
2 
 
2011, by video teleconference. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified, called three witnesses, and submitted exhibits (AE) A and B, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant’s counsel’s memorandum is marked hearing 
exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 6, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has a bachelor’s 
degree. He is married with two adult children.1 
  
 Applicant smoked marijuana a few times a year from 1978 to June 2010. His 
marijuana use usually occurred at his family’s cabin several hours from his home. He 
usually smoked the marijuana with one or more of his siblings, who would leave the 
marijuana at the cabin. He stated that his marijuana use was rare. He sometimes went 
more than a year without smoking marijuana, and he did not purchase the drug.2 
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in November 1996. 
He answered “No” to the question that asked if he had used any illegal substances, 
including marijuana, in the last seven years. Applicant initially denied intentionally 
falsifying the SCA. In his response to the SOR, he stated that he “answered ‘No’ 
because at the time [he] considered [his] marijuana use to be so rare and infrequent 
that [he] considered it to be non-use and did not even approach the use that seemed to 
be contemplated by the question.” At his hearing, Applicant admitted that his failure to 
list the marijuana use was intentional. He stated that his response to the SOR was 
poorly worded.3 I find that Applicant intentionally falsified his SCA. 
 
 Applicant received his security clearance sometime after he submitted his SCA. 
He continued to periodically smoke marijuana while he held his clearance. Applicant left 
his job in 2001, and went to work for a company that did not require a security 
clearance.4  
 
 Applicant tested positive for the active ingredient in marijuana during a random 
drug screening test administered by his employer in September 2008. Applicant was 
permitted to retain his job, but he was subjected to additional drug tests. He was 
required to sign a document certifying that he understood that he would be terminated 
from his position if he tested positive again.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 66; GE 1, 3. 
 
2 Tr. at 38-39, 47, 52-57; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 36-37, 66-69; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3. 
 
4 Tr. at 42-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 42-47, 60; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant received a chemical dependency assessment by a licensed addiction 
counselor (LAC) in November 2008. The LAC concluded that Applicant had abused 
marijuana, but he did not have an apparent dependence on marijuana. The LAC also 
noted that Applicant “does have a dependence upon alcohol and I am recommending 
an intensive outpatient treatment for alcohol dependence.”6 
 
 Applicant passed multiple drug tests after his 2008 positive test. He liked his job, 
and he was aware that smoking marijuana could cause him to lose the job. He stated 
that he did not use marijuana for 18 months. He smoked marijuana during a visit to the 
cabin in June 2010. He tested positive on a drug test administered shortly thereafter, 
and he was terminated from his job.7  
 
 Applicant completed a chemical dependency evaluation by a different LAC in 
June 2010. The LAC determined that Applicant met the criteria for alcohol abuse and 
cannabis abuse. He did not meet the criteria for treatment placement as specified by the 
American Society of Addiction Medicine. The LAC recommended that Applicant 
“achieve and maintain abstinence from marijuana and other non-prescribed mood-
altering substances and limit and monitor [his] alcohol consumption.”8 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
June 2010. Applicant listed marijuana use from “02/1978 (Estimated) to 06/2010.” He 
wrote that he “smoked pot occasionally/socially since college.” He stated that he had 
not used marijuana since his termination from employment in June 2010, and he would 
never use it again. Applicant noted that the U.S. Government “investigated [his] 
background and/or granted [him] a security clearance in 1997.” Applicant mistakenly 
checked “No” in the box asking about use of a controlled substance while holding a 
security clearance. That answer was not intended to deceive, as the same information 
was essentially provided under other questions.9 
 
 Applicant disputes the 2008 assessment that he is alcohol dependent. He 
accepts that he could be evaluated as an alcohol abuser. He admitted that when he 
smoked marijuana, he was usually drinking beer. He believes the evaluation was based 
upon his lifetime drinking habits. He stated that he drank more when he was younger. 
He stated that he still drinks beer occasionally, but only about three beers a week. He 
has never been arrested on an alcohol-related charge.10  
 
Applicant stated that he does not intend to use illegal drugs again. He has not 
used marijuana since his positive drug test. He has not discontinued association with 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 61-63; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 44-45, 58-59. 
 
8 Tr. at 64-65; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE B. 
 
9 Tr. at 39-40; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
10 Tr. at 48-50, 63-66; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
his siblings, and he still goes to the family cabin. He stated that one of his siblings no 
longer smokes marijuana. His other sibling may still smoke marijuana, but Applicant told 
the sibling not to do it around him and not to bring it to the cabin. Applicant is willing to 
sign a statement of intent not to use illegal drugs, with automatic revocation of his 
clearance for any violation.11  
 
 Three witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf, and attested to Applicant’s 
excellent job performance, responsibility, reliability, trustworthiness, patriotism, 
competence, professionalism, and judgment. The witnesses recommended Applicant 
for a security clearance.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 39, 41, 45-48, 57-58; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
12 Tr. at.15-35. 
 
5 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;13  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant possessed and smoked marijuana a few times a year from 1978 to 
June 2010. He used marijuana while he held a security clearance from about 1997 to 
2001. He tested positive for marijuana use in 2008 and 2010. All of the above 
disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
                                                          
13 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
6 
 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana periodically for much of his adult life. He smoked 
marijuana a few times a year, but he also went a year or more without using the drug. 
He did not list his marijuana use on his SCA in 1996, and he was granted a security 
clearance. He continued to smoke marijuana after he received his security clearance. 
He tested positive for marijuana in September 2008. He was permitted to retain his job, 
but he was required to sign a document certifying that he understood that he would be 
terminated from his position if he tested positive again. He again smoked marijuana in 
June 2010. He tested positive, and he was terminated. 
 
 Applicant stated that he does not intend to use illegal drugs again, and he is 
willing to sign a statement of intent not to use illegal drugs, with automatic revocation of 
his clearance for any violation. There is no bright-line rule for when conduct is recent. 
Applicant has not used illegal drugs since June 2010, about 15 months ago. He appears 
sincere in his desire to remain drug-free. However, he previously signed a document 
acknowledging that he would be terminated if he tested positive again, and he later 
smoked marijuana with full knowledge that it could cost him a job that he liked. 
Applicant may not use marijuana again; however, I am unable to conclude that illegal 
drug use is completely in his past. Applicant’s drug use continues to cast doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) has limited applicability. He 
does not receive full mitigation under AG ¶ 26(b) for the same rationale. In sum, I 
conclude that security concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
7 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his SCA in 1996 when he failed to list his 
marijuana use. AG ¶ 16(a) is applicable as it relates to that application. He did not 
deliberately falsify his SF 86 in 2010. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable to that application. 
SOR ¶ 2.b is concluded for Applicant. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant provided intentionally false information on his SCA in 1996. There is no 
evidence that the falsification was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or 
inadequate advice of authorized personnel, or that he made a prompt, good-faith effort 
to correct the falsification before being confronted with the facts. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(b) 
are not applicable. 
 
 
8 
 
Applicant left the job requiring a security clearance in 2001. When he was rehired 
and required to reapply for a security clearance in 2010, he fully listed his marijuana 
use. I find that Applicant has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. I further find that such behavior is unlikely to 
recur, and it no longer casts doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) are applicable. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program. 
 
Applicant was given chemical dependency evaluations by licensed addiction 
counselors following his positive drug tests in 2008 and 2010. In 2008, he was found to 
be alcohol dependent. In 2010, the LAC determined that Applicant met the criteria for 
alcohol abuse. AG ¶ 22(e) is applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). 
 
 Applicant accepts his evaluation as an alcohol abuser. He believes the 
evaluation was based upon his lifetime drinking habits. He has reduced his drinking to 
about three beers a week. He has never been arrested on an alcohol-related charge. I 
give the most recent evaluation the most weight. I find that Applicant has established a 
pattern of responsible alcohol use. Applicant’s alcohol consumption does not cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) are 
applicable. 
 
9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H, E, and G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. I found him to be a 
credible witness and tend to believe that he will probably not use marijuana again. 
However, Applicant lied about his drug use in 1996, and then used drugs while holding 
a security clearance. He flunked a drug test in 2008. He was permitted to keep a job 
that he liked, knowing he would lose the job if he tested positive again. Despite many 
good reasons to finally put marijuana in his past, Applicant once again smoked 
marijuana. At this time, 15 months of abstinence is not enough to mitigate Applicant’s 
incidents of extremely poor judgment and disregard for the law.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated personal conduct and alcohol consumption security concerns, but he has not 
mitigated drug involvement security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
