                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00191  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 15, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 2, 2011, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 1, 2011. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on August 10, 2011, scheduling the hearing for September 1, 2011, by 
video teleconference. The hearing date was changed at Applicant’s request to 
September 2, 2011. An amended notice of hearing was issued on August 19, 2011. The 
 
1 
 
 
2 
 
                                                          
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 
4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, but he did not submit any 
documentary evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 12, 
2011.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old truck driver for a defense contractor. He has worked 
for his current employer since July 2010. He is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time. He is a high school graduate. He has never been married, but he is in a 
committed relationship. He does not have children.1 
  
 Applicant was the driver/owner operator of a trucking business that he started in 
2004. Applicant’s truck had multiple mechanical problems requiring costly repairs. He 
had difficulty paying all his bills, and a number of debts became delinquent. Applicant 
closed the business in 2006 and returned to driving for other companies.2 
  
 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts totaling about $37,900. The debts range 
from a $43 medical debt to $18,987 for the deficiency on a loan after Applicant’s pickup 
truck was voluntarily repossessed. Applicant admitted owing all the debts.  
 
 Applicant has not made any payments on any of the delinquent debts alleged in 
the SOR. He paid several debts that were not alleged. His net income is only slightly 
more than his monthly expenses, and he has been unable to pay anything other than 
his normal bills. He consulted with a debt reduction company and an attorney. They told 
him that his financial situation could best be resolved by filing bankruptcy. Applicant was 
referred to a bankruptcy attorney. Applicant plans to retain the attorney and file a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition. He will receive a substantial increase in income if he is 
granted a security clearance.3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
1 Tr. at 22-23; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 15; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 16-23; GE 1-4. 
 
3 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
4 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were related to his failed trucking business. That 
qualifies as a condition that was outside his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) 
also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant paid 
some debts that were not alleged in the SOR. He has not made any payments on any of 
the debts alleged in the SOR. His monthly net income is only slightly more than his 
monthly expenses, and he has not been able to pay any of his older debts. His plan is to 
resolve his debts through bankruptcy. He has not yet retained his bankruptcy attorney. 
Applicant hopes to be granted a security clearance and receive the additional salary 
that will come with his clearance. In the meantime, he is unable to pay more than his 
monthly expenses.  
 
 Applicant appears to be sincere in his desire to address his financial problems. 
However, he does not have a track record of financial responsibility. I find that 
 
5 
 
Applicant’s finances are not yet under control. His financial issues are recent and 
ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 
20(d) are not applicable. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) are partially applicable. I find that 
financial concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has not made any payments toward the delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR. His plan is to discharge his debts through bankruptcy and obtain a security 
clearance, which will enable him to earn a greater salary and become more financially 
secure. If he can establish a track record of financial responsibility, he should be given 
that opportunity. While I believe that Applicant can arrive at that position, he is not there 
yet. Under AG ¶ 2(b), I am required to resolve my doubt in favor of national security. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
6 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
