KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Directive permits Applicant to mitigate security concerns either in writing with the
Judge deciding the case on a written record or by means of hearing.  The telephonic interview
conducted in this case had some attributes of a hearing and was occasionally called a hearing by
the Judge.  It is not clear that Applicant knowingly waived his right to a hearing. Adverse
decision remanded for a new proceeding.
CASENO: 06-13610.a1
DATE: 10/31/2008
DATE: October 31, 2008
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-13610
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
Prior to the proceedings in this case, Department Counsel objected to the proposed telephone interview of1
Applicant.  See GE 6, Government Motion, February 21, 2008.   At the beginning of the telephonic proceeding the Judge
acknowledged those objections, stating that they were part of the record.  Tr. at 14.  However, Department Counsel did
not raise these objections on appeal.  Therefore, they are not before the Board.  
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 29, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
Although Applicant requested a decision on the written record, he subsequently moved to convert
his case to a hearing.  Department Counsel did not object.  On April 28, 2008, after a proceeding
conducted telephonically, Administrative Judge Mark W. Harvey denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant filed a timely appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether he was denied due process as set
forth in the Directive and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding error, we remand the case to the Judge.
The SOR alleges that Applicant has numerous delinquent debts and that he deliberately
provided false answers on the security clearance form.  On appeal Applicant states that the
telephonic procedure which the Judge employed in this case denied him the benefit of a hearing as
contemplated by the Directive, specifically an opportunity for the Judge to evaluate his demeanor.
Applicant requests an opportunity to present his case in person.  We construe this to be a request to
remand the case to the Judge for a new proceeding.  
We have examined the record.  We note that Government Exhibit (GE) 4 contains a series
of e-mail messages between the Judge and the parties concerning the proposed hearing.  Specifically,
Applicant was not able to attend the hearing in person, due to his presence in a war zone.  There were
logistical difficulties setting up a video teleconference (VTC), which, in his appeal, he attributes to
technical difficulties at DOHA.  By e-mail dated February 22, 2008, the Judge mentioned a
telephonic interview as an alternative to the VTC, advising Applicant that “You have a right to an
in personam hearing . . . A speaker phone interview is not a hearing.  A hearing requires the judge
to assess credibility through observing demeanor.   A speaker phone interview would be recorded
and transcribed.  A speaker phone interview is a lawful manner for you to present information for
my consideration . . .”  Subsequently, Applicant sent the following message to the Judge and to
Department Counsel: “It looks like the VTC is not going to work out as well as we had planned.  I
will put this in writing so everyone will know that I am requesting this.  I, [Applicant], am requesting
a tele-conference for my interview with the personnel listed in this email.”  
Accordingly, the parties arranged for a telephonic interview of Applicant, which occurred
on March 20, 2008.   At the beginning of the proceeding, the Judge advised Applicant that he had
a right to a hearing in person or by video-teleconference and asked Applicant if he waived that right.
Applicant replied that he did so waive.  Tr. at 14.1
3
An applicant has a right under the Directive to present matters to a Judge in an effort to
mitigate any security concerns in his case.  He can do so in writing, the Judge deciding the case on
the written record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.7.  He can also do so by means of a hearing in which he appears
in person.  Directive ¶ E3.1.8.  There is no other alternative means for an Applicant to present his
case to DOHA.  In the case at issue here, Applicant initially requested a determination on the written
record.  He later changed his mind and requested a hearing, to which the Department Counsel did
not object.  A review of the record suggests that, throughout the processing of his case, Applicant
desired the benefits of a hearing, agreeing to the telephonic interview only when a VTC could not
be accomplished.  By advising Applicant that the telephonic interview was not a hearing but, rather,
a means by which Applicant could make a statement, the Judge appears, in effect, to have converted
the case to an administrative determination on the written record, Applicant’s telephonic interview
serving as an alternative to a written response to the Government’s File of Relevant Material.
Despite Applicant’s having stated that he waived his right to a VTC, it is not clear that Applicant
understood the significance of the procedure utilized in his case.   The Board notes that on more than
one occasion during the telephonic interview the Judge referred to the procedure in question as a
“hearing,” that he provided the Department Counsel with an opportunity to present evidence,
examined Applicant’s capacity to represent himself, and advised Applicant of the proper method by
which he should lodge any objections to that evidence.    See, e.g., Tr. at 3 - 8.  The Judge advised
Applicant of the extent to which the Federal Rules of Evidence would apply to the interview, a
procedure more pertinent to a hearing.  Tr. at 8.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.19.  He also advised Applicant
that “the hearing will be open” unless Applicant requests otherwise, which is a rule with no
applicability to a determination on the written record.  Tr. at 9; Directive ¶ E3.1.12.  The Judge
appears to have conducted the interview more in the manner of a hearing than merely of transcribing
a statement for use in a determination on the written record.  Examining the record as a whole, it is
reasonable to conclude that, despite the Judge’s advice concerning the limitations of a telephonic
interview, Applicant may have believed himself to be receiving more of the benefits of a hearing
than was actually the case.  
While applicants can waive various rights under the Directive, including the right to a
hearing, waivers must be knowing and intelligent.  See ISCR Case No. 06-24460 (App. Bd. Apr. 30,
2008)(waiver of right to counsel); ISCR Case 05-01237 (App. Bd. May 10, 2007)(waiver of right
to 15 day notice of the hearing).  See also ISCR Case No. 03-08512 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 8, 2005) for
list of factors demonstrating a proper waiver of the right to a hearing.  Given Applicant’s  pro se
status, the likely exigencies of communicating to DOHA from a war zone, and the circumstances
highlighted above, a reasonable person could conclude that Applicant’s waiver of his right to a
hearing was not sufficiently knowing so as to satisfy the due process requirements of Directive.
Accordingly, the Board concludes that the best course of action is to remand the case to the Judge
for a new proceeding, either a determination on the written record or a hearing that complies with
the requirements of the Directive (making appropriate allowances given Applicant’s presence in a
conflict zone).  The remaining issue is not ripe for consideration.
4
  
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is REMANDED. 
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
