 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------. )
SSN: ---------------- )       ISCR Case No. 06-22281
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, Administrative Judge:
On November 1, 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to request a security clearance for his employment
with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with1
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request. On July 31, 2008, DOHA issued to
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns
addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline M (misuse of2
information technology) and Guideline E (personal conduct).
The Government submitted eleven items to support its case.3
2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR, and admitted all of the allegations in the
SOR. He elected to have his case decided on the record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on August 29, 2008.3
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on September 12, 2008,
and was provided an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute,
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Applicant submitted additional
information on September 22, 2008. The case was assigned to me on October 21,
2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline M, the government alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a that Applicant misused
government resources while employed from 2002 to 2004 during work and non-work
hours by using his computer to access inappropriate web sites, to include those of a
pornographic nature. In SOR ¶ 1.b, the government alleged Applicant installed software
that could erase system memory on his computer from 2002 to 2004. In SOR ¶ 1.c., the
government alleged Applicant sent a joke from a pornographic web site in 2004 to a co-
worker. 
Under Guideline E, the government alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a the same information
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. The government also alleged falsification in SOR ¶¶ 2.b. through
d. After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact.
Applicant is 54 years old. Since April 2004, he has worked as a systems analyst
for a defense contractor. In 2003, he graduated from college with a B.S. degree.
Applicant served in the U.S. Army from 1996 until 2002, and held a security clearance.
He also held a clearance during his civilian employment until his resignation in 2004
(Item 4).
Applicant worked as a civilian employee from 2002 until 2004. During that time,
he admits sending inappropriate email to a coworker. The email contained a photograph
of a pornographic nature. An investigation revealed that he also installed software that
he could use to erase system memory. Applicant visited many sites on the internet
during work and non-work hours on his government computer that were considered
pornographic. He spent approximately two hours per day, on average, searching the
internet for these sites (Item 9). The record reveals that he was counseled at some point
in time about the inappropriate use (Item 11).
On February 17, 2004, a complaint was filed against Applicant. An investigation
followed and Applicant was sent back to work. However, his computer was taken.
Applicant resigned his position on April 4, 2004 (Item10). 
 Directive. 6.3.4
 Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, these factor are: (1) the nature, extent, and5
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
3
Applicant completed a security clearance application in November 2005. He
answered Section 22: Your Employment Record. His response to the question
concerning the reasons for resigning a job under unfavorable circumstances was “no.”
Applicant explained that he did resign but he had reasons in addition to ‘unfavorable
circumstances.’ He claimed he was subject to weekly interrogations and saw no
punishment in sight. He began to feel harassed (Applicant’s answer to FORM, undated).
A Department of Defense investigator interviewed Applicant on August 9, 2006
(Item 5). He reported that he used the computer once to visit a pornographic web site.
In his answer, he admitted that he falsified material facts by not disclosing that he had
accessed the pornographic sites on many occasions. He did not provide any information
or explanation that would permit mitigation. 
Applicant teaches classes to graduates and undergraduates on post on the “dos
and don’ts’ of security issues. He wants to pass on the lesson that he has learned from
his mistake. He is also taking post graduate courses in information security. He is sorry
for his mistakes.
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors4
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying or5
mitigating conditions is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant.
However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be
measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial
of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under Guideline M (misuse of information technology systems), at
AG ¶ 39, and Guideline E (personal conduct) at AG ¶ 15.
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
4
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a7
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. The
government, therefore, has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses
the requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
national interests. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of
the government.8
Analysis
Misuse of Information Technology Systems.
Under Guideline M, “[n]oncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or
regulations pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the willingness
or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and information. Information
Technology Systems include all related computer hardware, software, firmware, and
data used for the communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or
protection of information.” (AG ¶ 39). The government presented sufficient information
to support the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c. Applicant admitted using his
computer at work to access inappropriate web sites, to include those of a pornographic
nature. The information presented requires consideration of the disqualifying condition
listed at AG ¶ 40(e) (unauthorized use of a government or other information technology
system).
The record does support consideration of Guideline M mitigating conditions listed
in AG ¶ 41. This conduct last occurred in 2004. Since then, Applicant has taught
graduate and undergraduate classes on security for several years to share his
knowledge and impart the lessons that he has learned from this experience. He is also
taking classes in information security for his benefit. He acknowledges his inappropriate
actions and admits it was wrong. Applicant has demonstrated how his actions do not
reflect adversely on his current “reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” (AG ¶
41(a) (so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened under
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). 
 See footnote 5, supra.9
 See footnote 8, supra. 10
5
Personal Conduct.
The security concern about Applicant’s personal conduct, as expressed in the
AG ¶ 15, is that “[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty,
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” 
As to SOR ¶ 2.b, available information requires consideration of the disqualifying
conditions listed in AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities). Applicant admitted that he initially denied any inappropriate
computer activity during his interview in 2004 and in an August 9, 2006 interview with an
investigator for DoD. On his November 1, 2005 security clearance application, he
answered “no” to Section 22: Your Employment Record and failed to disclose that he
resigned from employment in 2004 following his investigation about the computer
misuse. For these reasons, the record does not warrant application of any of the
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented in this record and have applied the
appropriate adjudicative factors, pro and con, under Guidelines M and E. I have also
reviewed the record before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in ¶ AG
2(a).  Applicant is a mature adult who held a security clearance for many years. Since9
the 2004 resignation, Applicant has taught classes in security information and tried to
impart the lesson that he learned from his inappropriate use of his government
computer. He acknowledges his mistake and is sorry for the incident. The positive
information about Applicant is sufficient to overcome the adverse information about his
conduct at his previous job under Guideline M. However, the falsification of information
during his investigations and on his November 2005 security application raise serious
doubts about his reliability and trustworthiness. Applicant’s recent conduct does not
mitigate the security concerns under the personal conduct guideline. Because
protection of the national interest is paramount in these determinations, such doubts
must be resolved in favor of the national interest.  10
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline M: FOR APPLICANT
6
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied
                             
                                                    
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
