                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 06-22025 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Foreign Influence and 
Personal Conduct. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Standard Form (SF) 86 on October 27, 2005. On March 
18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines B 
(Foreign Influence) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 2, 2008, and requested a hearing before 
an Administrative Judge. DOHA received Applicant’s answer to SOR on April 8, 2008. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 14, 2008, and I received the 
case assignment on June 9, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 20, 2008, 
scheduling the case for July 17, 2008. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant 
objected to GE 1 on the grounds of authenticity, and had no objection to GE 2 through 
GE 4. I admitted GE 1 over Applicant’s objection, and also admitted GE 2 through GE 4. 
Applicant offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through AE E. Department Counsel 
objected to all of Applicant’s exhibits on the grounds of authenticity and hearsay. I 
admitted AE A through E over Department Counsel’s objections. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 25, 2008.  
 
PROCEDURAL RULINGS 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice (Exhibit (Ex.) 
I(A)), requesting that I take administrative notice of the summary of facts contained in 
Ex. I(A) as well as those facts in Exs. I through V. Without objection from Applicant I 
took administrative notice of the documents offered by Department Counsel, which 
pertained to Columbia. Tr. 13-15.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for administrative 
notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
Government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 
2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts pertaining to 
Columbia were derived from Exs. I(A), and I through V as contained infra under the 
subheading “Columbia” of this decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
As to the SOR’s factual allegations, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a. – 1.d., and 1.f. He denied ¶¶ 1.e. and 2.a. - 2(b)(1) – (3). His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Applicant testified at his hearing, and I found his testimony to be credible. 
Applicant is a 50-year-old software engineer, who has been employed by his defense 
contractor employer since November 2005. GE1, Tr. 25-26. He has successfully held a 
security clearance at some level since 1981. In 1981, he was granted a secret security 
clearance shortly after enlisting in the U.S. Air Force, discussed infra. That clearance 
was later upgraded to a top secret security clearance in 1994, which he has 
continuously held since then. When he was transitioning from the Air Force, he applied 
for a job with the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). He was vetted for and granted a top 
secret clearance in 2001 by the CIA, but “decided not to take the job.” He seeks to 
renew his top secret clearance, which is an employment requirement. GE 1, Tr. 25-28. 
 
Applicant was born in Columbia in March 1958. GE 1. In December 1973 at age 
15, he immigrated to the U.S. after being “sponsored” by his older brother, who was 
already living in the U.S. He completed high school in the U.S. and later joined the Air 
Force. Applicant honorably served in the Air Force from February 1981 to March 2001, 
and retired from active duty as a technical sergeant (pay grade E-6). Tr. 30. His Air 
Force Specialty Code (AFSC) was 702/computer programmer. Tr. 32-33.  
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in May 1981 shortly after enlisting in 
the Air Force. He holds a current U.S. passport and does not hold any other passport. 
GE 1. Applicant was awarded a Bachelor of Science degree in computer science in May 
1996, and master’s degree in software engineering in May 2003. GE 1, Tr. 23-24. 
 
Applicant is married to his fifth and current wife, who he married in October 2003. 
He was married to his fourth wife from 1998 to 2003, he was married to his third wife 
from 1992 to 1998, he was married to his second wife from 1980 to 1991, and was 
married to his first wife from 1975/1976 to 1978. His first four marriages ended by 
divorce. GE 1, GE 4, Tr. 19-23. Applicant has three children, a 27-year-old son and a 
17-year-old son born during his marriage to his second wife. He has a 3-year-old son 
born during his current marriage. GE 1, Tr. 33-35. 
 
Applicant has eight immediate family members. Applicant’s parents and siblings 
were all born in Columbia. His immediate and other family members are discussed infra.  
 
Wife. His current wife is 32 years old and is a U.S. born citizen. She is employed 
as a bank teller. GE 4.  
 
Children. Applicant has three sons, ages 27, 17, and 3, discussed supra. All of 
his children are U.S. born citizens and reside in the U.S. 
 
Brother. This is Applicant’s oldest brother, age 65. He immigrated to the U.S. 
from Columbia in 1961, and is a naturalized U.S. citizen. This brother resides in the U.S. 
owns a dental laboratory, and hopes to retire in the near future. He is married and has 
four children. Although Applicant does not live close to this brother, he communicates 
with him weekly by telephone or e-mail. Tr. 68-71. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Brother. This is Applicant’s second oldest brother, age 61. He immigrated to the 
U.S. from Columbia in 1988, and is a naturalized U.S. citizen. This brother has never 
been married, and lives near Applicant. Applicant visits with this brother weekly. This 
brother sponsored Applicant to immigrate to the U.S. in 1973, discussed supra. Tr. 71-
72, 78. 
 
Sister. This is Applicant’s only sister, age 55, and she is a Columbian citizen 
residing in Columbia. She is married and a homemaker with two children, a daughter 
(Applicant’s niece) and a son (Applicant’s nephew). Her husband (Applicant’s brother-
in-law) has been employed by the Columbian government for 30 years as an electrician. 
Applicant’s niece, age 25, attended college in the U.S. and works for a mortgage 
company in the U.S. Applicant’s niece lives near Applicant and he communicates with 
her “twice a month.” She plans on becoming a U.S. citizen when eligible. Applicant’s 
nephew, age 30, is currently unemployed, and lives in Columbia. Applicant 
communicates with his sister by telephone “[o]nce a month maybe.” Tr. 47-51, 72-75. 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.) 
 
Brother. This is Applicant’s younger brother, age 48, and he is a Columbian 
citizen residing in Columbia. He is separated from his second wife, has three children, 
and lives in Columbia. He has been deported twice from the U.S. back to Columbia in 
1988 and 2000, both times for selling drugs. He is not allowed to return to the U.S. 
Applicant stays in contact with his younger brother “two times a year” by telephone or e-
mail. It is Applicant’s understanding is that his brother “has a small business in which he 
sells gas station supplies.” Tr. 44-46, 76-77. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) 
 
Mother-in-law. Applicant’s mother-in-law, age 58, is a Columbian citizen, and 
lives with Applicant and his wife. Applicant and his wife “sponsored” his mother-in-law to 
move to the U.S. in February 2004 to care for their three year old son. His mother-in-law 
is not married, and telephones her 74-year-old mother in Columbia “probably once a 
month,” and sends her “$100 maybe” a month. Neither Applicant’s wife nor any of her 
family members are employed, associated or affiliated with the Columbian government. 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is “seriously thinking” about applying for U.S. citizenship when 
eligible in February 2009. Tr. 38-43. (SOR ¶ 1.a.) 
 
Since immigrating to the U.S. in 1973, Applicant has traveled to Columbia four 
times. He returned to Columbia to attend his mother’s funeral in 1984, and again in 
1992, 2002, and 2007. Except for his 1984 visit, the remaining visits were primarily for 
“pleasure” and visiting family members. Tr. 49-51. (SOR ¶ 1.d.) 
 
Applicant “sponsored” two of his “second cousins” from Columbia for student 
visas in the U.S. in 2001 and 2006. The second cousin he sponsored in 2001 recently 
graduated from college and lives in the U.S., discussed supra under Sister (age 55). 
The other second cousin is 23 years old and studying English in the U.S. Tr. 53-54. 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.) 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Applicant stated if any of his family members in Columbia were approached by 
anyone seeking information about Applicant, he would contact his facility security 
officer. Tr. 56. 
 
In 1988, Applicant made a $15,000 cash deposit into an international bank 
account located in the U.S, which resulted in Applicant being queried about the source 
of the deposited funds. The money belonged to two resident citizens of Columbia. 
Subsequent to that transaction, Applicant was interviewed or provided information on 
three separate occasions on September 7, 2000, February 12, 2001, and November 15, 
2007. It was alleged that Applicant provided inconsistent explanations regarding this 
transaction. (SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 2.a., 2.b.(1) – (3)).  
 
These purported inconsistencies are summarized in order. First, the SOR alleged 
Applicant stated his former sister-in-law asked him to make a $15,000 deposit into her 
husband’s account in a September 2000 signed, sworn statement. (SOR ¶ 2.a.(1)). 
Second, the SOR alleged Applicant stated he was asked by a friend to make a $15,000 
deposit into her brother-in-law’s international bank account in a February 2001 
memorandum to the Defense Investigative Service (DIS). (SOR ¶ 2.a.(2)).Third, the 
SOR alleged Applicant stated his girlfriend at the time asked him to take her mother to 
the bank to make a deposit into a joint international bank account belonging to her 
daughter and her son-in-law, adding the mother was unable to speak English clearly 
and Applicant made the deposit to help her (the mother) in a November 2007 signed, 
sworn statement. (SOR ¶ 2.a.(3)). 
 
Applicant testified at his hearing and clarified these explanations. In his 
testimony, Applicant stated at the time he made the deposit, he did not know the money 
belonged to two Columbian citizens, and was being deposited on their behalf. It was not 
until 2001 that Applicant learned who the money belonged to. I note from observing 
Applicant that he struggled to recall events, which bolsters his explanation that over 
time his acuity diminished. Pertinent parts of the exchange between Department 
Counsel and Applicant are quoted, which demonstrate this assertion as well as the 
difficulty of reconstructing a fairly complex factual pattern years after it occurred.  
 
Q. Okay. Now in your sworn statement dated September 7, 2000, which is 
Government’s Exhibit 2, you state on page 5 on February 17 of 1988 my 
former sister-in-law asked me to make a deposit of $15,000 into her 
husband’s account. Is that correct? 
 
A. That’s what I wrote, yes. 
 
Q. Okay. And in your signed statement dated February 12, 2001, which is 
Government Exhibit 3, you have a memorandum in there on page 3 where 
you state that you were asked  -- I was asked by my friend, [HB] to make a 
$15,000 deposit into her brother-in-law, [LL’s] international bank account 
of [bank name]. Is that correct? 
 
A. Correct. 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Q. Okay. And then in November 15, 2007, you gave a signed sworn 
statement and on page 2, the first full paragraph there, on February, 1988, 
I made a $15,000 cash deposit at the [bank name]. This was not my 
money, my girlfriend at the time, [PP] need(ed) to take her mother [DP] to 
the bank to make a deposit. 
 
The mother, [DP] wanted to make a bank deposit into a joint international 
bank account belonging to [DP’s] daughter, [DEP] and her son-in-law, 
[LL]. Do you see that? 
 
A. Yes. The statement I made back then, I got confused. It was – I 
confused her mom with her sister because of the name. Her sister has 
also the same name that her mom does, [D]. 
 
So when the officer told me that I had said in the past that I – the past is 
something for [D], then I immediately relate it to her mom, not to her sister. 
 
Q. Okay. So you’re saying when you made this statement in 2007 you 
confused her mother’s name with her sister? 
 
A.  Correct. 
 
Q. Okay. And it’s your testimony that you intended to say her sister? 
 
A. Correct. 
 
Q. Okay. But still you – between the Government’s – between your first 
statement in 2000, your second statement in 2001 you state – your first 
statement you state that it was your former sister-in-law? 
 
A. Yes. And [H] is the person that – [H] is my friend and she was never my 
wife or anything officially, which is just someone that I knew that I would 
say. So I say sister-in-law, you know, it’s not -- speak of sister-in-law I said 
because [H] was my girlfriend.  
 
So, but in reality, officially or legally, she was never my sister-in-law 
because my relationship to [H] was not more than boyfriend and girlfriend. 
 
Q. So why did you say sister-in-law? 
 
A. I mean, it’s – I really don’t know. I should have said [H’s] sister, 
because my relationship to [H] was not – never officially a legal 
relationship. 
 
Q. But she was your girlfriend? 
 
A. She was my girlfriend, yes. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Q. When you gave your second statement in 2001, you refer to – you 
state that a friend asked you to make that deposit? 
A. Yes my friend [H] was my girlfriend. 
 
Q. You didn’t say your girlfriend? 
A. Yes, I didn’t say my girlfriend. 
 
Q. Okay. Now, you state that in your third statement that you made the 
deposit because [H’s] mother was unable to speak English clearly? 
 
A. Right. And that’s – when I say this I mean [H’s] sister, right. 
 
Q. So today, again, you’re stating that this – that you meant to say her 
sister? 
 
A. Yes. The reason why, is because and I’ll tell you this, they have the 
same name. And I knew [H’s] sister by niece and her second – the middle 
name of [H’s] sister is [E] and they call her [N]. 
 
So, when I was told by the officer of [D], I immediately related it to her 
mother instead of [H’] sister. 
 
Q. Okay. But you told the – this is your statement, correct? 
 
A. Yes. 
 
Q. And so you told – you made the statement that it was her mother not 
her sister. 
 
A. Correct. But again, that’s because of the confusion. This is after almost 
a year after everything had happened and from the statement in 2001 to 
2007 is six years apart and I don’t remember too well what happened that 
day.  
 
Q. You don’t remember if you took [H’s] sister or [H’s] mother? 
 
A. Well, now after investigating and when I talked to [H’s] sister about two 
months ago, I’m sure it was her, the one that – when we (met) at the bank.  
 
Q. Okay. Now again, you didn’t have any concern that you were 
depositing that amount of money into a bank account that didn’t belong to 
you? 
 
A. I did not. 
 
Q. You didn’t have any concern that – it was apparently [LL’s] international 
bank account, correct? 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
A. Right. 
 
Q. You didn’t have any concern that this amount of money was brought 
over [to] the United States in cash? 
 
A. I did not at the time. [H] was my friend and I trusted her and we had a 
good relationship and I didn’t think she would ever have me do something 
that was inappropriate or illegal. 
 
Q. You didn’t think that since it was an international bank account that [LL] 
could deposit the money himself? 
 
A. [LL] was not in the United States at the time. 
 
Q. But it’s an international bank account. 
 
A. Yes. 
 
Q. Okay. So he could have done it on his own? 
 
A. In Columbia for sure. Yes. 
 
Q. But he didn’t do that? 
 
A. Probably not. 
 
Q. Have you done anything like this since 1998? 
 
A. No. And I know better now that my actions were not appropriate at the 
time.  
 
Q. Why – what do you mean by that? 
 
A. I mean that I will ask questions now if someone asked me to deposit 
$15,000 or any amount of money. I would ask questions, where’s this 
money coming from, where’s it going to, and if everything is legal then I 
won’t hesitate to do it. Tr. 60-65. 
 
 Applicant’s former girlfriend’s mother (DP – same name as her mother) submitted 
a signed, sworn statement, executed in the U.S., stating in part: 
 
In and around February 1988, my fiancé and I were trying to buy a house. I 
wanted to live close to my mother [DP] and my sister [HB] whom lived in the 
United States for many years, my mother and my sister are US citizens. 
 
My fiancé and I decided to deposit into my fiance’s [name of bank] account 
$15,000 dollars that we had gradually brought from Columbia over a 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
number of trips, to use as down payment towards the purchase of a house 
in the United States. I asked my sister to take me to the bank to make this 
deposit. My sister, [HB], was unable to take me to the bank, so she asked 
[Applicant] to take me to the bank. While at the bank, I asked [Applicant] to 
fill-up the deposit slip for me since I did not understand English and did not 
know what to write and where. [Applicant] gracefully filled up the deposit 
slip and I asked [Applicant] to make the deposit in case they asked me 
something in English that I would not understand. I handed [Applicant] the 
$15,000 dollars and he approached the teller counter and made the deposit 
on my behalf. [Applicant] deposited  the $15,000 in my fiance’s [name of 
bank] account. AE A. 
 
 The husband (LL) of Applicant’s former girlfriend’s mother submitted a signed, 
sworn statement executed in Columbia, stating in part: 
 
I am part owner of [name of business] since 1988 located in Columbia, 
with [substantial sales]. My three sons were educated in the US and are 
US citizens. 
 
During the trips my fiancé [DP] and I made to Columbia, we gradually 
brought money with the intention of buying a house, and in fact we did so 
in the year 2000. I went on a business trip to Columbia while my fiancé 
stayed in the US with her mother [DD] and her sister [HB]. My fiance’s 
mother and sister are both US citizens. My fiancé and I decided to deposit 
the money in my [name of bank]. My fiancé asked [Applicant] to deposit 
the money since she was unable to understand [E]nglish hence did not 
understand the teller[’]s questions. This is how in fact the fifteen thousand 
dollars were deposited in my [name of bank] account. AE B. 
 
The author (LL) of AE B also submitted a letter from his bank dated May 8, 2008, 
which stated his bank account was opened on February 12, 1998. AE C. 
 
Applicant submitted a letter from the Columbian Government Trade Bureau in 
Washington, DC, that provided data about the business owned by the author (LL) of AE 
B. The letter reflects the business owned by LL is in good standing. Tr. 83-85, AE D.  
 
In response to my question inquiring how Applicant would resolve the 
discrepancies surrounding the $15,000 deposit in 1998, he stated: 
 
Sir, I mean I know it’s negligence on my part that I did this and I should 
have asked questions. I know that my statements were not consistent and 
I really never thought that they were going to be taken literally like I had 
put it down. 
 
I think I have a good explanation on why I got confused. And I had never 
tried to hide anything that I’ve done. I always come forward to say what 
happened. Tr. 96. 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
Applicant submitted a letter from his Assistant Program Manager, which stated 
among other things that Applicant is a “must-have engineer” and concluded, “If 
[Applicant] were to lose his Top Secret Security [C]learance, it would delay the fielding 
and implementation of this (project Applicant is working on) critical national resource.” 
AE E. 
  
 All of Applicant’s assets are in the U.S. to include a home, 401k account, and 
bank account. He and his wife own a home that they recently purchased for $492,000. 
Tr. 92-95. Applicant earns $108,000 annually as a software engineer, and earns an 
additional $18,000 annually, teaching computer science courses part-time at a local 
community college. Tr. 104-105. 
 
Columbia1 
 
Colombia is a constitutional, multiparty democracy with a population of 
approximately 44.8 million. Colombia is the second most populous country in South 
America. Any person born in Colombia is considered a Colombian citizen. 
 
 The Department of State warns U.S. citizens of the dangers of travel to 
Colombia. Violence by narco-terrorist groups continues to affect some rural areas and 
cities. The potential for violence by terrorists and other criminal elements exists in all 
parts of the country. Terrorists and other criminal organizations continue to kidnap and 
hold persons of all nationalities and occupations for use as bargaining chips. No one is 
immune from kidnapping on the basis of occupation, nationality or other factors. U.S. 
Government officials and their families have strict limitations on travel to and within 
Colombia due to these dangers.  Kidnap or murder victims in Colombia have included 
journalists, missionaries, scientists, human rights workers and business people, as well 
as tourists and even small children. Approximately 298 kidnappings committed by 
terrorist groups and for-profit kidnap gangs were reported to authorities in 2007.  
Robbery and other violent crimes are common in major cities while small towns and 
rural areas can be extremely dangerous due to the presence of narco-terrorists. 
 
 The Secretary of State has designated three Colombian groups – the 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the National Liberation Army (ELN), 
and the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) – as Foreign Terrorist 
Organizations.  These groups have carried out bombings and other attacks in and 
around major urban areas, including against civilian targets. Terrorist groups have also 
targeted critical infrastructure (e.g., water, oil, gas, and electricity), public recreational 
areas, and modes of transportation. The FARC has targeted civilians, government 
representatives and politicians, soldiers, and the civilian infrastructure. Three Irish 
Republican Army members assisted in training the FARC on IRA bomb tactics in 
Colombia.  FARC held three U.S. government contractors -- all U.S. citizens -- hostage 
for five years, until they were rescued on July 2, 2008 by the Colombian military. Some 
border areas have become terrorist safe havens. 
 
1 The contents of this section are taken in whole or in part from Exs. I(A), I-V. 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
 
 Although the government’s respect for human rights continued to improve, 
serious problems remain.  Unlawful and extrajudicial killings, forced disappearances, 
insubordinate military collaboration with criminal groups, torture and mistreatment of 
detainees, overcrowded and insecure prisons, and other serious human rights abuses 
were reported during 2007. Illegal armed groups and terrorist groups committed the 
majority of human rights violations–including political killings and kidnappings, forced 
disappearances, torture, and other serious human rights abuses. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”2 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
2 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).3 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 explains the Government’s concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
3 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant has frequent 
contact with his sister and to a lesser extent with his brother in Columbia. These close 
relationships create a potential risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion meriting a close examination of all circumstances. 
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of these the three disqualifying 
conditions under AGs ¶¶ 7(a), (b) and 7(d) as a result of Applicant’s admissions and 
evidence presented. The Government established Applicant’s sister and brother are 
resident citizens of Columbia, and that Applicant maintains frequent contact with them 
by telephone/e-mail and travel. His mother-in-law is a Columbian citizen and she lives 
with the Applicant. She has frequent, non-casual contact with her family in Columbia. 
Also, Applicant sponsored two of his second cousins from Columbia for U.S. student 
visas. 
 
The $15,000 cash deposit in 1998 into an international bank account of money 
belonging to two Columbian citizens is also relevant and is a concern under Foreign 
Influence. It is discussed further under Personal Conduct, infra. The burden shifted to 
Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigating condition(s). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. 
 
 Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under Guideline ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applying common sense and life experience, there is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person has ties of affection for, and/or obligation to his immediate family. ISCR 
Case No. 04-07766 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2006); ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has demonstrated the indicia of ties of affection for/and or 
obligation to his sister and brother by telephone and e-mail contact as well as his travel 
to Columbia.  
 
Applicant’s sister is a career homemaker, wife, and mother of two children. Her 
husband (Applicant’s brother-in-law) has been employed as a career electrician for the 
Columbian government. There is nothing in the record to suggest his employment has 
been anything other than a non-political position. Applicant’s niece was educated in the 
U.S., is working in the U.S., and plans to become a U.S. citizen when eligible. His 
nephew is currently unemployed (discussed supra under Facts, Sister). Applicant’s 
younger brother lives in Columbia and since being deported twice from the U.S. for drug 
involvement, is a small business owner living in Columbia selling gas station supplies. 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is unmarried, lives with Applicant and his wife, and she 
provides day care for Applicant’s three-year-old son. She is part of the family, and is 
considering becoming a U.S. citizen. His mother-in-law’s contact with Columbia is 
primarily limited to monthly telephone calls and modest monetary gifts to her 74-year-
old mother in Columbia. Apart from Applicant’s brother-in-law, who holds a non-political 
Government job with the Columbian government, none of Applicant’s relatives living in 
Columbia or in the U.S. are associated with or affiliated with the Columbian government. 
The record does not identify what influence, if any, the Columbian government could 
exert on Applicant’s sister or brother as a result of their being resident citizens of 
Columbia. However, their presence in Columbia, and Applicant’s foreign travel as well 
as his sponsoring relatives for U.S. visas creates concerns under this Guideline. As 
such, the burden shifted to Applicant to show his relatives in Columbia and travel there 
do not create security risks.  
 
“[T]he nature of the foreign government involved in the case, and the intelligence-
gathering history of that government are important evidence that provides context for all 
 
15 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
the other evidence of the record . . .” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-0776 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 26, 2006); see also ISCR Case No. 02-07772 at 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2003). As 
noted supra under the subheading “Columbia,” the U.S. Secretary of State has 
designated three Columbian groups, FARC, ELN, and AUC as Foreign Terrorist 
Organizations. Although the Columbian government’s respect for human rights 
continues to improve, terrorist groups operating within Columbia have committed the 
majority of human rights violations to include political killings and kidnapping, forced 
disappearances, torture, and other serious human rights abuses. 
 
Applicant denies having “divided loyalties” between the U.S. and any foreign 
country. It should be noted Applicant’s allegiance to the U.S. was not challenged in this 
proceeding. The issue is rather a positional one.  
 
[Guideline B] hinges not on what choice Applicant might make if he is 
forced to choose between his loyalty to his family and the United States, 
but rather hinges on the concept that Applicant should not be placed in a 
position where he is forced to make such a choice. ISCR Case No. 03-
15205 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005). 
 
On balance, Applicant has not met his burden of showing there is “little likelihood 
that [his relationship with his family member in Columbia] could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.” Applicant’s continued and ongoing relationship with his 
Columbian relatives and nature of unlawful activities in Columbia by terrorist 
organizations places Applicant in just this position, given his close relationship with his 
family and their continued presence and connection with Columbia.  
 
However, Applicant is able to receive partial credit under AG ¶ 8(a). Applicant’s 
sister and brother maintain non-political low key positions in Columbia. Full application 
of AG ¶ 8(a) is also precluded given the past criminal drug activity of Applicant’s 
younger brother in the U.S. Although the evidence does not suggest Applicant’s 
younger brother is engaged in any illegal activity at present in Columbia, his having 
been deported twice from the U.S. for selling drugs remains troubling and lingers as a 
serious concern. 
 
Applicant is able to receive full credit under AG ¶ 8(b). His relationship with his 
Columbian relatives is minimal when compared and contrasted with his immediate 
relatives in the U.S. Applicant has “such deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties in the U.S., [h]e can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest.” His three sons and wife are U.S. born citizens and reside in the U.S., 
and they are fully inculcated with U.S. values. Applicant has lived in the U.S. since 1973 
and served a 20-year career in the Air Force. He has worked for a defense contractor 
with dedication and distinction since retiring from the Air Force. He has substantial 
property and investments in the U.S., and no property or investments in Columbia. He 
has many friends and colleagues in the U.S. He is a loyal, dedicated U.S. citizen. He 
provided a work-related reference from his Assistant Program Manager to corroborate 
his loyalty and trustworthiness.  
 
 
16 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Applicant is able to receive full credit under AG ¶ 8(f) because his $15,000 
deposit was on behalf of another party. He has no assets in Columbia as opposed to all 
of his assets being in the U.S. A thorough comparison of his relationship to the U.S. as 
compared to his relationship with Columbia is further discussed under the Whole 
Person Concept, infra. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 explains the Government’s concern under this Guideline: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and, 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
A statement is false when it is made deliberately, i.e. knowingly and willfully. An 
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely 
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely 
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
 
The issue here is the truthfulness of Applicant’s purported inconsistencies in his 
September 2000 signed, sworn statement, his February 2001 memorandum, and 
November 2007 signed, sworn statement regarding the 1998 $15,000 cash deposit. AG 
¶ 17(f) provides a condition that could mitigate security concerns in this case, stating, 
“the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability.” AG ¶ 
17(f) fully applies. 
 
Having had the opportunity to listen to his testimony and observe his demeanor, 
his explanations as set forth in the findings of fact are accepted as credible. The 
exchange between Department Counsel and Applicant, supra, demonstrates how 
confusion could arise surrounding this transaction considering the similarity of names, 
cultural complexities, and passage of time.  
 
17 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
I note that Applicant has held a top secret security clearance since 1994 and was 
vetted for a top secret security clearance by the CIA in 2001. This transaction 
presumably would have been uncovered and evaluated during renewal(s) of his top 
secret clearance(s) for the Air Force and CIA. The evidence is not sufficient to show that 
he made deliberately false statements when he provided his explanations surrounding 
the $15,000 deposit on three separate occasions or that his conduct was otherwise 
inappropriate or unlawful. There is no evidence that the $15,000 deposit involved any 
illegal activity such as money laundering. As such there is no evidence of a motive to 
fabricate. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
  In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as 
discussed previously, I have considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to 
the whole person concept under Directive ¶ E2.2.1. “Under the whole person concept, 
the Administrative Judge must not consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life 
separately, in a piecemeal manner. Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and 
circumstances.”4 The directive lists nine adjudicative process factors (APF) which are 
used for “whole person” analysis.   
 
Because foreign influence does not involve misconduct, voluntariness of 
participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the eighth APF, “the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” Directive ¶ E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of 
the nine APFs to this adjudication.5 In addition to the eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
should be considered in reaching a determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.1. Ultimately, the 
clearance decision is “an overall common sense determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2.3. 
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). 
 
 I have carefully considered Applicant’s family connections and personal 
connections to Columbia. Several circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole 
4 ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting  ISCR Case No. 02-01093 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2003)); ISCR Case No. 05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2007) (citing Raffone v. 
Adams, 468 F.2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events may have a significance that is 
missing when each event is viewed in isolation). 
 
5 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the 
eighth APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for 
exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that 
eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole person analysis in foreign influence cases). 
 
18 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
person analysis. First, three foreign terrorist organizations have been identified by the 
U.S. Secretary of State that are operating within Columbia. Illegal armed terrorist groups 
committed human rights violations to include political killings and kidnappings, forced 
disappearances, torture, and other serious human rights abuses. Although Columbia 
and the U.S. enjoy a cordial relationship, the existence these terrorist groups and their 
concomitant internal problems within Columbia remain a concern. Second, Applicant 
was born in Columbia and spent a significant portion of his formative years in Columbia. 
Third, Applicant visited Columbia four times, i.e. in 1984, 1992, 2002, and 2007 since 
immigrating to the U.S. in 1973. Fourth, he sponsored two of his Columbian second 
cousins for U.S. student visas in 2001 and 2006. Fifth, in 1998, he deposited $15,000 
into a bank account in the U.S. on behalf of two Columbian citizens. Sixth, his 
Columbian mother-in-law lives with him and his wife, and she maintains contact with her 
mother in Columbia. Seventh, he maintains frequent contacts with his sister and to a 
lesser extent his brother in Columbia, who was deported two times from the U.S. for 
drug involvement. These contacts and visits are collective manifestations of strong 
affection and regard Applicant has for family members in Columbia and/or connections 
with Columbia. 
 
 There is significant mitigating evidence that weighs towards grant of Applicant’s 
security clearance. Applicant immigrated to the U.S. when he was 15 years old, and 
completed his high school education in the U.S. Shortly after completing high school, he 
enlisted in the Air Force and successfully completed a 20-year career. Shortly after 
enlisting in 1981, he was granted a secret clearance, which was later upgraded to a top 
secret clearance in 1994. He has held a top secret clearance since then. He was vetted 
for and granted a top secret clearance by the CIA in 2001, the year he retired from the 
Air Force. All told, he has successfully held a security clearance at some level for 27 
years.  
 
Applicant has lived in the U.S. for the past 35 years, was married in the U.S., and 
has three U.S. born children in the U.S. His assets in the U.S. are substantial in contrast 
to having no assets in Columbia. He became a U.S. citizen shortly after enlisting in the 
Air Force and holds a U.S. passport. His wife is a U.S. born citizen. Although his 
mother-in-law is a Columbian citizen, she legally resides in the U.S. with Applicant and 
his wife and is considering becoming a U.S. citizen. Also of note is the fact that 
Applicant has two older brothers, who are U.S. citizens, who reside in the U.S. He also 
has a niece (his sister’s daughter), who resides in the U.S. and plans on becoming a 
U.S. citizen when eligible.  
 
Applicant maintains much more frequent contact with his U.S. based siblings 
than he does with his siblings residing in Columbia. His ties to the United States are 
stronger than his ties to his sister and brother in Columbia. There is no evidence 
Applicant has ever taken any action which could cause potential harm to the United 
States.6 He takes his loyalty to the United States very seriously, and he has worked 
6 The Government does not have the burden of providing such evidence. 
 
 
19 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                          
diligently for his Government contractor/employer since November 2005. The evidence 
contains no derogatory record evidence about the Applicant. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Columbia. Columbia and the 
U.S. enjoy a friendly relationship. Apart from the internal problems within Columbia, 
which are not endorsed by the Columbian government, Columbia is a multiparty 
democracy, whose government’s respect for human rights continues to improve. There 
is no evidence in the record to support the notion that the Columbian government 
engages in an adversarial relationship with the U.S. 
 
 In the unlikely event that Applicant’s family in Columbia were subjected to 
coercion or duress from a terrorist group within Columbia, I find that because of his 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that Applicant would 
resolve any attempt to exert pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the 
United States. Noteworthy and given great weight is Applicant’s 20 years of honorable 
service to his country while serving in the Air Force, and his having successfully held a 
security clearance for 27 years. Also the issue of the $15,000 deposit occurred in 1998 
and is not recent. In any event, I found his explanation credible and found him to be 
sincere, cooperative, and forthright in questions posed throughout the hearing. Lastly, 
Applicant’s Assistant Program Manager submitted a compelling endorsement on his 
behalf. 
  
This case must be adjudged on his own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis. This Analysis must answer the question whether there is a legitimate concern 
under the facts presented that Applicant may have divided loyalties or act in a way 
adverse to U.S. interests or some attempt may be made to exploit Applicant’s family 
members in such a way that this U.S. citizen would have to choose between his 
pledged loyalty to the U.S. and those family members. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign 
influence, and personal conduct.   
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”7 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
20 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
 
                  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.b. 
        (1) – (3):    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
