                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-00463
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeffery Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On February 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 12, 2008 and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on July 10, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on July
29, 2008.  A hearing was convened on July 29, 2008, for the purpose of considering
whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, or
deny, Applicant’s application for a security clearance.  At Applicant’s request, the
hearing was continued, and rescheduled for September 17, 2008. At hearing, the
Government's case consisted of four exhibits; Applicant relied on two witnesses
2
(including himself) and seven exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on August 7,
2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Procedural Rulings and Evidentiary Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with endorsements.  For good
cause shown, Applicant was afforded 14 days to supplement the record.  He did not file
any supplemental materials. 
   Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have (a) made false statements in a
DoD interview in June 2006 about his never abusing his spouse, (b) made false
statements to an authorized investigator in a signed, sworn statement of September
2007 concerning his choking of his spouse, using a knife on his spouse, and threatening
to kill her, and ©) made false statements to an authorized DoD investigator in an initial
October 2007 interview concerning his choking of his spouse, his threatening her with a
knife, and his telling her he was going to killer her, (d) been restrained from making
contact with his spouse by a protection order filed in January 2007, which was
subsequently extended a year under March 1999 modification order, and (e) been
issued a temporary order for protection against domestic violence in July 2000, which
was extended to one year.  Under Guideline J, Applicant’s alleged misstatements
covered by Guideline E are incorporated by reference.
 For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the substantive acts covered by
Guidelines E and J, but denied any intention to provide false information in any of his
covered DoD interviews in 2006 and 2007.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 52-year-old-employee of a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant are
incorporated herein and adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings
follow.
Applicant was born and raised in India to parents of Indian descent (see ex. 1;
R.T., at 59).  He married W (also of Indian descent) in December 1982 and has four
children from this marriage (see exs. 1, 2 and 5; R.T., at 44).  He immigrated to the U.S.
in 1988 at the age of 35 (R.T., at 60).  W joined him in 1990 (ex. 3).  Applicant and W
both became naturalized U.S. citizens in January 1995 (see exs. 1 and 2). They
separated in March 1999, but are still married.
Applicant and W argued frequently during their marriage.  Most of their
arguments involved disputes over W’s spending in consumer stores and outlets that W
1
         At hearing, Applicant trimmed his earlier acknowledgments, claiming his hand accidentally slipped on
to W ’s mouth, and he did not mean to threaten W  with a knife (R.T., at 55-56, 72-75).  If true, this changes the
whole tenor of Applicant’s physical exchanges from physical assaults and threats to inadvertent actions and
displays on his part.  For the first time, he claimed confusion when asked about his post-polygraph
admissions.  He  provided no plausible explanation, though, for why he did raise confusion when questioned
about his earlier denials in his post-polygraph interview.  Considering his earlier failure to admit any of the
details of his physical encounters with his wife until he was confronted in a post-polygraph interview, his
hearing claims cannot be accepted as credible corrections of his earlier accounts.   
3
enjoyed frequenting.  Their arguments often turned physical .  Between 1982 and 1988
(when they resided in India), Applicant sometimes slapped W in the face with his open
hand (see ex. 3).  When first questioned by an investigator from the Defense
Investigative Service (DSS) in September 2003, he estimated he slapped her on four to
five occasions during this period, but never physically assaulted her in any way (see ex.
3; R.T., at 69). 
After W joined applicant in the U.S. in 1990, they continued to argue over more
issues related to W’s shopping habits.  On several occasions (at least four to five),
Applicant physically assaulted W (mostly by slapping her with an open hand).  
Sometime in September 1998, Applicant and W had a particularly heated
exchange in which W cursed him in her native Urdu language.  W’s strong words were
uttered in the presence of Applicant’s children, causing him considerable insult and
embarrassment.  Applicant responded by physically grabbing W by the throat and briefly
choking her while placing his other hand over her mouth (see ex. 4).   Applicant’s1
actions caused W’s nose to bleed.   
On another occasion (in January 1999), Applicant told W that he was going to kill
her (see ex. 4).  In still another cited argument, Applicant brandished a knife in front of
W and threatened to kill her (see ex. 4).  Applicant was in the kitchen at the time of this
incident and held up the knife in a threatening gesture.  As a result of these physical
threats from Applicant, W sought and obtained an order for protection in January 1999
(see ex. 5; R.T., at 57-58).  In March 1999, she obtained a modification of the protective
order that covered reimbursement for medical expenses associated with her injuries
sustained in her 1998 assault (see ex. 5).  
Applicant’s physical exchanges with W caused considerable strains in their
marriage.  They tried marriage counseling for awhile, but without any manifest success
(R.T., at 50).  Unable to repair the growing rifts in their marriage, they separated in
March 1999.  Applicant and W remain separated, while still married.
Applicant has expressed remorse for his actions and has been forgiven (see ex.
A).   W (in retrospect) acknowledges some responsibility over the handling of her
disputes with Applicant and credits Applicant with “a lot of good things,” high moral
standards, and no intention, in hindsight, of trying to kill her (see ex. A).  During her
4
visits from Applicant and their daughters, W and Applicant “don’t fight much,” and
generally get along (ex. A).
When first interviewed by an DSS agent in December 2006, Applicant was asked
a number of questions about W’s abuse allegations.  In this initial interview, Applicant
denied any physical abuse of W.  When the DSS agent expressly informed him of D1's
allegations of his physical attempts to kill W and his brandishing of knives, Applicant
roundly rejected the allegations (see ex. 4).  The same DSS agent interviewed Applicant
a second time - this one in September 1977 (see exs. 3 and 4).  In this interview,
Applicant admitted to slapping W on numerous occasions between 1982 and 1998, and
placing his hand over her mouth on one occasion (in 1998), which caused her nose to
bleed.  But he denied ever trying to choke W, or threatening to kill her with a knife in the
presence of her children (see ex. 4).
Applicant’s denials of any physical exchanges and threats prompted the DSS
agent to schedule a polygraph with Applicant in October 2007.  During the pre-
polygraph phase of the DSS polygrapher’s exchange with Applicant, Applicant repeated
his denials of his ever choking W in an argument, or ever threatening her with a knife
during any of their arguments (ex. 4).
Following his opening interview with the DSS agent, the agent polygraphed
Applicant.  After this testing phase, the agent conducted a post-polygraph interview.  In
this interview, Applicant for the first time admitted to (a) putting his hand over W’s throat
in 1998 and briefly choking her and (b) placing his hand over her mouth, which caused
her nose to bleed (ex. 4).  Applicant admitted, too, to threatening to kill W in a heated
argument, and brandishing a knife in a threatening manner in W’s presence (ex. 4).  At
hearing, though, Applicant trimmed his earlier admissions.  
Applicant attributes his denials of his physical assaults of W to embarrassment.
His omissions and misstatements were clearly made, though, in a knowing and wilful
manner and were corrected only after a series of confrontations from the interviewing
agent.
Applicant and W continue to see each other periodically, even though they
remain separated (R.T., at 63).  Neither spouse has filed for divorce, and Applicant
remains interested in reconciling with W (see ex. A; R.T., at 63).  He is characterized by
his daughters as a good, supportive and reliable father (see exs. C and D).  His landlord
describes Applicant as patient, dependable, and ready to carry out his obligations (see
ex. B). 
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
5
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions,"
if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 18.
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and
regulations.  Adjudication Guidelines (AG) ¶ 18
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon
a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw
only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of
record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on
speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
6
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant physically assaulted his wife on a number of occasions over the course
of their long marriage and on two occasions threatened to kill her and/or cause her
serious bodily harm.  When asked about his actions in DSS interviews he minimized
and denied his actions.  Not until confronted by a DSS investigator in a post-polygraph
interview did he admit the extent of his physical actions and his underlying intent.
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s physical exchanges with his wife and his
ensuing omissions before submitting to a post-polygraph interview in 2003.
Potentially serious and difficult to reconcile with the trust and reliability
requirements for holding a security clearance are the timing and circumstances of
Applicant’s multiple omissions and misstatements over his physical assaults and threats
on his wife, and in his withholding of abusive actions  until he was confronted by a DSS
polyghrapher in a post-polygraph interview in October 2007.  So much trust is imposed
on persons cleared to see classified information that deviation tolerances for candor
lapses are gauged very narrowly. 
Mitigation of Applicant’s omissions and misstatements are difficult to credit
Applicant with,  since he failed to promptly correct his omissions and misstatements
until he was confronted in a post-polygraph interview.   In the past, the Appeal Board
has denied applicants availability of the predecessor mitigating condition of MC ¶ 27(a)
(the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or
falsification before being confronted with the facts) where the applicant has waited many
months to timely correct a known omission. Compare ISCR Case No. 97-0289 (Appeal
Bd. January 1998) with DISCR Case No. 93-1390 (Appeal Bd. January 1995).  
By contrast, the protection orders that W sought and obtained against Applicant,
while necessary and appropriate at the time they were issued in 1999 and 2000, have
not been renewed.  Applicant and W have made concerted efforts to reconcile and
maintain peace and harmony with their daughters, and have demonstrated considerable
progress over the past eight years.  MC ¶ 27©)), “the offense is so minor, or so much
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” is applicable to these facts.  Applicant
and W convince that they have made significant strides in repairing the damage to their
marriage and family unit.  Applicant, for his part, has inspired trust and confidence from
7
both his wife and daughters and exhibits no likelihood of any recurrent familial breaches
that prompted W to seek public intervention from the courts. 
By willfully and knowingly failing to disclose his multiple acts of physical assaults
and threats on his wife until confronted, Applicant concealed materially important
background information needed for the government to properly process and evaluate
his security clearance application.  His probative reasons for his omitting his actions
arrest/charges (embarrassment) are not sustainable grounds for averting inferences of
falsification.  Weighing all of the circumstances surrounding his multiple assault/threat
omissions and misstatements, and lack of any prompt, good faith corrections,
Applicant’s claims lack the necessary probative showing to avert drawn conclusions that
he knowingly and deliberately withheld material background information about his prior
physical assaults and threats. 
Knowing and wilful falsification is also covered by the criminal conduct guidelines.
Mitigation of the criminal features of his omissions falls along a little bit different fault line
than is the case with personal conduct considerations. To be sure, an applicant’s
positive work record and demonstrated family and community commitments can play a
major role in mitigating criminal conduct coverage of his omissions.  MC ¶ 32(d), “there
is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of time
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement,” has
potential application to Applicant’s situation.  Employment of this guideline and the use
of separate whole-person weighing of Applicant’s actions and personal assessments of
his family and landlord contributions weigh in his favor, but are not to mitigate the
repeated nature of his omissions and misstatements to the DSS agent who interviewed
him and eventually confronted him. 
Considering all of the evidence produced in this record and the available
guidelines in the Directive (inclusive of the E2.2 factors), unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g of Guideline E and subparagraph
2.a of Guideline 2.a. Favorable conclusions warrant, however, with respect to
subparagraphs 1.h through 1.j of Guideline E.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2 2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT):                   AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a: AGAINST APPLICANT
8
Sub-para. 1.b: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.c: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.d: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.e: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.f:: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.g: AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.h: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.I: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.j: FOR APPLICANT
GUIDELINE J: (CRIMINAL CONDUCT): AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
9
  
