1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ADP Case No. 07-09055 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for assignment to a public trust 
position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Questionnaire for Public Trust Position (SF 85P) on 
November 28, 2005. On March 21, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary 
decision to deny her application, citing trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines F and 
E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation), and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 27, 2008. She answered 
the Guideline F allegations on May 6, 2008, and requested a determination on the 
record without a hearing. She answered the Guideline E allegations on June 30, 2008. 
Department Counsel submitted the government’s written case on August 21, 2008. On 
August 22, 2008, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), including 
Government Exhibits (GX 1) through 14, was sent to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
government’s evidence. She received the FORM on September 2, 2008, but she did not 
respond within the prescribed 30-day period, which expired on October 2, 2008.  
 
On October 9, 2008, Applicant mailed Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A to DOHA, and it 
was received on October 14, 2008. Department Counsel did not object to consideration 
of her untimely submission, but argued that it should be given no weight. Department 
Counsel’s comments are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. The case was 
assigned to me on October 24, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
1.c, 1.e, 1.i, and 1.j. Her admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since November 2005. She has never received a trustworthiness 
determination.  
 
Applicant was previously married and divorced. The date of her divorce is not 
reflected in the record, but it appears to have been before November 2002. She and her 
former spouse had two children, ages 14 and 12, who live with their father. She also 
has a 17-year-old child whose father has custody and who lives with his grandmother. 
Applicant pays child support for all three children. She has an 18-year-old daughter who 
was living with her at the time of her application for a public trust position (GX 5 at 6-7; 
GX 6 at 4-5).  
 
In October 2005, Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. In her petition, she listed assets of $600 and liabilities of $54,236.23. She 
listed net monthly income of $1,280 and her expenses of $1,250. The court granted 
Applicant a discharge in March 2006 (GX 7 at 3-52).  
 
Applicant told a security investigator the bankruptcy was caused by 
unemployment and her divorce (GX 6 at 3). Her SF 85P reflects unemployment from 
December 1997 to September 1999, August 2001 to July 2002, March and April 2003, 
and January to May 2005. After Applicant’s bankruptcy discharge, she was unemployed 
from September to November 2005, when she started her current job (GX 5 at 3-5).  
 
When Applicant was divorced, her spouse agreed to be responsible for a joint 
credit union loan of about $20,000. He allowed the payments to become delinquent, and 
Applicant included the debt in her bankruptcy. 
3 
 
 
Applicant signed a one-year lease for an apartment in November 2002. After 
three months, she stopped paying rent and moved to low-income housing. The 
apartment landlord obtained a judgment against her, which was included in her 
bankruptcy. 
 
Applicant was laid off from work in March 2003 and was unable to pay her rent. 
The landlord obtained a judgment for unpaid rent, which was included in her 
bankruptcy.  
 
Applicant purchased a used car in about March 2003 and made payments until 
November 2003, when she surrendered the car and stopped making payments because 
the car was not operating properly. This debt was included in her bankruptcy. 
 
Applicant moved into another apartment in May 2004, taking over an existing 
lease from her former sister-in-law. After paying rent for two months, she moved in with 
a friend and stopped paying rent on the apartment. The landlord obtained a judgment 
for unpaid rent, which was included in her bankruptcy.  
 
 During an interview with a security investigator on August 7, 2006, Applicant 
stated the cell phone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d should have been included in her 
bankruptcy, but it is not listed on Schedule F of her bankruptcy petition, nor is the cell 
phone company listed in the certificate of service. The debt arose in 2004 when 
Applicant returned the cell phone without completing the contract because she was 
unhappy with the service (GX 6 at 6).  
 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant claimed she did not know anything about 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g. Her most recent credit report reflects that the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is a delinquent student loan (GX 8 at 2). The debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.f does not appear on the most recent credit report.  
 
On October 9, 2008, Applicant submitted evidence that she was enrolled in a 
consumer credit counseling service (AX A). The counseling service proposed a 
payment plan for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.h through 1.k. The plan 
includes the cell phone debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, which Applicant denied in her answer to the 
SOR. The plan does not address the unpaid fines alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c or 
delinquent student loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g. There is no evidence her creditors have 
agreed to the payment plan or that she has made any payments.  
 
Applicant’s net monthly income is about $1,120. Her expenses are about $940 
per month, leaving a net remainder of about $180. She has virtually no savings and 
owns a car worth about $2,000.  
 
4 
 
The following table summarizes the evidence concerning the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Answer 
To SOR 
Status Evidence 
1.b Parking Ticket $108 Admit Unpaid GX 4 
1.c Traffic Fine $585 Admit Paid in part GX 4 
1.d Cell Phone $421 Deny Unpaid GX 4; GX 6 at 6; AX A 
1.e Bad Check $228 Admit Unpaid GX 4; GX 8 at 2; AX A 
1.f Student Loan $1,529 Deny Not Proven GX 4; GX 8 
1.g Student Loan $2,432 Deny Unpaid GX 4;GX 8 at 2 
1.h Collection $713 Deny Unpaid GX 4; GX 8 at 2; AX A 
1.i Medical $229 Admit Unpaid GX 4; GX 8 at 2; AX A 
1.j Medical $339 Admit Unpaid GX 4; GX 8 at 2; AX A 
1.k Cell Phone $626 Deny Unpaid GX 4; GX 8 at 1; AX A 
 
When Applicant submitted her SF 85P in November 2005, she answered “yes” to 
question 16, asking if she had been charged with or convicted of any offense other than 
traffic fines of less than $150. She disclosed receiving a ticket in May 2005 for riding in 
a HOV [High Occupancy Vehicle] lane, but she did not disclose a $585 fine imposed in 
January 2005 for driving on a suspended, revoked, or cancelled license. The record 
reflects issuance of a warrant for failure to appear in court in May 2005, but it does not 
reflect whether the warrant was served or Applicant responded to it (GX 14). Although 
the SOR ¶ 1.c alleged she failed to appear in court for the driver’s license offense, the 
court records reflect that the charge of failure to appear occurred in November 2003 in 
connection with the traffic ticket alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b (GX 13). 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are entitled to adjudication under 
to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.   
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” AG ¶ 2(c). The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. The administrative judge’s over-
arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and common sense decision. 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. “Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] information will be 
resolved in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). An unfavorable trustworthiness 
determination is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines for a favorable 
determination. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in March 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.a) 
and ten delinquent debts totaling $7,210 (SSOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.k). Applicant admitted five 
delinquent debts totaling $1,489 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.i, and 1.j). The trustworthiness 
concern under this guideline is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise trustworthiness 
concerns and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(b) is raised where there is 
Aindebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the absence of any 
evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a realistic plan to pay the 
debt.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending beyond one=s means, which 
may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-
to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@  
 
 Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e). AG ¶ 19(b) is not 
established because there is no evidence of frivolous or irresponsible spending.  
6 
 
 
Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c) and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Trustworthiness concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by 
showing that Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are numerous, recent, and not the product of unusual circumstances that are not 
likely to recur. They raise doubt about her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing 
that Athe conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established.  
 
 Applicant’s divorce and her periods of unemployment were conditions beyond 
her control, establishing the first prong of AG ¶ 20(b). The second prong, however, is 
not established. Applicant’s bankruptcy was precipitated by her divorce and periods of 
unemployment, but she contributed to her financial distress by repeatedly disregarding 
her obligations with respect to her apartment leases, car loan, and traffic violations. Her 
last period of unemployment was after her bankruptcy and before her current 
employment. She has worked steadily for almost three years. In response to DOHA 
interrogatories, she promised to resolve all her delinquent debts by November 2007, but 
she presented no evidence of any actions to resolve her delinquent debts until October 
9, 2008, when she enrolled in a consumer credit counseling program.  
 
Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). 
Although Applicant has enrolled in a credit counseling program, this mitigating condition 
is not established because it does not encompass all her delinquent debts, there is no 
evidence the payment plan has been accepted by her creditors, and there is no 
evidence of payments under the plan. 
 
Trustworthiness concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing 
that Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@ ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
7 
 
Applicant has enrolled in a credit counseling program and submitted a proposed 
payment plan, but this mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has 
produced no evidence that she has made any payments under the plan. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR ¶ 2.a cross-alleges the unresolved parking ticket and unresolved traffic 
violation alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. The SOR ¶ 2.b alleges Applicant falsified her 
SF 85P by failing to disclose her $585 fine for driving on a suspended, revoked or 
cancelled driver’s license. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as 
follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 The disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(c) is relevant to Applicant’s failures to 
resolve the parking ticket and traffic violation. This disqualifying condition is raised by 
“credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and 
may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined 
with all available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information.” Applicant’s disregard for her legal obligations 
is sufficient “credible adverse information” to raise this disqualifying condition.  
 The relevant disqualifying condition pertaining to her failure to disclose her traffic 
violation is set out in AG ¶ 16(a) as follows: 
[D]eliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s 
state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
  
 Applicant’s denied falsifying her SF 85P. She admitted being fined $585 for 
driving without a valid license. She has offered no explanation for disclosing the HOV 
8 
 
violation but not disclosing her more recent and more serious offense of driving without 
a valid license. I conclude the security concern in AG ¶ 16(a) is raised. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns raised by false or misleading answers on an 
application for a public trust position may be mitigated by showing that “the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). In her answer to the SOR, she 
insisted she answered the question truthfully. While her answer to question 16 on the 
SF 85P was truthful, it was incomplete, and she made no effort to correct the omission. I 
conclude AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. 
 
 Trustworthiness concerns raised by personal conduct can be mitigated by 
showing “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant’s 
falsification was not minor, it was recent, it did not happen under unique circumstances, 
and it casts doubt on her reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a sensitive 
position must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed in my discussions of Guidelines F and E, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has suffered periods of unemployment and a marital breakup, but she 
received a fresh start with her Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in March 2006. She had 
one additional period of unemployment after her bankruptcy, but has been steadily 
employed for almost three years. She is again in financial distress. For the first time, 
she has enrolled in a credit counseling program, but it is too soon to tell if she will 
9 
 
adhere to whatever payment plan she can devise. Her lack of candor on her SF 85P 
raises questions about her reliability and trustworthiness. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
trustworthiness concerns raised by her financial problems and personal conduct. 
Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with national security to grant her eligibility for assignment to a public trust 
position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.k:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national 
security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for assignment 
to a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
