KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s relatively brief periods of unemployment during which she received
compensation are not adequate to apply the first prong of Mitigating Condition 20 (b).  Nor is
there a basis to apply the second prong.  Similarly the record does not support application of
mitigating Condition 20(c) and 20 (d).  The Judge’s whole person analysis relies on her
erroneous application of the mitigating conditions and is thus also error.  Favorable decision
reversed.
CASENO: 07-09304.a1
DATE: 10/06/2008
DATE: October 6, 2008
In Re:
---------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-09304
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On February 6, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On June 19, 2008, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Shari Dam granted
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel timely appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s application
of Guideline F Mitigating Conditions (MC) 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) is erroneous because it is
unsupported by the record evidence; and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis is contrary to
and unsupported by the record evidence.
            Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A. Facts:
The Judge made the following relevant factual findings: Applicant is married, but currently
separated.  She has a child from a former relationship and a child from her marriage.  From 1996
until 2002, Applicant was an airport screener for a security company.  Since that time, Applicant has
worked for other security firms; and since August 2004, she has worked for a federal contractor as
a security officer.  Applicant was unemployed for three to four months in 2002 and 1½ months in
2003.  In 2007, Applicant was out of work for six weeks after her child was born.  During those
periods, Applicant received unemployment compensation of about $200 every two weeks.  
In 2001, Applicant received seven credit cards, which she used for holiday presents and some
expenses.  At first, Applicant was able to manage the credit card bills.  However, her unemployment
and a significantly lower salary at her next job caused financial difficulties.  Applicant admitted that
from 2003 to 2006 she lived beyond her means.  She tried to obtain a loan to pay off her debts, but
was unable to do so because her credit rating was poor.  
Applicant responded to DOHA’s interrogatories regarding 26 debts in October 2007, stating
that she could not afford to pay them at that time, but would try to resolve them soon.  On February
29, 2008, Applicant contacted a credit-counseling firm for assistance in paying off her debts, and she
made an initial down payment for their services on March 12, 2008.  The firm set up a payment plan
to resolve 17 of Applicant’s debts.  The monthly payment was set at $539.  At the time of the
hearing, five debts had been removed from Applicant’s credit report after she disputed them, and
seven others remained unresolved.  Counting her salary and child support, Applicant claimed
sufficient income to cover her living expenses with $725 remaining, thereby giving her the ability
to make the $539 monthly payment.  However, as of the date of the hearing, Applicant admitted that
she had not made any payments on any of her debts or on the debt reduction plan for the past six
months.  She promised to try to pay off her debts in the future.
3
B.  Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of facts is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence—“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility
of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative
agency’s finding from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give
deference to the Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.      
To the extent that the Judge’s factual findings are relevant to the assigned error, they will be
discussed below.
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29,
43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Appeal
Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3 and ¶ E3.1.33.3.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Dep’t of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are arbitrary or capricious, the Board
will review the Judge's decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails
to articulate a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of
judgment; it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision
that runs contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere
difference of opinion.  In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are contrary to law,
the Board will consider whether they are contrary to provisions of Executive Order 10865, the
Directive, or other applicable federal law.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2,
2006).            
MC 20(b) is found at Directive ¶ E2.20(b): “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely1
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances[.]”
MC 20(c) is found at Directive ¶ E2.20(c): “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem2
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control[.]”
MC 20(d) is found at Directive ¶ E2.20(d): “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue3
creditors or otherwise resolve debts[.]”
4
Department Counsel contends that the Judge’s application of Guideline F Mitigating
Conditions (MC) 20(b),  20(c),  and 20(d)  is unsupported by the record evidence.  Department1 2 3
Counsel’s contention has merit.  
The Judge found “partial application” of MC 20(b) in Applicant’s case.  Decision at 6.  The
Judge cited Applicant’s periods of unemployment and underemployment.  As Department Counsel
points out, Applicant’s periods of unemployment were brief–three to four months in 2002 and 1½
months in 2003, as well as six weeks of unpaid maternity leave in 2007; and Applicant received
unemployment compensation during those periods.  To the extent that Applicant has experienced
financial difficulties beyond her control, Applicant has not shown a direct connection between her
employment history and her present financial situation.  The Board has held that such a connection,
or nexus, must be established in order for the first portion of MC 20(b) to be applicable.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-23362 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2008).  Moreover, the second prong of MC 20(b)
requires that an applicant act responsibly under the circumstances.  While Applicant testified that
she  worked for a reduced salary from 2002 until 2004, she stated that she lived beyond her means
between 2003 and 2006 and did not reduce her expenses to account for her reduced salary.
Transcript at 68-70.  Applicant also testified that she had made no payments on her debts for
“probably longer” than six months prior to the hearing.  Transcript at 89.  She had resources to do
so at that time.  Decision at 6.  Therefore, the record does not support the application of MC20(b)
in Applicant’s case.
The Judge also found that Applicant’s actions with regard to her debts were “sufficient to
trigger partial application” of MC 20(c) and MC 20(d).  Decision at 6.  The actions the Judge cited
were Applicant’s hiring of a debt-consolidation firm; her calls to some of her creditors, which
resulted in the deletion of either five or six debts from her credit reports (Decision at 3 and 6); and
her submission of a budget which indicated that she had a sufficient surplus left every month after
payment of her living expenses, with which she was able to pay the amount set by the debt-
consolidation firm.  Id. at 3.  
Department Counsel argues that the Judge erred in even partial application of MC 20(c) and
MC 20(d), because there is little or no indication that Applicant’s situation is yet being resolved or
is under control or that Applicant has yet initiated a good-faith effort to repay her creditors or
otherwise resolve her debt.  At the time of the hearing, Applicant did not clearly understand what
the financial firm she had hired would do, and she did not know which of her debts would be
5
included in the firm’s repayment plan.  Transcript at 82-90.  At the time of the hearing, Applicant
had made no payments on her debts.  Id. at 85-89.  In the absence of payments under the plan, it
cannot be said that there are “clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,”
as required for application of MC 20(c).  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-21386 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 11,
2003).  Furthermore, Applicant indicated that she had made no payments on any of her debts in six
months or longer, even though the budget she submitted indicated that she had more left every month
in discretionary income than the $539 she would eventually need for the firm’s repayment plan.
Decision at 3.  In the absence of a meaningful track record of repayments, it cannot reasonably be
suggested here that Applicant has initiated a good-faith effort to repay her creditors or otherwise
resolve her debts, as is required for application of MC 20(d).  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-21386 at
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 11, 2003).  Moreover, promises of future repayment are not a substitute for a history
of payment.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-31872 at 4 (App. Bd. May 24, 2005).  Thus, the record
does not support the application of MC 20(c) and MC 20(d).
Department Counsel also argues that the Judge’s whole-person analysis is contrary to and
unsupported by the record evidence.  Department Counsel’s argument has merit.  The Judge’s whole-
person analysis relied in large part on the MCs she applied.  While noting that Applicant had made
no payments under the repayment plan, the Judge concluded that the debts covered by the plan had
been resolved.  Decision at 7.  As discussed above, it cannot be said that debts are being resolved
in such a situation when an applicant has not yet begun making payments, especially when she had
resources to do so.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-21386 at 3 (Jun. 11, 2003).  The Judge then
indicated that in spite of Applicant’s lack of payments under the repayment plan, she based her
analysis on a favorable credibility determination.  Decision at 7.  While deference is to be given to
a Judge’s credibility determination, such a determination is not immune from review, and it cannot
take the place of substantive evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-00789 at 6 (App. Bd. Jun. 28,
2006).  The totality of evidence in this case does not reasonably support the Judge’s whole-person
analysis.
Order
The Judge’s decision granting Applicant a security clearance is REVERSED. 
 
Signed: Michael D. Hipple      
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin           
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
6
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
