                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-04035
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
October 30, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF-86), on
August 28, 2007.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On May 30, 2008, the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 25, 2008, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge.   This Administrative Judge was assigned the
matter on July 22, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on August 12, 2008,
scheduling the hearing for October 2, 2008.  The Government offered sixteen exhibits
referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 16, which were received without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted no exhibits. DOHA
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 14, 2008.  Based upon a review
of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 42 years old and married.  He is employed by a defense
contractor as a Senior Technical Specialist, and is applying for a security clearance in
connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because he is financially overextended
and at risk to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The Applicant has been married three times and divorced twice.  As a result, he
became indebted from the expenses of the marriages as well as from the costs of the
divorces.  In 1989, he married his first wife and they had two children.  They separated
in 1998.  In addition to his other bills, that included a credit union loan for $15,000.00,
the court ordered that he pay temporary child and alimony support of $2,400 a month.
The Applicant fell behind on the loan payments and struggled to pay his living
expenses.  The child and alimony support amount was eventually reduced, but he still
had financial difficulties making ends meet.  In 2002/2003, he married his second wife.
They incurred debt, and divorced in 2004.  He married his current wife in 2005.     
Credit reports of the Applicant dated March 28, 2003, September 24, 2001, April
3, 2007, May 5, 2008 and July 22, 2008 indicate that the delinquent debts set forth in
the SOR remain delinquent and owing.  (Government Exhibits 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6). 
In regard to the credit union loan for $15,000.00, the Applicant believes that his
ex-wife may have paid it, but he is not sure.  
In 2002, the Applicant became indebted to a creditor in the amount of $55.00.
This debt remains outstanding.  (Tr. p. 36).  A delinquent debt owed to another creditor
in the amount of $138.00 also remains outstanding.  (Tr. p. 41).   
In order to cover some of his expenses for gas and groceries, in July 2004, the
Applicant used his company credit card to make unauthorized personal purchases.  He
was suspended for three days without pay because of his misuse of the company credit
card.
The Applicant listed a delinquent credit card debt in the amount of $300.00 on his
Questionnaire for National Security Positions.  He stated that it no longer appears on his
credit report so he believes that it has been paid.  (Tr. p. 43).
When asked whether he has any other delinquent debts, the Applicant added
that he has an outstanding tax debt in the amount of about $1,300.00.  His wife is
currently paying the debt in the amount of $75.00 a month which comes out of her
social security check she receives for disability.  
Paragraph 2 (Guideline - M - Use of Information Technology). The Government alleges
that the Applicant is ineligible for a security clearance because noncompliance with
rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations pertaining to information technology
systems may raise security concerns about his reliability and trustworthiness, calling
3
into question his willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks,
and information.  
Paragraph 3 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because of his questionable judgment, lack of
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.
From 2004, until at least February 2005, the Applicant used his company
computer to view inappropriate Web sites on the internet.  The sites included pictures of
woman in bikinis, lingerie, partially undressed and with their breasts and genitals
exposed.  This was a violation of company policy.  In July 2004, the Applicant was
admonished by his manager for using a company computer to view these inappropriate
Web sites on the internet.  (Government Exhibit 9).  However, he continued to view the
inappropriate sites.  The Applicant testified that he knew it was wrong and was aware of
the company policies, the Code of Conduct and the Sexual Harassment policy that
prohibited such conduct.  Following the investigation of this matter, the Applicant was
terminated from his employment.  (Government Exhibits 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15 and
16). He testified, however, that he did not know that it would adversely affect his
security clearance.  He sincerely regrets what he did, and believes that he has learned
his lesson.  He states that he will never engage in this misconduct again.    
As discussed above, the Applicant also misused his corporate credit card in July
2004 to purchase groceries and gas because he ran short on cash that particular
month.  The bill reflects that there were 34 charges made by the Applicant that were not
business-related expenses, but were for his own personal use.  (Government Exhibit 8).
The Applicant stated that he paid the bill as soon as he received it.  (Tr. p. 45).  The
Applicant expressed that he will never engage in this misconduct again.  He currently
has an American Express credit card that was issued as a corporate Government card
and he will not touch it.  (Tr. p. 46).
 
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
4
also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
19.(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline M (Use of Information Technology)
39.  The Concern.  Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the willingness or ability
to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and information.  Information
Technology Systems include all related computer hardware, software, firmware, and
data used of the communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage,
protection of information. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
40.(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or
component thereof;
40.(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology system.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16.(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under ant other
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which,
when combined with all available information supports a whole person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
5
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person
may not properly safeguard protected information.  This includes but is not limited to
consideration of:
16.(d)(2) disruptive, violent or inappropriate behavior in the workplace;
16.(d)(3)  pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in evaluating the
relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should consider the
following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
6
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in financial irresponsibility, misuse of information technology
and rule violations that demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in financial irresponsibility (Guideline F), use of information
technology (Guideline M), and personal conduct (Guideline E).  The totality of this
evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the
Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there
is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guidelines F, M and E of the SOR.
The evidence shows that the Applicant has incurred a number of delinquent
debts that he has simply ignored.  Granted, his marriages and divorces have been
costly, however, even so, his delinquent debts are not so excessive to prevent him from
doing something to demonstrate a showing of good faith or an effort to resolve them.
He has not done anything.  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying
Conditions 19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 19.(c) a history of not
meeting financial obligations are applicable.  None of the mitigating conditions apply.
The Applicant has not made a good faith effort to resolve his indebtedness.  His
financial problems have not been resolved and they remain owing.  Accordingly, I find
against the Applicant under Guideline F, Financial Considerations.
 
With respect to the Applicant’s misuse of his company credit card in July 2004,
for which his pay was suspended for three days, and the misuse of the company
computer, from 2004 through February 2005, by viewing inappropriate Web sites, for
which he was terminated from his employment, the misconduct demonstrates a pattern
of poor judgment under Guidelines M (Use of Information Technology) and E, (Personal
7
Conduct) that is fairly recent and very troubling.  Under Guideline M, Disqualifying
Conditions 40(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology stem or
component thereof, and 40(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information
technology system apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Under
Guideline E, Disqualifying Conditions 16(d)(2) disruptive, violent or inappropriate
behavior in the workplace, and 16(d)(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations also
apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable. Consequently, his poor
judgment adversely effects his security clearance eligibility.  
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is 42 years old, but has
conducted himself in a very immature and irresponsible manner.  Under the particular
facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed
as a whole, support a whole person assessment of questionable judgement,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard classified information.     
This Applicant has not demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and does not meet
the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find
against the Applicant under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), M, Use of
Information Technology and E (Personal Conduct). 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 are found against the Applicant.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: Against the Applicant.
   
Paragraph 3: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.b.: Against the Applicant.
8
    Subpara.  3.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.d.: Against the Applicant.
   
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
