1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 07-08419
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
October 28, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for Public Trust Position (SF 85P), on
September 27, 2006.  On March 6, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns
under Guideline F regarding Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive);
Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated
Jan. 1987, as amended (Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 14, 2008.  He answered the
SOR on April 30, 2008, and requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge.  This
case was assigned to another Administrative Judge on June 16, 2008.  It was
reassigned to the undersigned on August 25, 2008.  DOHA had already issued a notice
of hearing on July 22, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 9,
2
2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 3, which were received without
objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibit (AppX) A, which
was also received without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR)
on September 18, 2008.  I granted Applicant’s several requests to keep the record open
until September 30, 2008, to submit additional matters.  On September 30, 2008, he
submitted Exhibits B and C, which were received without objection.  The record closed
on September 30, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts relating to Taiwan.  The request was granted.  The request, and the
attached documents, were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record.
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated April 30, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 2.b., 2.c. and 2.d of the SOR, without explanations.  He
denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b., 2.a. and 2.e of the SOR.
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
1.a. and 1.b.  The Applicant’s parents are dual nationals of the U.S. and Taiwan
(TR at page 39 line 12 to page 41 line 21, at page 45 lines 9~24, and GX 1 at page 5).
His mother, who is in “her late fifties or early sixties,” is a teacher (TR at page 43 line 21
to page 44 line 21).  As a public school teacher, her pay and benefits come from the
Taiwanese government (Id).  The Applicant is very close to his mother, but avers he
would not be subject to coercion vis-a-vis her, by the Taiwanese government (TR at
page 51 line 6 to page 52 line 14).  The Applicant’s father, who is in his “[e]arly sixties,”
is an engineer (TR at page 42 line 1 to page 43 line 20).  He has no connection with the
Taiwanese government (Id).
1.c.  The Applicant was employed by a “government affiliated . . . think tank”
from November of 2003 to May of 2004, while living in Taiwan on a Taiwanese passport
(TR at page 30 line 24 to page 33 line 2, and GX 3).
1.d. and 2.e.  The Applicant traveled to Hong Kong in December of 2005, using
his U.S. passport (TR at page 34 line 24 to page 35 line 2).
Guideline C - Foreign Preference
The Applicant is a native born American, who lived with his dual national parents
in Taiwan for eight years before attending high school in the U.S. (TR at page 19 line
3
16 to page 20 line 15).  He continued his stay in the U.S. while attending college (TR at
page 23 lines 14~22).  After college, he moved back to Taiwan “to be closer to . . . [his]
family” (TR at page 23 line 23 to page 24 line 8).
2.a.~2.d.  From about October of 2003 to about February of 2006, the Applicant
lived in Taiwan (TR at page 23 line 24 to page 24 line 10, and at page 28 line 25 to
page 29 line 15).  He lived in Taiwan on his Taiwanese passport (TR at page 20 line 19
to page 21 line 23).  He also entered and exited Taiwan using his Taiwanese passport
(TR at page 29 line 25 to page 30 line 23, and at page 33 line 14 to page 34 line 1).
This passport does not expire until October of 2013, but he has surrendered it to his
employer’s Facility Security Officer (AppX C).
At his hearing, the Applicant also indicated that he was willing to renounce his
Taiwanese citizenship, but he has failed to do so (TR at page 26 line 11 to page 27 line
5, at page 28 lines 1~7, and at page 27 line 6 to page 28 line 11).  Were he to do so, he
would be unable to handle his parents affairs when they pass away; and as their sole
heir, he would give up any property rights he might inherit in Taiwan (TR at page 47 line
3 to page 48 line 8).
2.e.  The Applicant traveled to Singapore in March of 2004, using his U.S.
passport (TR at page 34 line 24 to page 35 line 2, and at page 36 line 23 to page 38
line 3).
I take administrative notice of the following facts: Taiwan has an elected
democratic government.  It has the 17  largest economy in the world that is a leadingth
producer of high-technology goods.  It engages in industrial and economic espionage.
Proprietary information technology is high on the Taiwanese list of targeted information
to be acquired by their agents from foreign governments and businesses.  Although the
U.S. now recognizes Taiwan as part of China as “one-China,” it continues to maintain
strong unofficial relations with Taiwan.
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions”
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.).  “The standard that must be met for
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security” (See
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.).  The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel
are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final
unfavorable access determination may be made (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.).
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the
Administrative Judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
4
AG.  These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision.  According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.”  The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable
trustworthiness decision.
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to sensitive information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard sensitive information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
sensitive information.
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned” (See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information)).
Analysis
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
Paragraph 6 of the new adjudicative guidelines sets out the security concern
relating to Foreign Influence: “Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is
not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by a foreign interest.”
5
Here, Paragraph 7(a) is applicable: “contacts with a foreign family member . . .
who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  The
Applicant’s parent’s are dual nationals, but reside in Taiwan.  This is countered,
however, by the first mitigating condition, as “the nature of the relationships with foreign
persons, the country in which these persons are located . . . are such that it is unlikely
the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual . . . and the interests of the U.S.”  The Applicant averred credibly at
his hearing that, although he is very close to his mother, he could not be coerced by her
presence in Taiwan by the Taiwanese government.  Furthermore, in the unlikely event
that were to occur; as they are U.S. citizens, they could easily return to the U.S.
Guideline C - Foreign Preference
Paragraph 9 of the new adjudicative guidelines sets out the security concern
relating to Foreign Preference: “When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United
States.”
Here, Paragraphs 10(a)(1) and (5) are applicable. “exercise of any right, privilege
or obligation of a foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign
citizenship of a family member.  This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a
current foreign passport; . . . (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business
interests in another country.”  Although mitigating condition under Paragraph 11(e) is
clearly applicable, as Applicant’s “passport has been . . . surrendered to the cognizant
security authority,” I can not find that Paragraph 11(b) is also applicable.  At his hearing,
although the Applicant “expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship,” he was
hesitant in this regard, at best.  It is clear that he wishes to retain his Taiwanese
citizenship to protect his financial interests as his parent’s sole heir.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
6
He has the support of both his Branch Chief and his Team Leader, both of whom
have known the Applicant for two years.
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust
position.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the
trustworthiness concerns arising from his Foreign Preference. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust
position.  Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
7
