 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-01554 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) on December 14, 2005. On April 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations, for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On May 21, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 18, 2008. 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on June 25, 2008. The case 
was transferred to me on July 9, 2008. On July 31, 2008, a Notice of Hearing was 
issued, scheduling the hearing for August 26, 2008. The case was heard on that date. 
The Government offered seven exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits 
(Gov) 1 – 7, and called one witness. The Applicant offered seven exhibits which were 
 
2 
 
 
admitted as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A - H. Applicant testified and called two witnesses. 
The record was held open until September 9, 2008, to allow Applicant to submit 
additional documents. Applicant timely submitted a five-page document that was 
admitted as AE I. Department Counsel’s response to the documents is marked as 
Hearing Exhibit 1. The transcript was received on September 12, 2008.  Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 1.f, 
2.c, 2.d, 2.e, and 2.f, but denies the allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 2.a, 2.b, and 2.g.  
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to retain his security clearance.  He has been employed as a local area network 
administrator with his company since March 2004. He served on active duty in the 
United States Air Force from May 8, 1996, to May 7, 2000. He separated at the rank of 
Airman First Class, E-3. He has held a security clearance since 1996. He has two years 
of college credit, majoring in computer science. He is married and has a nine-year-old 
daughter. (Tr at 4-6, 83-84; Gov 1; Gov 2 at 1.)  
 
While on active duty, Applicant received Article 15 nonjudicial punishment on 
September 26, 1997, for violating Article 92, UMCJ, Failure to Obey a Lawful General 
Regulation and Article 134, UCMJ, Dishonorable Failure to Pay a Debt. Applicant 
wrongfully used his government credit for private purchases in the amount of $1,793, 
and failed to pay the debt. His commander punished him to be reduced to the grade of 
Airman, which was suspended until March 25, 1998. (Gov 2 at 2-4.) 
 
After separating from active duty, Applicant accepted a job with a defense 
contractor in May 2000. He worked in a military squadron. The defense contractor’s 
office was at another location.  The military customer arranged to send Applicant to a 
computer training seminar from 27-30 May 2003. The training was held in his former 
hometown. His brother still lived in the area. Applicant did not show up May 27, 2003, 
the first day of training, which started at 9 am until the afternoon. He was advised to be 
on time the next day. The next day, he left early in the afternoon. He did not attend 
class the remaining two days. (Tr at 20-31; 84-92.) At hearing, Applicant admitted to 
visiting with family members and friends during times when he was supposed to be at 
the training seminar. (Tr at 91-92.)   
 
Applicant left the area where the training was held on Friday, May 30, 2008, and 
returned to his home on Sunday. When he returned to work, he completed an expense 
report claiming expenses for the training even though he did not complete the course. 
He also completed a time card claiming he worked eight hours each day during the 
training seminar. (Tr at 93-95; Gov 3.)  
  
 
3 
 
 
When Applicant returned to the squadron, he told two co-workers, MSgt B. and 
Mr. D., that the training was not “curtailed to his benefit.” He did not mention that he 
failed to attend most of the training sessions. (Tr at 94.) MSgt B. was contacted in the 
middle of June by the company who ran the training and informed that Applicant had 
missed half a day the first two days of training, and failed to show up for training on 
Thursday and Friday. They told MSgt B. that they cancelled Applicant’s registration and 
credited the voucher back to the government. MSgt B. informed them he would handle 
the matter internally. (Gov 3 at 3.) The record is unclear as to whether MSgt B. informed 
Applicant’s employer – the defense contractor.  
 
The Deputy Division Manager (and Facility Security Officer) of Applicant’s former 
company testified during the hearing. He works at the defense contractor’s office and 
does not work with Applicant on a daily basis. On September 1, 2003, he was informed 
that the training company sent in a notification of reimbursement for the training that 
Applicant failed to complete in May 2003. The training company provided further details 
in an e-mail sent on September 2, 2003. Applicant’s pay and travel records were 
reviewed. It was discovered that although he did not complete the course, Applicant 
submitted a travel reimbursement request for the entire period of the training and 
claimed that he worked eight hours each day during the training period. (Tr at 19-21; 
Gov 3.) 
 
 On September 3, 2003, Applicant was called into the meeting with the Deputy 
Division Manager and the program manager who worked with Applicant on a daily 
basis. During the meeting, Applicant was informed that he was being terminated for 
false time charging and false expense reporting related to the May 2003 training that 
Applicant was required to attend but did not. Memorandums were prepared which 
summarized what happened during the meeting. The Deputy Division Manager 
identified these memorandums and testified that they were accurate summaries of what 
occurred during the meeting. He testified that Applicant was clearly informed of the 
basis for his termination and that he was not subject to rehire. (Tr at 17 - 35; Gov 3; Gov 
4.)  
 
Applicant was hired by his current employer in March 2004. On December 14, 
2005, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Position, (e-QIP) in 
conjunction with a routine periodic reinvestigation of his security clearance. He 
answered “No” in response to section “22. Your Employment Record. Has any of the 
following happened to you in the last 7 years? 1. Fired from job; 2. Quit after being told 
you’d be fired; 3. Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct; 4. 
Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of unsatisfactory performance; 5. 
Left a job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances?” He did not list his 
termination on September 3, 2003, from his previous employer. (Gov 1.)  
 
On October 11, 2007, Applicant was interviewed in conjunction with his 
background investigation. He provided a signed, sworn statement on that same date.  In 
his statement, Applicant acknowledges being fired from his previous employer in 
September 2003. In the statement, he explained that he attended a training seminar in 
 
4 
 
 
2003 in relation to his job. He found that most training sessions were not useful for his 
job and he attended only two to three sessions. He admits to being paid on a per diem 
rate for travel and meals. (Gov 5.) At hearing, Applicant testified that he attended 
sessions on each day of the training seminar. (Tr. at 85-89.)    
 
In his statement, Applicant indicates that he was given a good evaluation and a 
raise in August 2003. Around that time, he noticed a co-worker was keeping a log of 
work activities on her work computer. He reported her activity to his supervisor in late 
August 2003. On September 1, 2003, his managers contacted him and arranged a 
meeting on September 1, 2003. He believed the meeting was to discuss the issue with 
the co-worker. At the meeting, Applicant was asked to provide all of his papers and 
materials from his training in early May 2003. He met with his superiors again on 
September 3, 2003. He was told that he was being fired during this meeting. He claims 
he was never given a reason for the termination. (Gov 5 at 1-2.) At hearing, Applicant 
admits that he was told during the meeting that he was fired for expense report fraud 
and submission of a false time card. (Tr at 101-106.) 
 
After he was terminated, Applicant filed a complaint with his former company’s 
corporate office. He claims there was an investigation. At the end of the investigation, 
he was told that he was eligible for employment with the company at its other locations 
but not at the location from where he was fired. (Gov 5.) He did not provide any 
documents to support this assertion.  
 
Applicant states that he did not intentionally falsify section 22 on his security 
clearance questionnaire. He did not forget that he was fired but claims that since he was 
told he was eligible for rehire that the termination was not unfavorable. He feels that he 
was unjustly targeted during his time at his previous employer. (Tr at 112; Gov 5.)   
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed that Applicant had financial issues. 
When Applicant separated from active duty, he started a small business. The business 
was not successful and he incurred a lot of debts. As a result, he filed for bankruptcy on 
December 3, 2001. (AE B.)  He continued to incur delinquent debts after the bankruptcy 
discharge, including: a $1,386 delinquent credit card account that was charged off (SOR 
¶ 2.d: Gov 6 at 4; Gov 7 at 2.); a $221 credit card account that was charged off (SOR ¶ 
2.e: Gov 7 at 2); a $1,169 credit card account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 2.f: Gov 4 at 
2-3; Gov 6 at 6; Gov 7 at 2); and a $2,125 jewelry store account that was charged off 
(SOR ¶ 2.g; Gov 6 at 5; Gov 7 at 3). 
 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.e and 2.g were included in his bankruptcy (AE B 
at 16, Schedule F, page 2; AE B at AE B at 12; Schedule D, page 1.) The debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 2.f is resolved. (Tr at 117-118; AE G at 9-10; AE I at 2-3.) Applicant entered 
into a payment agreement pertaining to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 2.d. He agreed to 
pay $115.55 per month until the debt is paid. He anticipates it will be resolved after 12 
payments are made.  He began making payments in June 2008 and has made four 
payments. (Tr at 114; AE G at 11-14; AE I at 5.)   
 
5 
 
 
In April 2008, Applicant consulted a credit counseling agency.  The agency 
assisted him in preparing a budget. As of April 30, 2008, Applicant and his wife had a 
net monthly income of $5,400.  Their total monthly expenses are approximately $4,679.  
After expenses, they have approximately $721 in discretionary income. (AE G. ) 
 
Two witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf. The Director of the military 
squadron where Applicant works as a contractor testified that he has known Applicant 
for four years. He states Applicant is vigilant about keeping computers and servers safe. 
He claims that Applicant is the best LAN administrator he has worked with over the past 
20 years. He has no reason to doubt Applicant’s integrity and recommends renewal of 
his security clearance. (Tr at 57-64; AE A at 2.)  An electronics engineer who has 
worked with Applicant over the past three years testified. He works with Applicant 
approximately 3-4 times a week. He describes Applicant as professional and dedicated 
to his work. He does not consider him a risk. (Tr at 66-69.)  
 
 Applicant provided several reference letters. The Chief, Seekers and Sensors 
Flight states he has worked with Applicant for the past four years. He states Applicant 
brings energy, enthusiasm, and commitment to his work.  He consistently delivers high 
quality products to the organization who quickly established himself as a go-to person. 
(AE A at 1.) Another coworker describes him as “efficient, extremely competent, and 
[having] an excellent rapport with those he supported.” (AE A at 3.) 
 
Master Sergeant B. worked with Applicant at his previous employer and wrote a 
letter on his behalf. He states Applicant came to work in his squadron as a contractor in 
2002. He states that he was not fully trained for his position and Applicant took the time 
to train him. He states Applicant was always available when he needed assistance with 
any issue within the squadron.  He is aware that Applicant did not complete the training 
that he was sent to in May 2003. He claims that it was not a problem because the 
training company refunded the training fee back to the squadron. (It is unclear whether 
MSgt B. informed Applicant’s employer about the issue. It is also unclear whether MSgt 
B. is aware that Applicant was reimbursed for his travel expenses even though he did 
not complete the course, and that he claimed full eight hour work days during the week 
of training even though he did not attend the training course for the majority of the 
week.) MSgt B. claims Applicant’s integrity has never come into question when he 
worked for him. He claims his patience, honesty and work ethic were the best he has 
seen in his 23 and half years in the Air Force. (AE F.)    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
6 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
7 
 
 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Personal conduct concerns are raised because of Applicant’s misuse of a 
government credit card in 1997 when he was on active duty; his termination in 
September 2003 for fraudulent time charging and expense reporting related to the May 
2003 training and his deliberate failure to list his termination in response to section 22 of 
the security clearance questionnaire; and his statement in a signed, sworn statement 
that he was not given a reason for the termination.  The government concedes the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.c should be found for Applicant. 
 
 Applicant’s termination in September 2003 and the underlying conduct 
supporting the termination raised Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (PC DC) ¶ 
16(c ) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, 
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information) and PC DC ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse 
information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be 
sufficient itself for an adverse determination, but which, when combined with all 
available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information -  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and (4) 
evidence of significant misuse of government or other employer’s time and resources). 
 
 In May 2003, Applicant was sent to training by the government customer. He 
arrived late the first day of training. He only spent half a day the second day of training 
and did not return for the remaining training. He decided that the training was not useful 
to him so he stopped attending. He did not seek authorization for leaving the training. 
He did not leave immediately when he thought the training was not useful in relation to 
his job. He admits that he has family in the area where the training was located, and he 
spent time with his family when he should have been attending training. He then 
claimed expenses for the training when he actually did not complete the course, and 
also claimed that he worked eight hours each day when he was at the training. His 
failure to attend training violated his company’s policies, and was an abuse of his 
employer’s and the government’s time and resources. His conduct raises questions in 
regard to his judgment, untrustworthiness, lack of candor, and an inability to follow 
rules. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct is further aggravated by his deliberate failure to list his 
termination in response to section 22 on his December 14, 2005, security clearance 
questionnaire and his statement that he was not aware of the basis for his termination in 
 
8 
 
 
his October 11, 2007, signed, sworn statement. This conduct supports the applicability 
of PC DC ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities). Applicant claims that he believed he did not need to list that he was 
terminated because he was informed he was subject to rehire at any other location 
aside from the location that he was fired. In his response to the SOR, he claimed that he 
did not have enough time to complete the questionnaire and did not read the question 
carefully. I do not find his explanation credible. The language of Section 22 is very 
specific. At hearing, Applicant admits that he was aware that he was fired. The outcome 
of the purported investigation did not change that. The government expects applicants 
to be truthful at all times. Self-serving justifications do not provide an excuse for failing 
to provide full disclosure. I find he deliberately failed to list that he was fired. I also do 
not find Applicant’s statement that he was not aware of the basis for the termination to 
be credible. The Deputy Division Manager testified that Applicant was informed about 
the basis of his termination. The memorandums prepared at the time of the September 
3, 2008, meeting verify what occurred during the meeting.  
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to establish a prima facie 
case and raise disqualifying conditions under Personal Conduct, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
concerns. (Directive ¶ E3.1.15.) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. (See, ISCR 
Case NO. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005.)  
  
 The following Personal Conduct Mitigating Concerns (PC MC) have the potential 
to apply: PC MC ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts) has the 
potential to apply to Applicant’s deliberate falsifications. I find it does not apply. After 
completing his personnel security questionnaire, Applicant did not promptly come 
forward to correct his incorrect answer to section 22. He only admitted to being fired 
after being confronted by the investigator conducting his background investigation. He 
continued to provide false information in his signed, sworn statement when he claimed 
he was not told why he was terminated. At hearing, he continued to provide excuses for 
his lack of forthrightness.  
 
 PC MC ¶ 17( c) (the offense is so minor so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not case doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment); and PC DC ¶ 17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior 
and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to occur) potentially apply 
to the other issues under personal conduct. I find they do not apply. While Applicant is 
highly regarded at his current employer, his refusal to accept responsibility for the poor 
 
9 
 
 
judgment he demonstrated in his previous job which ultimately resulted in his 
termination does not support mitigation. On his own volition, Applicant decided he did 
not need to attend the training in May 2003. He fails to acknowledge that his failure to 
attend the training was irresponsible. He refuses to acknowledge that claiming travel 
and expenses for a training that he did not complete was fraudulent. He clearly did not 
work four eight hour days during the training course. He sees nothing wrong with 
claiming pay for these hours even though he was not working.  Essentially, the training 
appears to have been an opportunity for Applicant to take a paid vacation at the 
government’s expense (and ultimately the taxpayers) to visit family members. He still 
has not acknowledged the gravity of his conduct. He self-rationalizes and blames others 
for his own poor choices.  
 
 If Applicant had come forward and admitted that he made a serious mistake in 
his previous job and truthfully listed on his security clearance questionnaire that he was 
fired from his previous job, he would have a good case for mitigation considering his 
favorable work performance over the past four years in his current job. However, at 
hearing, Applicant provided inconsistent statements, evasive answers, and 
demonstrated a lack of insight as to the gravity of the incident which was the basis for 
his termination from his previous employer. His repeated failure to accept responsibility 
for his past errors in judgment remains a concern under personal conduct.   
 
 I find against Applicant under the Personal Conduct concern. 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has a history of financial 
irresponsibility. He misused and did not pay a government credit card in 1997 when he 
was on active duty.  His financial problems in the 2000-2001 led to his December 2001 
bankruptcy filing. After his bankruptcy discharge, he incurred several delinquent 
accounts.  
 
 
10 
 
 
FC DC ¶ 19(c)(deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing 
deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of trust) applies 
related to Applicant’s history of breaching his fiduciary duty to the government and to his 
employer. In 1997, while on active duty, he was issued a government credit card which 
was only to be used for official travel. He used the card for personal purchases and 
failed to pay the debt. In May 2003, he breached his duty towards his employer by 
failing to complete the training seminar and filing for travel expenses and credit for 
hours not worked.   
  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Applicant has a long history of financial irresponsibility starting with the abuse of his 
government credit card in 2007. He recently started to resolve his most recent 
delinquent accounts. However, questions about his trustworthiness and good judgment 
remain based on his lack of insight about the gravity of offense which was the basis for 
his termination from his previous job.    
 
FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies with respect to Applicant’s failure of 
his small business in 2001. He was unemployed for six months after he was fired in 
September 2003. He has taken steps to resolve the delinquent debts that remain.  
Although, Applicant’s conduct was the basis for his termination from his previous 
employer, he acted responsibly under the circumstances pertaining to his financial 
situation.   
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) applies. Applicant attended financial counseling in April 2008. A budget was 
prepared as part of his counseling. Applicant appears to live within his means and has 
taken steps to resolve his delinquent accounts.   
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
2.f. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.e. and 2.g were included in his bankruptcy. He 
entered into a payment agreement with the debt alleged in 2.d and is making regular 
payments towards this debt.   
 
While Applicant has made progress towards resolving his financial delinquencies, 
issues remain as to his trustworthiness and judgment pertaining to his breach of 
 
11 
 
 
fiduciary duty towards his employer to file accurate travel and time reports. For this 
reason, I find against Applicant under Guideline F.    
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s active duty 
service in the United States Air Force. I considered the favorable recommendations of 
Applicant’s superiors and co-workers at his current place of employment. I considered 
Applicant’s attempts to resolve his current delinquent debts. However, questions remain 
under the personal conduct concern based on Applicant’s deliberate omission of his 
September 2003 job termination on his security clearance questionnaire as well his 
refusal to acknowledge that his actions were wrong. Applicant mitigated the concerns 
raised under financial considerations. Concerns remain about Applicant’s 
trustworthiness and reliability under the personal conduct concern due to his deliberate 
omission of his job termination and his refusal to accept responsibility for his past poor 
judgment.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
