 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-15302 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on August 23, 2005. On June 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct for Applicant. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On June 18, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 8, 
2008. The case was assigned to me on August 1, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on August 13, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 
10, 2008. The government called one witness and offered Exhibits (Gov Ex) 1 through 
7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called 
one witness and submitted three documents which were marked as Applicant Exhibits 
 
2 
 
 
(AE) A – C and admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr) on September 22, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 On August 18, 2008, Department Counsel prepared a motion to amend the SOR 
and forwarded the amendment to Applicant. The motion to amend added 
subparagraphs 2.b, 2.c, and 2.d. On August 25, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR 
amendments. There being no objection to the amendment from Applicant at hearing, 
the amendment was allowed in accordance with Enclosure 3, Additional Procedural 
Guidance, of the Directive, ¶ E3.1.17. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated June 18, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e., and denied SOR ¶ 2.a. In response to the SOR amendment, 
dated August 18, 2008, Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.c, and 2.d.   
 
Applicant is a 24-year-old systems engineer employed by a Department of 
Defense contractor seeking a security clearance.  This is his first time applying for a 
security clearance.  He has worked for his current employer for three years. He has a 
Bachelor’s of Science degree in computer engineering technology. He is single and has 
no children. (Tr at 6-8; Gov 1.)   
 
On August 23, 2005, Applicant completed an electronic questionnaire for 
investigations processing (e-QIP) in order to apply for a security clearance. Applicant 
answered “No” in response to “Section 23. Your Police Record: For this item report 
information regardless of whether the report in your case has been “sealed” or stricken 
from the court record. The single exception to this requirement is for certain convictions 
under the Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 3607. Have you 
ever been charged with or convicted of any offenses related to alcohol or drugs?” (Gov 
1.)   
 
On the same e-QIP application, Applicant answered, “No” in response to Section 
24. Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity. Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 
years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled substance, for 
example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, 
codeine, heroin, etc.) amphetamines, depressants (barbituates, methaqualone, 
tranquilizers, etc.) hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?” (Gov 1.)  
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed several arrests. In May 1999, he 
was charged with Possession of Drug Paraphernalia and Possession of Cannabis. He 
was 15 years-old at the time. He was caught with a bag of marijuana in his pocket at 
school. A friend had given it to him. A classmate saw the marijuana in his pocket and 
 
3 
 
 
told the teacher. The police were called and Applicant was arrested. After community 
service and teen court, the charges were expunged. Applicant claims he had never tried 
or taken drugs prior to this incident.  He did not deliberately omit this arrest from his e-
QIP application. He claims that he thought he did not have to list it because the case 
was expunged from his records because he was a juvenile at the time of his arrest. (Tr 
at 63; Gov 2; Gov 7; Answer to SOR.) 
 
  In 2003, he was given a verbal warning for trespass for drinking in a park after 
hours. In August 2004, he was charged with careless driving. He also had numerous 
traffic offenses that were not alleged in the SOR. (Tr at 63; Gov 6.)   
 
On September 7, 2006, Applicant was observed by Officer M. to be driving 
erratically. Officer M. was driving his private owned car into work to start the evening 
shift. He called a patrol officer who was on duty in the area who pulled over Applicant’s 
vehicle. After his car was pulled over, Officer M. approached Applicant’s car. He 
explained the reason for the stop. Applicant was defensive and uncooperative. Officer 
M. noticed that Applicant and the inside of Applicant’s car smelled heavily of burnt 
cannabis (i.e. marijuana). He asked Applicant if he had been smoking cannabis. 
Applicant replied, “Not today.” (Tr at 28-29.) 
 
Officer M. informed Applicant that he had probable cause to search his car 
because the car smelled like burnt cannabis. Applicant replied, “That’s impossible. I 
don’t smoke weed in my car. I only smoke in my house.” Upon search of Applicant’s car, 
Officer M. noticed a green leafy substance on the driver’s side on the floor mat. He 
noticed a pink-colored cigar tube on the floor of the passenger side of the car which was 
altered to be used as a device for smoking marijuana. The cigar tube had burnt black 
residue inside and small pieces of what appeared to be marijuana.  The substance 
tested positive for marijuana in a subsequent field test. (Tr at 30 – 31; Gov 4.)  
 
Applicant was arrested and charged with Possession of Marijuana, Possession of 
Drug Paraphernalia, and Careless Driving.  There were no passengers in Applicant’s 
car.  Officer M. completed an arrest report within 30 minutes of the charging affidavit. 
Government Exhibit 4 is a copy of the report he prepared. (Tr at 31-32.) Applicant pled 
guilty to both charges and one charge was dropped. He was ordered to pay a $150 fine 
and court costs of $385.50. (Gov 5.)  
 
On October 3, 2006, Applicant was interviewed by an investigator with the Office 
of Personnel Management pertaining to his security clearance background 
investigation. During this interview, he detailed his arrest history. He stated that he does 
not use drugs and has never used drugs. (Gov 2.) 
 
An incident report, dated October 27, 2006, detailed Applicant’s September 7, 
2006, arrest for possession of marijuana. It is unclear who prepared the report but the 
report apparently summarizes a statement Applicant previously made. In the statement, 
Applicant states he was initially pulled over for careless driving. Marijuana was found on 
the passenger’s side of the car and he was arrested for possession of marijuana. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant claims the marijuana found in the car belonged to his friend, Mr. R., who left it 
in his car a few days earlier. Applicant apparently made the statement that he does not 
participate in the buying, taking, or selling any type of drugs and that he is willing to take 
a drug test to prove it. (Gov 3.) 
 
Mr. R., Applicant’s friend, testified. He claims he would often roll joints in 
Applicant’s car prior to working out. He claims that the marijuana found in Applicant’s 
car on September 7, 2006, was his. He claims that he is the only person that Applicant 
knows who uses marijuana.  He has never seen Applicant smoke marijuana. Applicant 
always told him that he did not want marijuana in his car or in his house. In September 
2006, he saw Applicant an average of once a week.  He did not see him on the day he 
was arrested. When Applicant told him about the arrest, he knew it was his fault but did 
not come forward when Applicant appeared in court to admit the marijuana was his 
because he did not think it would do any good. Applicant never told him to appear with 
him in court to take responsibility for the marijuana.  Mr. R. has been arrested for 
marijuana possession on three occasions. He was arrested a couple times in 2002. His 
most recent arrest was six months ago. The charges against him are still pending. He is 
going through drug court and hopes to have the charges dropped if he completes all the 
requirements. (Tr at 43-60.)  
 
The Lab Manager where Applicant works states that Applicant has worked for 
him since November 2005.  He has seen him progress from a college student to a well 
rounded mature and ethical engineer.  He has handled classified information on a daily 
basis without incident. Applicant is a stellar performer and he recommends that his 
clearance be reinstated. (AE B.) Applicant’s performance evaluations from 2005 to 
2007, rate him as a “successful contributor.”  He is noted as a good team player with 
excellent verbal and written skills.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in ¶ 
30 of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines: 
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
 trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
 or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
There are two Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) which apply to 
Applicant’s case. CC DC ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and 
CC DC ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted) apply with respect to 
Applicant’s 1999 arrest for Possession of Drugs, and Possession of Drug Paraphernalia 
and his arrest on September 7, 2006, for Possession of Marijuana, and Possession of 
Drug Paraphernalia. I find for Applicant with respect to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 
 
6 
 
 
1.d, and 1.e.  While the incidents happened, the record evidence is unclear as to 
whether these were criminal offenses. These appear to be traffic offenses or citations as 
opposed to criminal offenses. 
 
The Government produced substantial evidence by way of exhibits and testimony 
to raise the CC DC ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c). The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigated the security concerns (Directive 
¶E3.1.15). An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the government (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. 
Bd. September 22, 2005.)   
   
The following Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (CC MC) potentially apply 
to Applicant’s case: 
 
CC MC ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not 
apply with respect to Applicant’s September 2006 arrest. Applicant was arrested after 
becoming employed with a Department of Defense contractor. Not enough time has 
passed since his arrest to mitigate the concerns raised. Applicant’s statements are 
inconsistent with the testimony of Officer M., the arresting officer. Questions remain 
about his trustworthiness and judgment based on his conflicting statements to the 
officer and his testimony at hearing. I find for Applicant with respect to the May 1999 
arrest because it occurred over nine years ago when Applicant was in high school.  
 
CC MC ¶ 33(d) (there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement) has the potential to apply. While it has been two years since 
Applicant’s arrest in September 2006, concerns remain based on Applicant’s failure to 
accept responsibility for his actions. He maintains that the marijuana found in the car 
belonged to his friend, Mr. R.  Although Mr. R. testified that his marijuana was found in 
Applicant’s car, his credibility is in question due to the fact that he did not come forward 
to state the marijuana was his during Applicant’s criminal court proceeding. Mr. R. has a 
history of criminal conduct as well, having been arrested three times on marijuana 
possession charges.  
 
Of the three individuals who testified during the hearing, I find the testimony of 
Officer M. the most credible. When he approached Applicant in his car on the day of the 
arrest, he observed the smell of burnt cannabis. No one else was in Applicant’s car. 
Even if the marijuana in Applicant’s car belonged to Mr. R., it does not explain the smell 
of burnt cannabis in Applicant’s car on the night of his arrest – a good indicator that 
marijuana was recently smoked.  When Officer M. asked Applicant whether he used 
marijuana – Applicant replied “Not today.” Applicant further claimed that he only smokes 
marijuana in his residence. While Applicant has a good employment record, his lack of 
 
7 
 
 
truthfulness about his September 7, 2006 arrest and his marijuana use remains a 
concern.  
 
Applicant has not mitigated the criminal conduct concern. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 Applicant’s omissions on his August 23, 2005, e-QIP application raises the 
potential application of Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶ 16(a) 
(deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities).  With respect to omitting his May 1999 arrest in response to question 
23(d) on his e-QIP application, I find Applicant’s omission was deliberate. Applicant 
claims that he did not think that he had to list his 1999 arrest because it occurred when 
he was still a juvenile and it was expunged from his criminal record. The plain language 
of question 23(d) asks:  “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offenses 
related to alcohol or drugs?” The question further states, “For this item report 
information regardless of whether the report in your case has been ‘sealed’ or stricken 
from the court record. The single exception to this requirement is for certain convictions 
under the Federal Controlled Substances Act for which the court issued an 
expungement order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 3607.” Applicant 
is a college graduate. It is unlikely that he misunderstood the plain language of the 
question. I find Applicant deliberately omitted his May 1999 arrest for possession of 
marijuana in response to question 23(d). 
 
 I find Applicant did not falsify his answer to question 24, regarding illegal use of 
drugs and drug activity. While Applicant was arrested for and possessed Marijuana in 
1999, there is nothing in the record evidence which implicates Applicant’s use of 
marijuana since the age of 16 or within the seven years prior to Applicant completing his 
e-QIP application on August 23, 2005.  Applicant admits to possessing the marijuana 
when he was arrested in 1999, he denies using marijuana.  There is no evidence in the 
record contradicting Applicant’s denials of marijuana use within seven years prior to 
completion of his e-QIP application.   
 
 
8 
 
 
 There is substantial evidence to support Applicant’s use of marijuana in 
September 2006.  Officer M. noticed the smell of burnt marijuana when he approached 
Applicant’s car on the date of his arrest which is strong evidence supporting that 
marijuana was recently smoked. Applicant was alone in the car. He later told Officer M. 
that he usually smoked marijuana at his residence. For these reasons, I conclude he 
provided false information to the OPM investigator during his October 3, 2006, interview 
when he claimed he had never used any illegal drugs. This conduct raises PC DC ¶ 
16(e) (deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to 
an employer, investigator, security official, or competent medical authority or other 
official government representative).  Applicant’s claims that he never used marijuana 
conflicts with the facts that led to his arrest on September 7, 2006.  
 
 I find for Applicant with respect to SOR ¶ 2.d. This allegation alleges that 
Applicant provided false information to his employer on October 27, 2006, by stating 
that he had not previously participated in using illegal drugs. The evidence is support of 
this allegation is an Incident Report that was entered into Joint Personnel Adjudication 
System (JPAS). I do not find the Incident Report to be reliable because it is not signed.  
The author of the report is unknown. The record is not authenticated. Applicant did not 
testify to the accuracy of the document. The Government did not meet its burden with 
regard to the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.d.   
 
 It is noted that the summary of Applicant’s interview with an OPM investigator on 
October 3, 2006 is also unsigned and unsworn (the statement is relevant to SOR ¶ 2.c). 
The identity of the author of the summary of the interview is not apparent. While it may 
seem contradictory to conclude the government met its burden with respect to SOR ¶ 
2.c but not ¶ 2.d, Applicant was sent a copy of the October 3, 2006 summary of 
interview. He had the opportunity to review the document. He had the opportunity to 
make changes to the document. Upon review of the document, he found the document 
to be an accurate summary of what occurred during the interview. (Gov 2.) Applicant 
was not given the same opportunity with respect to the Incident Report. (Gov 3.)     
 
 PC DC 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing) applies to Applicant’s case. It is reasonable to conclude that 
Applicant did not want to admit that he used marijuana after being hired with a defense 
contractor because of the adverse affect it might have on getting a security clearance as 
well as the potential that he could lose his job for illegal drug use.  
 
 The personal conduct concern may be mitigated.  The following Personal 
Conduct Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) potentially apply: 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts) does not 
apply because Applicant did not disclose the omission of his 1999 arrest for possession 
of marijuana before being confronted with the facts.   
 
9 
 
 
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment) does not apply.  If Applicant had been more honest about his 
marijuana use, this mitigating condition may have been applicable. However, instead of 
accepting responsibility for his past actions, Applicant denies using marijuana on 
September 7, 2006. He went to great lengths to have his friend lie for him by claiming 
the marijuana that was found in Applicant’s car was his. His friend’s statements do not 
explain why Officer M. smelled marijuana smoke when he approached Applicant’s car. 
Nor does his friend’s testimony explain Applicant’s statement to Officer M. that he 
smokes marijuana in his residence. Applicant’s dishonesty casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
 PC MC ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress) does not apply. Applicant’s 
misrepresentations about his marijuana use makes him vulnerable to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.  His repeated denials despite evidence to the contrary support 
the premise that he has something to hide.  
 
 None of the other PC MCs are relevant to the facts of Applicant’s case. He has 
not mitigated the concerns raised under personal conduct.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
work history and his record of no subsequent criminal conduct over a period of two 
years.  However, not enough time has passed to mitigate the concerns raised under 
Guideline J. Applicant had worked for a defense contractor for nine months prior to his 
September 2007 arrest. He submitted his security clearance application in August 2005. 
The extensive questions about illegal drug use should have put him on notice that illegal 
 
10 
 
 
drug use is a security concern. He deliberately omitted his May 1999 arrest for 
Possession of Drugs/Possession of Drug Paraphernalia on his August 2005 e-QIP 
application. There is overwhelming circumstantial evidence that Applicant used 
marijuana prior to being arrested on September 7, 2006. His repeated denials of drug 
use despite evidence to the contrary, raise questions about his trustworthiness. He did 
not meet his burden to mitigate the concerns raised under personal conduct.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under criminal conduct, and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2. Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
