                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-14305
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
 October 28, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On March 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines B and C. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On March 28, 2008, applicant answered the SOR in writing, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 28, 2008. Applicant did not respond
to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on July 24, 2008. Based upon a review of
the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49 year old employee of a defense contractor.
Applicant was born in Taiwan. In the 1980s, he moved to the United States. He
became a United States citizen in 2000. In 2003, after he became a United States
citizen, applicant applied for and received a Taiwanese passport. Although he has never
used this passport, he still has possession of it.
Applicant’s mother, two brothers, two sisters, mother-in-law, and father-in-law are
citizens and residents of Taiwan. Applicant speaks to his mother once or twice a month.
He speaks with his siblings less frequently, but sees them when he visits Taiwan.
Applicant traveled to Taiwan in at least 2001, 2003, 2005 and 2006.
The Government provided seven official United States publications with the
FORM that describe the political and intelligence activities of Taiwan. The Government
requested that these documents be admitted into evidence. I have admitted the
documents into evidence, and I take administrative notice of the following facts found
therein:
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy with a population of about 23 million. It is one
of the most active collectors of sensitive United States information and technology.
Numerous individuals and companies have been subjected to civil penalties and or
prosecuted for illegally exporting, or attempting to illegally export, sensitive United
States technology to Taiwan. One United States official was recently convicted of
crimes related to his improper relationship with a Taiwanese intelligence official.
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
 
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
3
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
The security concern relating to the Foreign Influence guideline is set forth in
Paragraph 6 of the AG, and is as follows: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
Paragraph 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 7.a., “contact with a foreign family member, business or
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion” may be disqualifying. Under Paragraph 7.b.,
“connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential
conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or
technology and the individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by
providing that information” may be disqualifying. Lastly, under Paragraph 7.i., “conduct,
especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make the individual vulnerable to
exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign person, group, government, or country”
may be disqualifying.
Applicant has at least monthly contact with his mother, and less frequent but
regular contact with his four siblings, all of whom are citizens and residents of Taiwan.
In addition, since becoming a United States citizen, he has visited Taiwan at least four
4
times. Applicant’s presence in Taiwan during these trips made him and his family
members potentially vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by the Taiwanese
government. These facts raise concerns under all three disqualifying conditions.
Paragraph 8 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Under
Paragraph 8.a., it is potentially mitigating if an applicant can demonstrate that “the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.” Under Paragraph 8.b., it is potentially mitigating if an applicant can
demonstrate “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual*s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal,
or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.,
that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest.” Lastly, under Paragraph 8.c., it is potentially mitigating if an applicant can
demonstrate that the “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation.”
None of the foregoing mitigating conditions is applicable. Applicant*s contacts
with his mother and siblings in Taiwan are frequent and ongoing. His relationship with
them is one of affection and obligation, raising the concern that these relationships
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation. Applicant failed to provide sufficient
credible evidence that it is unlikely he would be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign government and the interests of the United States, or
that he is not vulnerable to a conflict of interest.
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
The security concern relating to the Foreign Preference guideline is set forth in
Paragraph 9 of the AG, and is as follows:
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States.
Paragraph 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying. Under Paragraph 10 a.1., exercising any right or privilege of foreign
citizenship after becoming a United States citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a
family member, such as possession of a current foreign passport, may be disqualifying.
Applicant applied for and received a Taiwanese passport after becoming a United
States citizen. Accordingly, this disqualifying condition applies.
Paragraph 11 describes potentially mitigating conditions. Under Paragraph 11.c.,
it may be mitigating if the “exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign
5
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual
was a minor.” Applicant applied for and received a Taiwanese passport after he became
a United States citizen. This mitigating condition does not apply.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph 2.a:
“(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2.c., the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Applicant’s mother and four siblings are citizens and residents of Taiwan. He has
strong ties to them as evidenced by his regular contact with them and the voluntary trips
he made to Taiwan to visit them. His strong familial ties and his voluntary trips to
Taiwan, a country that actively seeks to acquire sensitive U.S. information and
technology, could leave him vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure and could
cause the future compromise of classified information. 
I have carefully reviewed the administrative record, applicant*s submissions, and
the allegations in the SOR. I have weighed the disqualifying and mitigating conditions of
Guidelines B and C, and I have evaluated applicant*s conduct in light of the whole
person concept identified at Paragraph E2.2. of Enclosure 2 of the Directive. After doing
so, I conclude that applicant failed to rebut the Government’s case under Guidelines B
and C.
There is nothing in the record that suggests applicant is anything but a loyal
American citizen. Applicant*s allegiance, loyalty, and patriotism are not at issue in these
proceedings. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 specifically provides that industrial
security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Therefore,
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest I have based this decision, in
whole or in part, on any express or implied concern as to applicant*s allegiance, loyalty,
or patriotism.
6
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
