1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
      ------------------------ )           ISCR Case No. 07-10400
      SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
__________
Decision
__________
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines J, and E.
Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On September 14, 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires For
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) also known as Security Clearance Application (SF
86). On March 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and
modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended,
modified and revised. The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines J, and E. 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative
2
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations in a sworn statement signed on May
13, 2008, and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a
hearing. Documents were attached to the answer with explanatory information. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated June 5, 2008, was
provided to him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant provided no additional
material. The case was assigned to me on October 21, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted all of the  allegations in his answer to the SOR, and offered
explanations. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make
the following findings of fact:
Applicant is 36 years old. He has been an employee of a defense contractor
since 2004 working as a warehouse specialist. He has a record over a dozen years of
criminal activity which is alleged under Guideline J as criminal conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-e.).
These activities began in 1992 when he was 20 years old when he was arrested and
charged with felony burglary and sentenced to summary probation for 3 years and 70
days in county jail. His second offense was less than a year later in 1993 when he was
arrested and charged with misdemeanor marijuana possession of less than an ounce
and fined. 
In April 1996 he was cited for having an open container of alcohol in an
automobile, found guilty and fined. Less than a year later in 1997 he was arrested and
charged with transporting narcotics. The charges were dismissed because the drugs
were in the possession of a passenger. His last arrest was in December, 2003 when he
was charged with possession of less than one ounce of marijuana in a vehicle. He plead
guilty and was sentenced to three years of summary probation and paid fines and fees
totaling $365. 
Applicant has attempted to change his conduct since his last drug arrest. He
states that he is not a habitual drug user, has a stable family environment, and that he
has matured in the past five years through a steady job. He offered no specific evidence
to support these assertions but appears not to have had any further conduct problems. 
Applicant was also alleged to have violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001 by failing to answer
correctly on his SF 86 Question 23 relating to his police record and Question 24 relating
to drug activity (SOR ¶ 1.f.). These allegations are also repeated in SOR ¶¶ 2. a.- d.
under Guideline E as personal conduct.  In his answer (Exh. 3) he stated that the
reason for doing so was confusion about the question. However, he acknowledge in his
interrogatory answers and supplemental answers that he withheld the information
3
deliberately to protect his employment, but now recognizes that doing so was not proper
behavior (Exhs. 6 and 8).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered For access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information.
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition,
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant]
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
4
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3.
Analysis
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly
above, I conclude that the following Adudicative Guidelines provide the standard for
resolution of the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
Guideline J Criminal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 30, “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31(c) provides that “an allegation or admission of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted” is a disqualifying condition. Applicant was arrested for four offenses and cited
for a fifth between 1992 and 2003.  He was found guilty of four offenses and one of
them was dismissed. Thus, the evidence submitted clearly raises the potentially
disqualifying conditions.  
AG ¶ 32 provide two conditions that could be applicable to mitigate the alleged
security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
Although almost five years has elapsed since the last offense, they all related to
criminal activity some of which concerned drugs. His probation for the last offense
expired less than two years ago. Applicant has provided insufficient evidence of
rehabilitation and it is premature at this time to apply the mitigating conditions.
5
The allegation concerning 18 U.S.C.§ 1101 requires that the omission be
deliberate. Applicant admitted in his interrogatory answers (Exh. 6), and his
supplemental answers (Exh. 8), that his omissions were because he did not want to
endanger his employment. Thus, I conclude that the omissions were deliberate. 
Guideline E Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline For Personal Conduct is set out in
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying in this case:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and,
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative.
Applicant is alleged to have falsified material facts in response to Questions 23
and 24 on his application for a security clearance. This prompted security concerns
under AG ¶¶ 16(a) and (b).
AG ¶ 17(c) provides that Applicant could mitigate security concerns from the
facts in this case. It is that if the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment.”
Many of the offenses alleged occurred between ten and fifteen years ago and
could be  mitigated on this basis. Applicant falsified his answers to the security
clearance questionnaire approximately three years ago. The last offense resulted in a
second drug conviction that occurred less than five years ago. Also, the probation
imposed for that conviction did not cease until less than two years ago. Thus, I conclude
6
that it would be inappropriate, under these circumstances, to mitigate any of these
allegations. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the
security concerns pertaining to criminal and personal conduct allegations.  He has made
some progress in changing his conduct through family responsibilities and stable
employment. However, the most recent conduct alleged cannot be attributed to youthful
indiscretions for it occurred when he was 31 years old. The fact that he acknowledges
deliberately failing to answer the two critical question on his SF 86 also militates against
a favorable finding under the whole person doctrine. 
Applicant should not be permanently disabled from obtaining a security clearance
since most of the offenses are now quite old and he will have learned a valuable lesson
which he now knows he needs to be totally candid in his responses to questions and
interrogatories. 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518 (1988), a careful consideration of the whole person factors and supporting
evidence, application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative process, and
interpretation of my responsibilities under the guidelines. Applicant has not mitigated or
overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible
for access to classified information.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings For or For Applicant on the allegations set Forth in the SOR, as
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against Applicant 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d.: Against Applicant 
 Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied.
Charles D. Ablard
Administrative Judge
