                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-15050 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  John Glendon, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
A February 2007 foreclosure on Applicant’s investment real estate eliminated the 
mortgage debt on the property, but not the equity line of credit debt, and it remains 
unpaid. Applicant acted responsibility and appropriately in her attempt to prevent the 
foreclosure. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the security concerns under financial 
considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 13, 2008, detailing security concerns 
under financial considerations.  
 
 On July 2, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On July 
22, 2008, I was assigned the case. On July 25, 2008, DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
scheduling the hearing held on August 21, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 
1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on her own behalf. 
The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional matters. On August 
27, 2008, additional documents were received. There being no objection, the material 
was admitted into evidence as Ex. A. On September 2, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was 
received.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations of the SOR.  
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old analyst who has worked for a defense contractor since 
2001, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. (Tr. 38, 79) Her husband describes 
Applicant as a woman of integrity, strong character, and great moral values who is the 
“most trustworthy, reliable and dependable human being” he knows. (Ex. A)  
 
In 1985, Applicant came to the United States from Zimbabwe. (Tr. 35) In July 
2005, she became a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Tr. 38) Her son, born in 1987, is a U.S. 
Navy medic. (Tr. 36) Applicant divorced in 1995 and remarried in 1996. (Tr. 37) In 1998, 
her second child, a daughter was born. In 2004, her youngest child, also a daughter 
was born prematurely, had developmental delays, and has special needs. (Tr, 57, Ex. 
A, Ex. 2) Applicant works 30 hours per week due to her daughter’s special needs. At 
present she commutes between three and four hours a day, four days a week. If 
Applicant receives a clearance, her employer would transfer her to a work location 
closer to her home. (Tr. 28) 
 
 In June 1995, Applicant obtained a master’s in business administration (MBA) in 
finance.(Tr. 37) She owes approximately $18,000 in student loans, which are currently 
in a forbearance or deferment status. (Tr. 67) Applicant also owes $18,000 on a credit 
card. (Tr. 66) Neither of these debts are delinquent.  
 
In the mid 2000s, Applicant was looking for a way to make money while 
remaining at home with her daughter. She observed others purchasing investment 
properties and selling them at a profit. She and her husband intended to purchase real 
estate, keep it for five or six months, and they sell it at a profit. (Tr. 44) They decided to 
purchase a town home; her husband states it looked to be a good decision. (Tr. 88) Her 
husband urged against a real estate investment because he did not want the hassle of 
rental property. (Tr. 88) He believes the logic of his wife’s decision was impeccable at 
the time particularly when viewing the way home prices were increasing at the time. (Tr. 
88 - 89) Unfortunately, the market conditions turned in an unexpected way. (Tr. 89)  
 
 
 
 
3
They chose to purchase a town home in an area five minutes from their home 
and in a neighborhood where they had previously lived for seven years. (Tr. 91) Even 
though Applicant felt uneasy about the transaction, she went through with the purchase. 
Applicant credit was excellent at the time of the purchase. (Tr. 21, 25) 
 
 In July 2005, Applicant purchased a town home. Applicant put down $1,000 
earnest money. The remaining balance of $377,741 ($370,000 contract price plus 
$7,741 settlement charges) was split into a $296,000 first mortgage and an equity line 
of credit of $74,000. Following the purchase, the housing market took a downward turn. 
Within three months of the purchase, the town home had declined $75,000 in value.  
 
Applicant was to make monthly interest only payments of approximately $3,000 
on the two loans. (Tr. 42) Applicant paid $2,125 monthly on the first mortgage and $625 
on the line of credit plus escrow fees. (Tr. 43) The line of credit was at a variable 
interest rate, which increased raising their monthly payment to $850 on the equity line of 
credit. (Tr. 53, 54) 
 
 Applicant asserts she never used the line of credit on the town home. Purchasers 
are normally required to pay a minimum of 20% of the contract sales price at the time of 
closing. On a $370,000 mortgage 20% would be $74,000. The line of credit was 
$74,000.  
 
 It was never Applicant’s intention to occupy the town home. It was intended the 
property would be rented thereby generating income and covering part of the monthly 
mortgage. Just prior to purchasing the home, Applicant learned the expected monthly 
rent would not exceed $1,500, which would cover only half of the $3,000 monthly 
mortgage payment. (Tr. 45) Tax advantages of owing rental property routinely provide 
some relief to address a portion of the shortfall. However, Applicant was told the only 
tax advantage she could claim was a $2,000 per year deduction for depreciation, which 
resulted in a yearly tax savings of $1,200. (Tr. 62-63, Ex. A) 
 
Applicant had problems renting the property. The two months following purchase, 
the sellers stayed in the home paying rent. Applicant was unable to find a tenant for the 
next two months. (Tr. 47) The first tenant she located failed to timely pay the rent, then 
failed to pay rent for two months, broke windows, and did other damage to the property. 
The tenant occupied the town home for five months. (Tr. 71) From January through 
March 2006, Applicant actively sought to evict the tenant. In March 2006, the tenant 
was evicted. Applicant was unable to find new tenants and had to make mortgage 
payments on both the investment property and her home after March 2006.  
 
Applicant contacted the mortgage company to determine her options. Applicant 
qualified with the mortgage company for a “short sale.” (Tr. 49) A short sale allows a 
home to be sold at its current market value to avoid a potential foreclosure and negative 
credit rating. (Ex. 2) Applicant worked with her mortgage company for five or six months 
attempting to negotiate a short sale. Applicant hired a realtor to attempt to find a new 
buyer. (Tr. 51)  
 
 
 
 
4
 In 2003, Applicant and her husband purchased the home they live in for 
approximately $300,000. (Tr. 29) They have never been late on a mortgage payment 
and the taxes on the home are paid timely. (Tr. 41) Last year their home was assessed 
at $550,000, but had devalued to approximately $450,000. During 2006, they refinanced 
their home several times to continue paying the mortgage on the town house. Applicant 
increased her hours at work to generate more income. Applicant exhausted her funds in 
her 401(k) retirement fund making the town home’s monthly mortgage payment. 
Applicant contemplated selling her home and moving into the town home, but this was 
prevented by the current status of the housing market. Their neighbor’s home failed to 
sell having been on the market for a year and a half. Applicant attempted to sell the 
town home. Since the fair market value of the house had dropped, the town home could 
not be sold for the value owed on the first mortgage and equity line of credit. Applicant 
continued to make payments until October 2006, when all funds were exhausted.  
 
In December 2006, Applicant’s realtor found a buyer who offered to purchase the 
town home for $326,000, which was a “much higher” offer than they going rate. (Ex. 2) 
The buyer moved into the town home, with a clause in the purchase contract directing 
the return all rents paid if the offer to purchase failed to close. In February 2007, the 
mortgage company informed Applicant the property would go to foreclosure. The 
potential buyer left the property and in March 2007 the town home was sold at 
foreclosure for $305,000.  
 
Since the foreclosure, the mortgage company has actively sought repayment of 
the home equity line of credit. Applicant states, “[f]or endless weeks and months, they 
harassed me. They hired another company to do it and they were brutal.” Applicant 
offered $5,000 to settle the matter, which was not accepted. The creditor stated at least 
$18,000 was needed. (Tr. 73) “The debt collector called evenings, early mornings, and 
afternoons, at work, weekends and my cell phone.” However, Applicant has not recently 
received a demand for payment from the creditor regarding the home equity line of 
credit. (Tr. 74) As of April 2008, it was Applicant’s plan to pay the home equity line of 
credit. (Ex. 2) Applicant has made inquiries with an attorney as to bankruptcy, but was 
reluctant to go that route. (Tr. 95)  
 
Until November or December 2006, Applicant was able to pay the property 
owners’ association (POS) monthly fees. In November 2007, the property owners 
association obtained a $319 judgment (SOR ¶ 1.a) against Applicant for unpaid monthly 
fees. Applicant states her tenant was supposed to have paid the monthly payments. In 
April 2008, the judgment was paid in full or otherwise satisfied. (See Answer to SOR)  
 
 In July 2007, a health care provided obtained a $15,000 judgment against 
Applicant. (See Answer to SOR) The judgment was released in April 2008.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
 
 
 
5
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
 
 
 
6
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant purchased investment property that went to foreclosure in February 
2007. The foreclosure eliminated the first mortgage of approximately $300,000, but 
failed to eliminate the $74,000 equity line of credit. Applicant offered to settle the debt 
for $5,000, but the creditor indicated that a minimum payment of $18,000 was required. 
No payment has been made on this debt. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; [and] 
 
 
 
7
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by market factors beyond her 
control. Shortly after purchasing the investment real estate for $370,000, the fair market 
value of the property dropped to $300,000. The decline in the value of the real estate is 
not, of itself, the cause of the debt. Although the decline did prevent Applicant from 
liquidating the debt through sale of the property at the amount owed on the town house.  
 
It was the inability to secure a proper renter that was an additional factor beyond 
her control that resulted in the foreclosure. Applicant’s first renter failed to pay the rent 
and after five months an eviction action was required. Another temporary tenant who 
was living in the property following a purchase offer had all rents returned to her when 
the property failed to close. With a renter paying a portion of the monthly mortgage, 
Applicant may have been able to prevent the foreclosure. 
 
Applicant asserts she never used the line of credit. However, the line of credit 
was used to pay the customary 20% down payment required of purchasers. The 
variable interest rate on the equity line of credit increased Applicant’s inability to make 
her monthly payments.  
 
Applicant did what she could to prevent the foreclosure. She increased her hours 
of work, thereby bring home more income. She actively sought to secure new tenants, 
but was unsuccessful. She used her 401(k) retirement funds until they were exhausted. 
She refinanced her principle residence, until all the available equity in that residence 
was eliminated. She actively pursued alternatives with the mortgage holder including 
the possibility of a short sale. She did what she could to prevent the foreclosure. 
 
Following foreclosure, Applicant offered to settle equity line of credit for $5,000, 
which was a good-faith offer to settle the debt. The creditor refused and demanded a 
minimum payment of $18,000, an amount she was unable to pay. 
 
As her husband stated, her reasoning in purchasing the investment was sound at 
the time. Homes were increasing in value. They knew the area and were only five 
minutes from the property so they could monitor the property. They anticipated house 
prices would continue to increase. The downturn in the housing market caught a large 
segment of the population by surprise. Applicant and her husband were very insistent 
that they would not buy investment property again.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) applies. The behavior is infrequent. The sole unpaid debt is the line of 
credit. There are no other delinquent obligations. The debt was incurred under 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur. The downturn in the housing market does not 
cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 
 
 
8
Under AG & 20(b), the down turn of the market and the inability to find a paying 
were beyond her control. Applicant did all she could to prevent the foreclosure. She 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Her current finances prevent making an 
offer of more than $5,000 to settle the line of credit.  
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply. There has been no showing Applicant has received 
financial counseling. However, except for this single debt, Applicant’s finances are 
under control. AG & 20(d) does not apply to the line of credit, but does apply to the 
property owner’s association judgment because that judgment (SOR ¶ 1.a, $319) was 
paid and the judgment released. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Security clearance 
decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past 
transgressions. Rather, the objective of the adjudicative process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person=s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole person 
concept in evaluating Applicant=s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national 
interests.  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The two debts are not the types that 
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The debts set forth in the SOR were not 
incurred on luxuries, but were the monthly association fees on the investment property 
and the equity line of credit used as down payment to purchase the property. Applicant 
worked extra hours, used the equity in her home, and used her retirement funds to 
 
 
 
9
prevent foreclosure, which shows a strong desire by Applicant’s to prevent the 
foreclosure.  
 
Having had a bad experience with investment property it is unlikely Applicant will 
repeat the conduct. A house went to foreclosure, but this does not indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. It does not 
raise questions about her reliability, trustworthiness, or ability to protect classified 
information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
