 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 07-12693 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
On January 8, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 25, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On May 27, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On June 3, 2008, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing eight Items, and 
mailed Applicant a complete copy on June 17, 2008. Applicant received the FORM on 
October 2, 2008, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. On October 16, 2008, Applicant submitted a letter that I marked 
as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. On October 21, 2008, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
After reviewing AE A, I admitted it into the record over Department Counsel’s objection. 
  
Procedural Matters 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel requested withdrawal of SOR ¶ 1.b because 
the $81 debt was paid prior to the issuance of the SOR. Said request is granted.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, and 1.d, and offered explanations. He denied the allegation contained in 
SOR ¶ 1.a.  
  
 Applicant is 46 years old. He divorced in May 2005 and has two children. Since 
1983, he has worked as a lab technician for a federal contractor. In that same year he 
was investigated for a Secret security clearance.  (Item 5).  When he completed the e-
QIP in January 2007, he disclosed financial delinquencies, a foreclosure and a 
garnishment for his wife’s hospital bills. (Id. at 18-19). 
 
 Prior to the issuance of the SOR, Applicant completed a set of Financial 
Interrogatories related to his finances.  He indicated that he spoke to someone about 
the pending foreclosure and was told that it could take up to ten years for any final 
action to be completed. He noted he could withdraw monies from his 401(k) to satisfy 
the debt, if necessary. His wife was responsible for the $1,054 debt owed to a credit 
card company. No information was requested or given about the $1,980 debt owed to 
the same company. (Item 6 at 3-4). 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated February 8, 2007, and October 31, 
2007, the SOR alleges three delinquent debts, totaling $25,977. All three were joint 
accounts, held by Applicant and his wife, which started to become delinquent in mid-
2002. These debts remain unpaid or unresolved. 
 
1. SOR ¶ 1.a lists a $23,015 mortgage account balance that was past due as of 
July 2002. Subsequently, a foreclosure proceeding began in May 2003 per 
the e-QIP.  
 
2. SOR ¶ 1.c lists a $1,054 balance owed to a credit card company, as of 
December 2002. 
 
3. SOR ¶ 1.d lists a $1,908 balance owed to the above credit card company, as 
of December 2002. 
 
3 
 
 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that his wife was responsible for 
paying the household bills during the marriage. After separating, he became aware of 
the financial problems. Upon their divorce in 2005, he learned that she had taken 
$10,000 of his money. He also thought she was responsible for paying the credit card 
company according to the divorce agreement. Again, he indicated that he could pay the 
mortgage balance with funds in his 401(k). (Item 4 at 4). 
 
 In responding to the FORM, Applicant noted that after he and his wife separated 
he could no longer afford the mortgage on his income. He tried to negotiate a resolution 
with the mortgagor, but was unable. He also tried to contact the credit card company but 
could not locate them. He considered filing bankruptcy and decided against it. Other 
than those three debts, he is otherwise in good financial shape. (AE A). 
 
 According to his budget, Applicant has a net monthly income of $2,200 and 
expenses of $885, leaving $1,135. His assets included $115,000 in a 401(k). (Item 4 at 
5). 
       
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, The applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
4 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions adverse to an 
applicant shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19, two of them are potentially disqualifying: 
 
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Based on two CBRs and his admissions, Applicant has been unable or unwilling 
to satisfy debts that began accruing in July 2002. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
these two disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
5 
 
 
After the Government raised potential disqualifications, the burden shifted to 
Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. The guideline 
includes six examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.   
 
Applicant’s financial delinquencies have been ongoing since 2002. Hence, AG ¶ 
2 (a) does not apply. Some of Applicant’s financial difficulties are attributable to his 
divorce and a reduction of his income, which was a circumstance beyond his control. 
However, there is no evidence in the record indicating that he responsibly managed his 
finances during those difficult periods, which is necessary for full application of this 
mitigating condition. Thus, AG & 20(b) has limited application.  Applicant did not present 
any evidence that he received credit counseling, or that the three delinquent debts are 
resolved or under control, as required under AG & 20(c). Applicant has not initiated 
repayment of the three debts; hence, AG & 20(d) does not apply. There is no evidence 
indicating that he disputed any of the debts, which is required under AG & 20(e). The 
record does not support the application of AG & 20(f). 
  
 Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 46 years old and has 
worked for a federal contractor for more than thirty. When he completed his e-QIP in 
January 2007, he disclosed a foreclosure that began in May 2003. Although he learned 
of the Government’s concerns about his finances in November 2007, he did not take 
any action to resolve the concerns. In February 2008, he again received notice of the 
concerns and did not take steps or submit information that the matters were resolved. 
Without such proof, there is insufficient information in the record to mitigate the financial 
concerns. His failure to address the issues over the past couple years, raises questions 
about his judgment.  
 
  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
    
 
7 
 
 
 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
