KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Several members of Applicant’s family citizens of Iran and five of them reside in Iran. 
The Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by substantial record evidence. 
Adverse decision affirmed
CASENO: 07-13209.a1
DATE: 10/06/2008
DATE: October 6, 2008
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-13209
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Aleksander Lamvol, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On February 8, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
Directive ¶ E2.7(a): “contact with a foreign family member . . . who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign1
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion[.]”
2
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On June 25, 2008, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Darlene Lokey-
Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant filed a timely appeal
pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s factual
findings were supported by substantial record evidence; whether the Judge erred in failing to address
heightened risk under Guideline B Disqualifying Condition 7(a);  whether the Judge erred in her1
application of the mitigating conditions; and whether the Judge erred in her whole person analysis.
Finding no harmful error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following sustainable findings of fact: Applicant was born in Iran.  He
came to the U.S. in the mid-1970s to attend college.  He married a U.S. citizen in the mid-1980s, and
they had two children, who are also native-born U.S. citizens.  Applicant is a mechanical engineer
for a defense contractor.  He has held a security clearance since 1990 with no security violations.
In 2003, Applicant married an Iranian woman, who is currently a permanent resident.
Applicant sponsored his wife’s child from a prior marriage and her Iranian parents to come to the
U.S.  Applicant subsequently filed for divorce from his second wife, which action was still pending
at the close of the record.  Applicant’s wife and  stepchild are Iranian citizens.  His parents-in-law
and brother-in-law are residents and citizens of Iran.  Additionally, Applicant’s father and brother
are residents and citizens of Iran.  Applicant has another brother who, though an Iranian citizen,
resides in a European country.  He also has a sister who is an Iranian citizen residing in another
middle-eastern country.
Applicant’s mother is a naturalized U.S. citizen.  She divides her time between the U.S. and
Iran.  At the close of the record, Applicant’s mother was living in Iran caring for Applicant’s ailing
father.  Applicant maintains telephone or e-mail contact with his parents and siblings about once a
month.  He has also sent birthday and wedding gifts to his Iranian relatives.  Applicant has traveled
to Iran on five occasions from the late 1970s through the mid-2000s.  Each time, he used an Iranian
passport, although he has subsequently surrendered it to his company’s security office.
Iran has no diplomatic ties with the U.S.  It supports international terrorism, commits human
rights violations, and is attempting to develop weapons of mass destruction. 
The Board concludes that the Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by
substantial record evidence.  See  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
For example Applicant argued that the Judge erred in stating that Applicant still has contact with his current2
wife and stepchild.  The only record evidence explicitly on point is to the effect that he does not have contact with these
persons.  See, e. g., Answers to Statement of Reasons; Tr. at 50.  However, even if the Judge had made a finding on this
matter consistent with this evidence, such a finding would not likely have resulted in a favorable security clearance
decision when viewed in light of the record as a whole.
3
contrary evidence in the same record.”) To the extent that the Judge’s findings contain error, the
Board concludes that such error is harmless.  See ISCR Case No. 06-23112 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 31,
2007).   Applicant states that the Judge erred by not analyzing the heightened risk clause of2
Disqualifying Condition 7(a).  Given that the relatives are in Iran, a hostile country with a “dismal
human rights record,” the Judge’s failure to discuss this issue is at most harmless error.  In light of
the record as a whole, the Judge has drawn a rational connection between the facts found and her
ultimate adverse security clearance decision, both as regards the mitigating conditions and the whole-
person factors.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).  See also Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s decision that
“it is not clearly consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant” is sustainable on this record.  Decision at 8.  See also Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when
‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security’”).  See also  ISCR Case No. 06-18918
at 2 (App. Bd. May 23, 2008), citing ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007)  (“[A]n
applicant with family members living in a country hostile to the U.S. bears a ‘heavy burden’ in
demonstrating that those family members do not pose a security risk”). 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple          
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin              
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
