 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-15113
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by the government’s
information about his alcohol consumption. Accordingly, his request for a security
clearance is denied.
On November 20, 2006, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive
Positions (SF-86) to request a security clearance required as part of his employment
with a defense contractor. (FORM, Item 5) After reviewing the results of the ensuing
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly1
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request. 
On May 27, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR),
which specified the basis for its decision – security concerns addressed in the Directive
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six documents (Items 1 - 6) proffered in3
support of the government’s case.
2
under Guideline G (alcohol consumption) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2
More specifically, the government alleged that Applicant was arrested in September
2006, charged with and convicted of Operating a Motor Vehicle While Intoxicated (SOR
¶ 1.a); that from 1975 until at least March 2008, he regularly consumed alcohol to
excess and to the point of intoxication (SOR ¶ 1.b); that he intends to continue
consuming alcohol to the point of intoxication (SOR ¶ 1.c); and that he was arrested in
September 1995, charged with and convicted of Operating a Motor Vehicle While
Intoxicated/Operating a Motor Vehicle With a Blood Alcohol Content 0.08% - 0.15%.
(SOR ¶ 1.d). 
On June 22, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, admitted the allegations in SOR
¶¶ 1.a, 1.c and 1d. He denied the SOR ¶ 1.b allegation. He also requested a decision
without a hearing. On July 24, 2008, DOHA Department Counsel submitted a file of
relevant materials (FORM)  in support of the government’s preliminary decision.3
Applicant received the FORM on August 6, 2008, and was given 30 days to file a
response to the FORM. He did not submit anything in response to the FORM by the
September 5, 2008, deadline. The case was assigned to me on October 10, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the FORM, I
make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is a 52-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor and has
held a security clearance since 1991. He holds a bachelor’s degree and a master’s
degree in electrical engineering. He and his wife were married in March 1984, divorced
in June 1992, and re-married in August 1994. They have two sons, ages 23 and 21.
(FORM, Items 5 and 6)
Applicant considers himself to be a social drinker. He will drink beer when
attending or watching a sporting event, and on such occasions has consumed as many
as 10 beers. He drinks between three and six beers at one time each month and was
last intoxicated in March 2008. (FORM, Item 7) Applicant has further stated he will
continue to consume alcohol in this manner and with this frequency. He also
acknowledges that his alcohol consumption will probably result in his being legally
intoxicated at times. Applicant further avers he will not drive after drinking to the point of
intoxication, which he speculates is about four beers. (FORM, Item 7)
 Directive. 6.3.4
3
Prior to the current investigation, Applicant had submitted a Security Clearance
Application (SF 86) on March 7, 2000 (FORM, Item 6), to request a periodic
reinvestigation. He disclosed therein that, in September 1995, he was arrested for
“DUI”. He was subsequently convicted and sentenced to 60 days in jail, of which all but
two days (already served) were suspended. He was also placed on probation for 363
days and assessed fines and court costs. (FORM, Items 4, 5, 6 and 9) There is no
information available regarding the details of his conduct, e.g., how much he had to
drink or under what circumstances he was drinking and decided to drive. Further, the
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d states the charge as “Operating a Motor Vehicle While
Intoxicated/Operating a Motor Vehicle with a Blood Alcohol Content 0.08% - 0.15%.”
However, the record before me does not contain the source of that charge as drafted.
Nonetheless, it is uncontroverted that Applicant was arrested, charged, and convicted of
an alcohol-related driving offense in 1995.
In September 2006, after watching a basketball game and consuming an
unspecified amount of alcohol, Applicant was arrested and charged Operating a Vehicle
While Intoxicated. After refusing a breath test, his blood alcohol level was determined
through an involuntary blood test conducted pursuant to a search warrant. He was
convicted in December 2006 and sentenced to 365 days in jail. His jail term was
suspended for one year conditioned on good and lawful behavior, payment of assessed
fines and court costs, completion of alcohol safety awareness classes, 180 hours of
community service, participation in Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) activities,
and installation of an ignition interlock system on his car for one year. Applicant
completed the court’s requirements and was released from probation in December
2007. (FORM, Item 8)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors4
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, these factor are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
4
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
Guideline G (alcohol consumption) at AG ¶ 21.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a6
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the government.7
Analysis
Alcohol Consumption.
Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise
of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.” (AG ¶ 21) The government’s
information presented in the FORM is sufficient to support the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a
- 1.d. Applicant was arrested and convicted in 1995 and in 2006 for driving while under
the influence of alcohol. In December 2007, Appellant completed probation and other
requirements of his sentence from his 2006 conviction. He admits to consuming as
many as 10 beers in one sitting and that he drinks between three and six beers in one
sitting about once monthly. Applicant was most recently intoxicated in March 2008,
three months after completing his probation and having the interlock ignition device
removed from his car. 
Available information requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at
AG ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under  the
 See footnote 4, supra.8
 See footnote 7, supra. 9
5
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent) and AG ¶ 22(c) (habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the
point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent).
By contrast, of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 23, only AG ¶ 23(a)(so
much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;) potentially applies
here. Applicant’s most recent alcohol-related incident occurred about two years ago. It
had been 11 years since any similar conduct. Thus, it could be argued Applicant’s
conduct was not recent and was infrequent. However, it does not appear Applicant has
changed his drinking habits, even after a second alcohol-related arrest, a year of
probation, violation of which would have landed him in jail for a year, a year of court-
ordered monitoring (through the ignition interlock device) of his drinking and driving, and
after alcohol awareness classes and work with MADD. Applicant’s use of alcohol ranges
from mildly excessive (three to six beers at once) to abusive (10 beers at once), with no
apparent change in sight. In light of all of the information presented, I cannot conclude
he will not again drink and drive or that his alcohol consumption does not cast doubt on
his “current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant has failed to
mitigate the security concerns presented by the adverse information about his alcohol
consumption.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline H. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 52 years old and
presumed to be a mature, responsible adult. Indeed, he is a father and husband with
advanced degrees, he has a stable employment record, and he has held a security
clearance for about 19 years. However, in response to the government’s concerns
about his drinking and alcohol-related arrests, he exhibits an unwillingness to change or
to even acknowledge the gravity of the information presented. Absent information that
shows he is not likely to engage in alcohol abuse or illegal alcohol-related conduct, the
favorable information in his background is insufficient to overcome the security concerns
about his drinking. A fair and commonsense assessment  of the available information8
bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not yet satisfied
the doubts about his ability or willingness to protect the government’s interests.
Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these determinations, such
doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.9
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Alcohol Consumption: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Request for a security clearance is
denied.
                             
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
