KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying circumstances.  He reasonably explained why Applicant’s
evidence was insufficient to overcome the government’s security concerns.  Adverse decision
affirmed.
CASENO: 07-13564.a1
DATE: 10/16/2008
DATE: October 16, 2008
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-13564
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On November 27, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested that the case be decided on the written record.  On May 30, 2008, after considering the
record, Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision under Guideline B is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
The Judge found as follows: Applicant is a 34-year-old radar technician for a defense
contractor working in South America.  He has been employed in this capacity and location by
defense contractors since January 2001.  He previously served in the United States Maine Corps for
over five years in a similar occupation specialty.  He held a security clearance for most of the time
he was on active duty. 
Applicant’s wife, mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of Colombia.
Applicant’s child is a dual citizen of Colombia and the United States, and resides with her parents
in Colombia.  She is a citizen of the United States because she was born of a United States citizen
living abroad.
 
Applicant’s wife is an officer in the Colombian military.  She has an approved resignation
from the Colombian military.  Applicant’s supervisor notes that he knows Applicant’s wife and has
no negative information concerning her.  He has no reason to doubt Applicant’s loyalty to the United
States. The military mission chief overseeing Applicant’s work has known Applicant’s wife for over
two years and worked several projects with her.  He stated that she is a trusted officer of good
character.  She is highly respected by her peers and leaders, and he has full trust and confidence in
her.  He has no concerns about Applicant’s access to classified information.  Applicant presented no
information concerning his mother-in-law and father-in-law, except his admission that they are
residents and citizens of Colombia.
Colombia is a constitutional democracy with the second largest population in South America.
The government generally respects freedom of speech and press, freedom of assembly and
association, and freedom of religion.  The government has improved its respect for human rights,
although serious problems remain.  There were unlawful and extrajudicial killings, forced
disappearances, insubordinate military collaboration with criminal groups, and other human rights
abuses.  Government steps to improve human rights and the security situation showed demonstrated
results.
Illegal armed groups committed the majority of human rights violations in the country,
including political killings, kidnaping, and torture.  Colombian-based terrorists groups were
weakened as a result of aggressive actions by Colombian military and police but the groups continue
Decision at 6.
1
3
to murder, kidnap, and terrorize Colombians from all walks of life.  The United States State
Department notes that travel to Colombia can expose visitors to considerable risk.  There are at least
three recognized foreign terrorist organizations operating in Colombia.  These groups have carried
out bombings and other attacks in and around major urban areas, including against civilian targets.
Kidnaping and murders of journalists, missionaries, scientists, human rights workers, business
people, tourists, and even small children have taken place.  No one can be considered safe from such
actions.  The United States Embassy restricts official and personal travel of its employees outside
of urban areas. 
 
Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse decision should be reversed based on his good
character and job performance, his ties to the United States, and the fact that his wife has resigned
from the Colombian military.  Applicant’s arguments in that regard do not demonstrate that the
Judge erred.
In support of his appeal, Applicant attaches new evidence in the form of a sworn statement,
travel documentation, and a document from a Colombian military department.  The Board cannot
consider this new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to establish mitigation.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the
Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00434 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 18, 2008).
A review of the record indicates that the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by
Applicant against the seriousness of the disqualifying circumstances and considered the possible
application of relevant conditions and factors.  He reasonably explained why the evidence which the
Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the government’s security
concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable record evidence cited by
Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  The Judge examined the
relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision, “including a ‘rational
connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  Therefore, the Judge’s conclusion that “it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance”1
is sustainable.  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).
4
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett       
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple        
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields          
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
