                                                              
 
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-10456 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding Guideline J (Criminal Conduct); 
however he did not mitigate security concerns pertaining to Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct). He deliberately falsified his 2006 security clearance application, when he 
failed to disclose the majority of his criminal arrests, charges and convictions. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 12, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On June 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him (GE 9), pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.1 The SOR alleges security 
concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On July 25, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to 
have his case decided by a hearing before an administrative judge (GE 10). On August 
19, 2008, Department Counsel stated she was ready to proceed and on August 19, 
2008, the case was assigned to me. On August 28, 2008, notice was issued for the 
hearing, which was held on September 18, 2008 (GE 8). At the hearing, Department 
Counsel offered seven exhibits (GEs 1-7) (Transcript (Tr.) 20), and Applicant offered 
nine exhibits (Tr. 21-26; AE A-I). There were no objections, and I admitted GEs 1-7 (Tr. 
20), and AEs A-I (Tr. 25-26). Additionally, I admitted the SOR, response to the SOR and 
Hearing Notice (GEs 8-10). I received the transcript on September 25, 2008. At 
Applicant’s request, I authorized until September 29, 2008, for him to submit 
documentation (Tr. 26, 45, 54). On September 29, 2008, I received AEs J-Q. 
Department Counsel did not object to my consideration of AEs J-Q (AE J), and I 
admitted AEs J-Q. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.bb, and he denied the 
allegations in SOR ¶ 2 (GE 10; Tr. 15). His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 45-years-old, and a high school graduate (Tr. 6). He has not 
attended college (Tr. 7). He currently holds an interim secret clearance (Tr. 7).  He is 
married. He has a two-year-old daughter and a 22-year-old stepson (Tr. 53).   
   
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Applicant has ten convictions involving concealment, larceny, theft, shoplifting or 
trespassing, three of which are felonies.  He has two drug-related convictions, one is a 
felony. He has seven convictions involving probation violations, contempt of court, and 
interfering with a police officer, three of which are felonies.  His most recent arrests 
 
1On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. GEs 2 (Responses to Interrogatories) and 10 (Response to 
SOR) are the sources for the facts in this section unless stated otherwise.  
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
were for assault and battery in July 2004, and for disorderly conduct in 2005. The 
assault and battery related to domestic violence (GE 2 at 5) and the disorderly conduct 
resulted from a disturbance at a Taco Bell restaurant (Tr. 28, GE 2 at 6). Applicant was 
arrested for blowing his horn. The disorderly conduct was dismissed (Tr. 28). He has 
not had any convictions since June 1996 (Tr. 27), and no arrests since the 2005 
disorderly conduct (Tr. 28).  He is not currently on probation or parole (Tr. 28-29). 
 
 Applicant had a serious problem with heroin abuse from the early 1980s until 
about 1995 (GE 2 at 6). By 1995, he was “snorting” two, $20 bags of heroin per day (GE 
2 at 6). He has purchased heroin almost every day when he was not in jail from about 
1985 to 1995 (GE 2 at 6). Since his release from jail in 1999, Applicant attends 
Narcotics Anonymous (NA) and Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) approximately three times 
a month (Tr. 29-30). He learned that he had to stop getting high because he was 
harming his family and himself (Tr. 30). He was at step one in NA and AA because he 
had a difficult time fully admitting that he had a problem (Tr. 31). He receives support 
from AA and NA as well as from his family, including his siblings (Tr. 33). He avoids any 
association with those who abuse drugs (Tr. 34). Applicant attributed the criminal 
offenses from 1985 to April 1996 to heroin addiction (Tr. 32). He denied drug use after 
1996 (Tr. 32). His employer conducts random drug testing and he offered to submit to 
random drug testing (Tr. 33).   
 
1985 to 1989 
 
During the 1980s, Applicant was charged with ten criminal offenses. Ultimately, 
he was convicted of five misdemeanors and one felony. The particular offenses, 
charges and dispositions are as follows: 
 
In September 1985, the court found Applicant guilty of Concealment/Alter Price, 
a misdemeanor. The court sentenced him to 30 days in jail (30 days suspended), fined 
him $25, and placed him on probation for one year. (SOR ¶ 1.bb) 
 
In January 1986, the court found Applicant guilty of Concealment, a 
misdemeanor. The court sentenced him to 30 days in jail (28 days suspended), and 
fined him about $100 (SOR ¶ 1.aa). 
 
In July 1986, the police charged Applicant with (1) Robbery, a felony, and (2) Use 
of a Firearm in Commission of a Robbery, a felony. In August 1986, the court nolle 
prossed these charges (SOR ¶ 1.z, GE 5 at 5). 
 
In September 1986, the police charged Applicant with Possession of Controlled 
Drugs With Intent, a misdemeanor. In November 1986, the court found him guilty as 
charged, and sentenced him to 30 days in jail (SOR ¶ 1.y). 
 
In November 1988, the police charged Applicant with (1) Interfere With Police, a 
misdemeanor, and (2) Forgery, a felony. In December 1988, he was found guilty of 
Interfere with Police, a misdemeanor. The court sentenced him to 30 days in jail, and 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
fined him approximately $50. In January 1989, the court amended his Forgery change, 
and found him guilty of Interfere With Police, a felony. The court sentenced him to six 
months in jail (SOR ¶ 1.x). 
 
In November 1988, the police charged Applicant with Concealment 3rd Offense, a 
felony. In December 1988, the court dismissed this charge (SOR ¶ 1.w). 
 
In July 1989, the police charged Applicant with Petit Larceny. In July 1990, this 
charge was nolle prossed (SOR ¶ 1.v). 
 
In October 1989, the police charged Applicant with Petit Larceny, a 
misdemeanor. In October 1989, the court found him guilty as charged (SOR ¶ 1.u). 
 
In November 1989, the police charged Applicant with Concealment/Alter Price, a 
misdemeanor. In December 1989, the court dismissed this charge (SOR ¶ 1.t). 
 
1990 to 1995 
 
From 1990 to 1995, Applicant was charged with 17 criminal offenses. Ultimately, 
he was convicted of six misdemeanors and five felonies. He served about 20 months of 
imprisonment in total, and was ordered to pay a substantial amount of fines and court 
costs. The particular offenses, charges and dispositions are as follows: 
 
In February 1990, the police charged Applicant with two counts of Capias Failure 
to Appear. In February 1990, the court found him guilty of one count of Failure to Pay 
Fines, a misdemeanor. The court fined him approximately $50, and ordered him to pay 
approximately $1,126 in costs (SOR ¶ 1.s). 
 
In February 1990, the police charged Applicant with (1) Shoplifting, a 
misdemeanor, and (2) Refuse ID to Police Officer, a misdemeanor. In March 1990, the 
court nolle prossed Charge (1), and found him guilty of Charge (2). The court sentenced 
him to nine months of imprisonment (eight months were suspended) (SOR ¶ 1.r). 
 
In March 1990, the police charged Applicant with (1) Grand Larceny, a felony, 
and (2) Petit Larceny 3rd Offense, a felony. In June 1990, Charge (1) was nolle prossed. 
In September 1990, the court found him guilty of Charge (2), and sentenced him to 
three years of imprisonment (two years and three months were suspended) (SOR ¶ 
1.q). 
 
In September 1990, the police charged Applicant with Shoplifting, a felony. In 
February 1991, the court found him guilty as charged, and ordered him to pay 
approximately $510 in costs (SOR ¶ 1.p). 
 
In September 1991, the police charged Applicant with Failure to Pay Fines. In 
October 1991, the court found him guilty and sentenced him to 60 days in jail (SOR ¶ 
1.o). 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
In November 1991, the police charged Applicant with Trespassing. In February 
1992, the court found him guilty, fined him approximately $100, and sentenced him to 
10 days in jail (SOR ¶ 1. n). 
 
In November 1991, the police charged Applicant with Concealment/Alter Price, a 
felony. In November 1991, the court found him guilty of Concealment, a misdemeanor 
(SOR ¶ 1.m). 
 
In February 1992, the police charged Applicant with (1) Larceny of U.S. 
Government Property and (2) Trespassing. The court found him guilty of Larceny of 
Government Property and sentenced him to 8 months of imprisonment, which he began 
serving in a federal correctional facility in April 1993 (SOR ¶ 1.l). 
 
In February 1994, the police charged Applicant with Possession of Drug With 
Intent, a felony. In July 1994, the court found him guilty of Possession of Heroin, a 
felony. The court sentenced him to four years of imprisonment (four years was 
suspended). The court also sentenced him to county jail for six months and placed him 
on supervised probation for two years.  The court ordered him to pay approximately 
$907 in costs (SOR ¶ 1.k). 
 
In August 1994, the police charged Applicant with Concealment, a felony. In 
October 1994, the court found him guilty as charged (SOR ¶ 1.j). 
 
In August 1994, the police charged Applicant with Violation of Probation, a 
felony. In October 1994, Applicant’s probation was revoked (SOR ¶ 1.i). 
 
In November 1994, the police charged Applicant with (1) Conceal Merchandise 
and (2) Petit Larceny-3rd Offense (SOR ¶ 1.h).  Applicant did not remember the 
disposition of this offense (Tr. 34-35).  
 
1996 to 2000 
 
From 1996 to 2000, Applicant was charged with three criminal offenses. 
Ultimately, he was convicted of two misdemeanors and one felony. He served about 29 
months of imprisonment in total, and was ordered to pay a substantial amount of fines 
and court costs. The particular offenses, charges and dispositions are as follows: 
 
In March 1996, the police charged Applicant with Grand Larceny, a felony. In 
June 1996, the court found Applicant guilty of Petit Larceny, a misdemeanor, and fined 
him approximately $1,500. The court sentenced him to 12 months in jail (three months 
were suspended) (SOR ¶ 1.g). 
 
In November 1995, the police charged Applicant with Contempt of Court, a 
misdemeanor. In April 1996, the court found him guilty as charged (SOR ¶ 1.f). 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
In June 1996, the police charged Applicant with Violation of Probation-2nd 
Offense, a felony. In August 1996, the court found him guilty as charged, and sentenced 
him to four years of imprisonment. Applicant was incarcerated from February 28, 1997, 
until November 2, 1999, and then placed him on probation for two years (SOR ¶ 1.e, 
GE 4 at 4). On May 2, 2001, he successfully completed probation (AE Q). 
 
2001 to Present 
 
In July 2001, the police charged Applicant with Assault and Battery-Family 
Member, a misdemeanor. In May 2002, the court dismissed this charge (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
 
In August 2001, the police charged Applicant with Assault and Battery, a 
misdemeanor. In September 2001, the court dismissed this charge (SOR ¶ 1.c). 
 
In December 2002, the court charged Applicant with Driving While License 
Suspended. In January 2003, the court dismissed this charge (SOR ¶ 1.b). 
 
In July 2004, the police charged Applicant with (1) Assault and Battery-Family 
Member and (2) Violate Protective Orders, both misdemeanors (SOR ¶ 1.a, GE 3 at 9-
14). In August 2004, he received deferred adjudication. He successfully completed the 
probation period and did not have a conviction (Tr. 38-39, GE 2 at 6).  
 
When an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator interviewed him 
on February 7, 2007, he admitted arrests and charges going back to the 1980s (GE 2). 
He also provided details concerning his 2004 arrest and charges for assault and battery 
and 2005 disorderly conduct (GE 2 at 5-6). He described his attendance at domestic 
family class for ten weeks (GE 2 at 6). On May 19, 2005, Applicant completed all court-
required probation and was released from probation (AE I). 
 
Falsification of Security Clearance Applications 
 
Applicant signed his SF 86 on May 18, 2006 (GE 1). He incorrectly responded, 
“No” or did not provide complete information in his responses to questions pertaining to 
previous criminal arrests, charges and convictions.  Section 23a, 23b and 23f of his SF 
86, (SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 2.c, respectively) asked: 
 
Section 23: Your Police Record – Felony Offenses for this item, report 
information regardless of whether the record in your case has been 
‘sealed’ or otherwise stricken from the court record. The single exception 
to this requirement is for certain convictions under the Federal Controlled 
Substances Act for which the court issued an expungement order under 
the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 3607.  
 
a. Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any felony offense? 
(Include those under the Uniform Code of Military Justice.); and  
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
b. Have you ever been arrested charged with or convicted of firearms or 
explosives offense? 
 
f. In the last 7 years, have you been arrested for, charged with, or 
convicted of any offense(s) not listed in response to a, b, c, d, or e above? 
(Leave out traffic offenses of less than $150 unless the violation was 
alcohol or drug related.)    
 
Applicant answered, “Yes” to subsections 23a and 23d. He disclosed in February 
1994 he was convicted of felony heroin possession (GE 1). At his hearing he explained, 
he could only remember that one offense when he was filling out his security clearance 
application (Tr. 36-39). He thought he did not have to disclose the 2004, assault and 
battery because it was in a type of deferred adjudication and subsequently dismissed 
after he completed a domestic violence counseling program (Tr. 38-39). He did not 
subsequently volunteer to investigators that he failed to disclose some of his past 
criminal record on his security clearance application (Tr. 40-41).  
 
Recommendations and Achievements 
  
 Applicant’s program manager indicates Applicant has worked for the contractor 
for seven years.3 He describes Applicant as a valued employee. Applicant is a quick 
learner, punctual, and highly motivated.  He has a positive attitude and is a team player. 
 
 Applicant received a certificate of achievement in August 2008 (AE B), 
certificates of completion for training and/or certification in October 2003 (AE O), July 
2004 (AE L), April 2005 (AE E), June 2005 (AE C), May 2006 (AE D), January 2007 (AE 
M), and May 2008 (AE K). He was entrusted to perform fire watch duties (AE F, G and 
H). He achieved qualification and technical expertise as shown by his training records 
and qualification sheets (AE N and P). 
 
Applicant met his spouse in 2002 (Tr. 53). His spouse went though the domestic 
violence family program with him in 2004 (Tr. 52). She attested to his attendance at NA 
meetings and noted that he speaks at some of the NA meetings (Tr. 53). Applicant had 
the support of his family and his church (Tr. 52). He and his spouse received marital 
counseling (Tr. 53). Applicant has been “clean” for more than 12 years and his spouse 
has been clean for eight years (Tr. 53). Applicant has definitely changed and should 
receive a security clearance (Tr. 54).  
 
 Applicant explained that after he was released from incarceration in 1999, he 
changed (Tr. 42). He married and had a daughter (Tr. 42). He cares for and supports 
his family (Tr. 42). He loves his family and his work (Tr. 44). He has not been disciplined 
at his job (Tr. 43). He has a good relationship with his associates at work and his 
supervisors (Tr. 43). He paid his debt to society and abstains from drugs (Tr. 42).  He is 
loyal to the United States (Tr. 42).  
 
3AE A, a letter dated September 17, 2008, is the source for the facts in this paragraph. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”4 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).5 
 
 
4See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is 
“more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
5“The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct).  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes six conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable 
conditions;)  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program; and 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year.6  
 
AGs ¶¶ 31(a), 31(c) and 31(e) apply. Applicant was convicted of several felonies 
and more than 10 misdemeanors. In June 1996, the police charged Applicant with 
Violation of Probation-2nd Offense, a “felony.” The record indicates, in August 1996, the 
court found him “guilty as charged,” and sentenced him to four years of imprisonment. 
Applicant was incarcerated from February 28, 1997 until November 2, 1999 and then 
placed on probation for two years (SOR ¶ 1.e, GE 4 at 4). The pertinent state code 
references § 19.2-306 and describes a judgment of probation revocation issued by the 
same court that issued the initial sentence to probation. It does not describe a trial on 
the merits or a “conviction.” However, the original offense involved a conviction and an 
 
6 The SOR cited facts that would have brought Applicant’s case under the prohibitions of the 
Smith Amendment (10 U.S.C. § 986), because he was convicted and sentenced to and served more than 
12 months of confinement. However, this section of the United States Code, which applied only to 
clearances granted by the Department of Defense (DoD), was repealed on January 28, 2008, when the 
President signed the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008 into law. It was replaced by 
adding Sec. 3002 to 50 U.S.C. § 435b (the Bond Amendment), which applies throughout the Federal 
Government. Sec. 3002(c) of this new provision continues the requirement for disqualification, absent a 
meritorious waiver, for persons who were sentenced to and served imprisonment for more than a year. 
However, this disqualification only applies to prevent clearances that would provide access to special 
access programs (SAP), Restricted Data (RD), or any other information commonly referred to as “special 
compartmented information” (SCI). 
 
This statutory modification ends the former Smith Amendment requirement for a meritorious 
Secretarial waiver to grant or continue a regular, or “collateral,” security clearance to a person who has 
served more than a year on a criminal sentence. On June 20, 2008, the same day the SOR was issued in 
this case, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) issued a memorandum providing interim 
guidance for implementation of the Bond Amendment. This memorandum set forth guidance for 
adjudicators to assess the potential application of the Bond Amendment to security clearance 
determinations and requirements for “Exception” identification of persons subject to its limitations in the 
Joint Adjudication Management System (JAMS) if a collateral clearance is granted. The granting of 
access to SAP, RD or SCI to such individuals requires a meritorious waiver under the terms of that 
memorandum. Such access is not at issue in this case, and accordingly the Bond Amendment was not 
addressed in either the SOR or at the hearing. 
 
The repeal of the Smith Amendment also nullified the legal authority by which the Under 
Secretary of Defense for Intelligence modified the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) that were 
approved by the President on December 29, 2005. When the Under Secretary promulgated the AG for 
use within DoD, on August 30, 2006, he added provisions reflecting the Smith Amendment. AG H (Drug 
Involvement), AG I(Psychological Conditions), and AG J (Criminal Conduct) were each modified, but only 
the latter guideline is involved in this case. It was modified by adding ¶¶ 31(f), 32(e),and footnotes 1 and 
2. Because the President, in Executive Order 12968, intended to establish “a uniform Federal personnel 
security program” (Intro.), and required a “common set of adjudicative guidelines for determining eligibility 
for access to classified information” (Sec. 3.1(f).), the authority for these DoD modifications to the 
guidelines ended with the repeal of the Smith Amendment. The new statutory requirements are in effect 
and must be followed pending formal revision of the AG, but only the prohibition against granting 
clearances to unlawful drug users and addicts under AG H applies to “collateral” security clearances. 
Accordingly, the Smith Amendment-related provisions added to AG J have been repealed, and do not 
apply to the remaining proceedings in this case.     
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
original sentence of more than one year of imprisonment. Ultimately he served 20 
months of imprisonment. As indicated in n.6 infra, I have not found AG ¶ 31(f) 
applicable as a disqualifying condition. 
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply to mitigate the criminal conduct. Applicant's last 
offense resulting in a conviction occurred in June 1996, more than 12 years ago.  He 
has changed his lifestyle and his environment. He has attended NA meetings for 10 
years and continues to receive NA counseling. He completed his probation. His NA 
attendance reinforces his rehabilitation. The source of his criminal problem was a 
decade of heroin abuse. He stopped using heroin when he was incarcerated in 1996. 
He has 12 years of heroin abstinence. He has demonstrated his intent not to abuse any 
drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence. His criminal offenses are unlikely to recur. His 
demonstrated intent is encompassed in these two mitigating conditions. He has 
demonstrated remorse and been reformed with respect to his heroin-related criminal 
activity. He received job training and has a good employment record.  There is a strong 
evidentiary record in this case showing his full rehabilitation for the particular offenses 
resulting in arrests, charges or convictions. Any doubt about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment arises from his lack of candor, discussed below, and 
not from his past criminal conduct.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and, 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant disclosed only one of his criminal offenses—his 1994 arrest and 
conviction for possession of heroin. He did not disclose his other felonies (SOR ¶ 2.a). 
He did not disclose his July 1986, charges of (1) Robbery, a felony, and (2) Use of a 
Firearm in Commission of a Robbery, a felony (SOR ¶ 2.b).  He did not disclose his 
2001 and 2004 arrests for assault and battery (SOR ¶ 2.c). AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) both 
apply.7 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
7Deliberate and materially false answers on a security clearance application may violate 18 
U.S.C. § 1001. The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 
(1995): as a statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of influencing, the decision 
making body to which it is addressed.” See also United States v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 
2004). If Applicant had provided accurate answers on his security clearance applications, his accurate 
answers are capable of influencing the government to deny his security clearance. His criminal offenses 
are sufficiently serious to potentially jeopardize approval of his security clearance. Making a false 
statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony (the maximum potential sentence includes 
confinement for five years and a $10,000 fine). In light of my ultimate decision, and the absence to 
alleged a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 in the SOR, it is unnecessary for me to decide whether or not 
Applicant actually violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001. 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. He does receive some credit for 
truthfully describing his criminal offenses and background to an OMP investigator.  At 
his hearing, he admitted preparing his 2006 security clearance application and 
answering incorrectly. However, he was not honest and candid at his hearing about his 
state of mind when he completed his security clearance application. He said he was 
confused about the requirement to disclose arrests when the charges were ultimately 
dismissed. He also said he could only remember one felony.8 His statement at his 
hearing about his reasons for not disclosing the police information is not credible. He 
was well aware of more than one reportable felony, and knowingly and deliberately 
chose not to disclose full information about those felonies on his security clearance 
application.     
 
8The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
Whole Person Concept. Applicant committed numerous offenses from 1985 to 1996. 
However, the evidence of the offenses after 1996 is not compelling, as he was not 
convicted and the offenses are less serious. His lengthy criminal record is connected to 
his addiction to heroin. Applicant receives substantial credit for his ten years of NA 
attendance, his devotion to his family, and his other efforts to reform and rehabilitate 
himself after 1996. His work for a defense contractor is excellent, and aside from the 
SOR allegations no other disciplinary or security-related problems surfaced. His record 
of good employment weighs in his favor. There is some compelling evidence of his 
responsibility, rehabilitation, mitigation. I am convinced that he is loyal to his family, his 
company, his church and his country.   
 
  Applicant’s deliberate failure to disclose information on his security clearance 
application is serious, recent and not mitigated. At his hearing on September 18, 2008, 
he was not candid about why he failed to provide full and complete information on his 
security clearance application. He said he could only remember one felony, and I do not 
believe this to be a truthful, candid explanation for failing to list more of his criminal 
history. I have questions about his current ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all 
the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has 
mitigated security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct, but has not mitigated such 
concerns about his personal conduct.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors” and 
 
15 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has failed to mitigate or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.bb:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.c:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
