                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-16650 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Francisco Mendez, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Ecuador and is a naturalized U.S. citizen who has lived in 
the United States since 1979. Applicant’s mother, sister, and brother-in-law are citizens 
and residents of Ecuador. His sisters, wife, and daughter are dual citizens of Ecuador 
and the United States living in the United States. His brother is a U.S. citizen living in 
Ecuador. Applicant maintains his Ecuadorian citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in Ecuador and because he intends to retire in Ecuador. Applicant has rebutted 
or mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, 
but has not rebutted or mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
C, foreign preference. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
2
                                                          
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 5, 2008, detailing security concerns 
under Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence. 
 
 On June 10, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
July 10, 2008, I was assigned the case. On July 10, 2008, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing held on August 6, 2008. The government offered 
Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on his 
own behalf. On August 14, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Ecuador. Applicant stated the material did not apply to him 
even though his relatives lived in Ecuador because he had no professional or business 
ties to Ecuador. (Tr. 16) The attached documents were not admitted into evidence but 
were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HEx) I. The facts administratively 
noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR. 
Applicant is a 59-year-old systems engineer who has worked for a defense contractor 
since May 1983, and is seeking to maintain a security clearance.  
 
 In 1975, Applicant starting working at a tracking station in Ecuador. (Tr. 21) In 
1979, the tracking station closed and he came to the U.S. (Tr. 21) In 1982, he obtained 
his permanent U.S. residence status. In May 1983, he obtained employment with his 
present employer. In February 1995, he became a U.S. citizen.  
 
 In 1973, Applicant married. His wife was born in Ecuador and became a U.S. 
citizen in April 1988. In 1976, Applicant’s daughter was born in Ecuador. In 1995,2 she 
became a U.S. citizen and works as a social worker. (Tr. 23) In 1978, Applicant’s son 
was born in Ecuador. In 1995, he became a U.S. citizen and is studying criminology at 
an American university. (Tr. 23)  
 
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 In 1995, when Applicant became a U.S. citizen, his children who were minors also became U.S. 
citizens.   
 
 
 
3
Applicant’s mother – age 95 – is a citizen and resident of Ecuador who lives on a 
pension. His father is deceased. He has biweekly telephone contact with his mother. 
(Ex. 1, p. 55) One of his sisters is deceased; another – age 60 – is a citizen and 
resident of Ecuador and is an English teacher. (Tr. 28, Ex. 3, p. 71) He talks with this 
sister biweekly by telephone. (Ex. 2, p. 56) Applicant and his siblings send his mother 
and sister in Ecuador $300 per month. His share is $50 per month. (Tr. 28) 
 
Applicant’s one brother became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1979 and his other 
brother became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1994. (Ex. 1, p. 20 – 22) Another sister is a 
68 year old house wife living in England. Applicant rarely contacts her, once every two 
years, and his last physical contact was five years ago. (Tr. 24, Ex. 2, p. 55, Ex. 3, p. 
78) Two other sisters became naturalized U.S. citizens in 1978 and 1994. (Ex. 1, p. 24 – 
26) His one brother and two sisters who are naturalized U.S. citizens live in the U.S. In 
2007, one brother moved back to Ecuador to establish temporary residency. (Ex. 3, p. 
71) This brother comes back and forth between Ecuador and the U.S. (Tr. 36)  
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is a U.S legal resident living in Ecuador who spends six 
months of each year in the U.S. and six months in Ecuador. (Tr. 37, Ex. 3, p. 76, 81) 
When she is in the U.S., she lives with Applicant and his wife. His mother-in-law and 
father-in-law separated 45 years ago and Applicant is unsure if his father-in-law is still 
alive. (Ex. 1, p. 28) His brother-in-law is a retired accountant and a citizen and resident 
of Ecuador. Applicant’s mother-in-law and brother-in-law live together in Ecuador. 
Applicant talks by telephone with his mother-in-law two or three times a month and talks 
weekly with his brother-in-law in Ecuador. (Ex. 2, p. 56, Ex. 3, p. 79) None of his 
relatives have held political office or are politically active.  
 
In 1979, prior to coming to the U.S., Applicant purchased a townhome and an 
unimproved lot in Ecuador. (Tr. 33) Two weeks prior to the hearing, Applicant sold the 
townhome for $35,000 and intends to build a new home. He also owns an executive 
suite. Applicant obtained a $50,000 loan from his 401(k) retirement plan to purchase the 
executive suite in Ecuador. Applicant rents out the executive suite for $400 per month. 
(Tr. 30) Applicant has $3,500 in a saving account in Ecuador comprised of rent received 
on the executive suite and he has $36,000 from the sale of his townhome in a bank 
account in Ecuador.  
 
In the U.S., Applicant has $346,000 in his 401 (k) retirement plan, owns a home 
in the U.S. worth $275,000 on which he has a $70,000 mortgage, owns four vehicles in 
the U.S. worth $37,000 on which he makes monthly payments of $575, has $9,000 in 
his credit union account, and his other property in the U.S. is worth $22,000. (Tr. 24 – 
26, Ex. 2, p. 65) Applicant has no professional or business ties to anyone in Ecuador. 
(Tr. 16)  
 
 In August 2007, Applicant voted in an election in Ecuador. (Ex. 2, p. 65) A voter 
certificate is needed to conduct most legal transactions in Ecuador. Applicant must vote 
in Ecuadorian elections to maintain his Ecuadorian citizenship. Applicant maintains his 
 
 
 
4
                                                          
Ecuadorian citizenship to protect assets from future laws pertaining to eminent domain. 
(Ex. 2, p. 65) Applicant is unwilling to renounce his Ecuadorian citizenship because he 
is afraid the Ecuadorian government might take his property. (Tr. 13) Applicant intends 
to return to Ecuador when he retires in the next two to two and a half years. (Tr. 25) In 
October – November 2001, February 2002, October – November 2002, August – 
September 2004, January 2005, and July 2005, Applicant traveled to Ecuador on 
company business. In February 2007, Applicant went to Ecuador to attend his sister’s 
funeral. (Ex. 3, p. 78) 
 
Ecuador 
 
 Ecuador is a constitutional republic whose government is democratically elected, 
although none of the last three democratically elected presidents finished their terms 
because of political instability.3 
 
 Ecuador has a record for respecting human rights.4 Ecuador’s constitution bars 
torture and similar forms of intimidation and punishment, as well as arbitrary arrest and 
detention. Its constitution also provides for an independent judiciary. Still, human rights 
organizations report incidents of police torture and other cruel, inhumane, or degrading 
treatment or punishment. Criminal kidnapping for profit has continued to be a problem in 
certain regions of the country, and there have been reported cases of arbitrary arrest 
and detention. Political and economic pressures and corruption in the national police 
and the courts have also been reported and remain a source of continuing U.S. 
concern.5 
 
 The U.S. remains concerned about the high levels of corruption in Ecuador, 
which, according to Transparency International, rivals those of Congo, Iraq, Sierra 
Leone, and Uganda and makes Ecuador the second most corrupt nation in South 
America.6 
 
 Ecuador has a mixed record as to the protection of foreign property rights. Twice 
in the last half-century, it has nationalized the property of U.S. firms.7 For many years, 
the U.S. and Ecuador have maintained close ties based on a shared interest in 
3 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs, Background Note: Ecuador, 
January 2008 at 3 (Background Note). (HEx I) 
 
4 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Ecuador: Country 
reports on Human Rights Practices – 2007, dated March 11, 2008 at 1. (Human Rights) (HEx I) 
 
5 Id. 
  
6 CRS Report for Congress, Ecuador: Political and Economic Situation and U.S. Relations, May 
2, 2005 at 5. (CRS Report) (HEx I) 
 
7 Background Note at 4 – 5. (HEx I) 
 
 
 
 
5
                                                          
maintaining democratic institutions, combating narco-trafficking, building trade, 
investment and financial relationships, cooperating in fostering Ecuador’s economic 
development, and participating in inter-American organizations.8  
 
 Ecuador’s ongoing conflict with Colombia along its 450-mile-long northern border 
involves counter terrorism and security threats from Colombian foreign terrorist 
organizations, frequently lined with narcotics trafficking organizations.9  
 
 Members of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) and the 
National Liberation Army (ELN) were present on the Colombia side of the border and 
regularly entered Ecuadorian territory.10 Although Ecuadorian officials deplore 
Colombian guerilla activity and amassed armed forces along the border to interdict 
guerilla bands from Colombia, encroaching guerillas have been known to extort and 
intimidate local populations, and raise some security concerns for U.S. citizens residing 
in Ecuador. Since 1998, at least ten U.S. citizens have been kidnapped near Ecuador’s 
border with Colombia and one killed.11  
 
 Ecuador has continued to work closely with the U.S. to promote lawful economic 
activity and Ecuador’s Congress has ratified the Inter-American Convention against 
Terrorism.12 All in all, Ecuador remains a friendly country with democratic institutions 
and strong inter-governmental relations with the U.S. Historically, the country has 
shown little inclination to coerce or pressure U.S. citizens to provide classified or 
proprietary data, or in any way attempt to compromise sensitive and classified U.S. 
Information. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
8 Background Note at 6. (HEx I) 
 
9 U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator of Counterterrorism, Country Reports on 
Terrorism, Chapter 2 – Country Reports: Western Hemisphere Overview, dated April 30, 2008 (Terrorism) 
at 8. (HEx I) 
 
10 Id.  
 
11 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Consular Information Sheet on Ecuador, 
dated March 28, 2008 at 2. (Consular Information) (HEx I) 
  
12 Terrorism at 2. (HEx I) 
 
 
 
 
6
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: Foreign 
contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or 
foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable 
 
 
 
7
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can 
and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG & 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual=s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(c) counterintelligence information, that may be classified, indicates that 
the individual=s access to protected information may involve unacceptable 
risk to national security; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of their 
citizenship status, if the potential for adverse foreign influence or duress 
exists; 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation;   
 
(f) failure to report, when required, association with foreign national; 
 
(g) unauthorized association with a suspected or known agent, associate, 
or employee of a foreign intelligence service; 
 
(h) indications that representatives or nations from a foreign country are 
acting to increase the vulnerability of the individual to possible future 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; [and] 
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make 
the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign 
person, group, government, or country.  
 
 
 
 
8
Applicant’s wife and children were born in Ecuador and are naturalized U.S. 
citizens living in the U.S. Applicant’s mother, who he helps support, and sister are 
citizens and residents of Ecuador. His one brother is a naturalized U.S. citizen who 
spends part of the year in Ecuador and part in the U.S. Applicant has a sister who lives 
in England. His other three siblings are naturalized U.S. citizens living in the U.S. His 
mother-in-law is a U.S legal resident who spends six months of each year in the U.S. 
and six months in Ecuador. Applicant’s brother-in-law is a retired accountant and a 
citizen and resident of Ecuador.  
 
 Having considered all of the Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions, 
applicable conditions that could possibly raise a security concern are AG & 7(a) and AG 
& 7(b), which apply. AG & 7(d) does not apply even though his wife was born in 
Ecuador, because she is a U.S. citizen living in the U.S., which negates any potential for 
adverse foreign influence or duress. AG & 7(e) partially applies because Applicant owns 
property in Ecuador and does not wish to give up his Ecuadorian citizenship for fear of 
losing the property. The property is not “substantial” when compared to his U.S. 
property, but is of concern.  
 
 AG & 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of 
loyalty or obligations to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority.  
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; [and] 
 
 
 
 
9
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 AG && 8(a) and 8(c) partially apply. Applicant talks with his mother, sister, 
mother-in-law, and brother-in-law a couple of times each month. Because of his limited 
contact with them, “it is unlikely [he] will be place in a position of having to choose 
between the interest of [his relatives and in-laws] and the interest of the U.S. “There is 
little likelihood that [his relationship with his Ecuadorian relatives and in-laws] could 
create a risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 AG & 8(b) fully applies. There is no evidence that his mother, siblings, mother-in-
law or brother-in-law are or have been a political activists, challenging the policies of the 
Ecuadorian Government. There is no evidence his relatives or in-laws currently work or 
ever worked for the Ecuadorian Government, military, or news media, or that of any 
other foreign government. There is no evidence that terrorists or the Ecuadorian 
Government have approached or threatened Applicant or his relatives and in-laws for 
any reason. There is no evidence that his relatives and in-laws living in Ecuador 
currently engages in activities which would bring attention to them or that other 
Ecuadorian elements are even aware of Applicant’s work. As such, there is a reduced 
possibility that his relatives and in-laws or Applicant would be targets for coercion or 
exploitation. 
 Applicant has “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
U.S., [he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.” His wife, children, brother, and two sisters are U.S. citizens, and all reside in 
the United States. Another brother is a U.S. citizen who travels between Ecuador and 
the U.S. and another sister lives in the U.K. However, his mother, sister, mother-in-law, 
and brother-in-law are citizens and residents of Ecuador. Applicant was born in 
Ecuador. He came to the U.S. in 1979 and became a U.S. citizen on February, 1995. 
He has worked for defense contractors since 1975.  
 AG & 8 (f) partially applies because he has property in Ecuador. However, he 
has significant U.S. property and assets. These mitigating conditions taken together are 
sufficient to fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Foreign Preference 
 
AG & 9 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: Foreign 
Preference is a security concern when an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a 
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United 
States.  
 
 
 
 
10
AG & 10 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. 
This includes but is not limited to: 
 
  (1) possession and/or use of a foreign passport; 
  (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
  (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other 
such benefits from a foreign country; 
  (4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
  (5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in 
another country; 
  (6) seeking or holding political office in the foreign country; 
  (7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an American 
citizen; 
  
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as to serve 
the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or government in conflict 
with the national security interest; [and] 
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than the 
United States; for example, declaration of intent to renounce United States 
citizenship; renunciation of United states citizenship. 
 
 Applicant votes in Ecuadorian elections because he needs the voter certificate to 
conduct legal transactions in Ecuador. Applicant votes in Ecuadorian elections in order 
to maintain his Ecuadorian citizenship. He maintains his Ecuadorian citizenship to 
protect assets from the possibility of eminent domain. He is unwilling to renounce his 
Ecuadorian citizenship because he is afraid he might lose his Ecuadorian property. 
Applicant intends to retire in the next two to two and a half years, return to Ecuador, and 
build a home in Ecuador. He has chosen to keep his foreign citizenship so he can keep 
his foreign property. AG && 10(a) (5) and 10(a) (7) apply 
 
  AG & 11 lists conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign 
country; 
   
(b) individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship; 
 
 
 
 
11
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship occurred 
before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security authority;  
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security 
authority, or otherwise invalidated; [and] 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has chosen to actively 
maintain his Ecuadorian citizenship in order to protect his Ecuadorian property. He 
voted in foreign elections not because the U.S. Government encouraged it, but because 
he needed to prove he voted in order to transact business in Ecuador and to prove his 
Ecuadorian citizenship. The foreign preference concerns have not been mitigated.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Security clearance 
decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past 
transgressions. Rather, the objective of the adjudicative process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person=s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole person 
concept in evaluating Applicant=s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national 
interests.  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
 
 
 
12
In the more than 29 years since he left Ecuador, Applicant returned six times for 
company business and only once, in February 2007, for personal reasons to attend his 
sister’s funeral. I have carefully weighed the evidence in favor of Applicant against the 
government=s concerns about Applicant=s ability to protect classified information. I find 
that there is little potential for Applicant to be pressured, coerced, or exploited because 
his mother, siblings, and in-laws are living in Ecuador or because he plans to retire in 
Ecuador. It is not his Ecuadorian relatives or in-laws or future retirement plans that 
provide concern. Future plans are merely speculative until they occur. When and if he 
retires to Ecuador is uncertain. 
 
What is of security concern is his decision to maintain his Ecuadorian citizenship 
in order to protect his Ecuadorian property. He votes in foreign elections specifically to 
maintain his foreign citizenship. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concern, but failed 
to mitigate the foreign preference security concern. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Foreign Preference:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Foreign Influence:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a – 2.j.:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
