                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-17920 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
REMAND DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE  
CAROL G. RICCIARDELLO 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Fred Grafstein, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 7, 2008, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the government’s 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
file of relevant material (FORM) on May 1, 2008. The FORM was mailed to Applicant on 
May 7, 2008, and it was received on May 19, 2008. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant’s case was assigned to me on July 7, 2008, and the file was forwarded to me 
on the same day. The file indicated Applicant did not object to the FORM and did not 
submit additional information. I issued my decision on July 28, 2008. On August 27, 
2008, Applicant filed a motion for expedited remand for the Administrative Judge to 
consider Applicant’s original response to the FORM which “apparently had not been 
taken into account.” The evidence was never provided to me. On September 4, 2008, 
Department Counsel filed a response to Applicant’s motion stating he had no objection 
to the request for an expedited remand. The case was remanded to me on October 3, 
2008, ordering the case to be remanded “for further processing.”  
 
 On October 6, 2008, I ordered Department Counsel to provide me by October 9, 
2008, the complete copy of the “Response to Form and accompanying documents” that 
were dated May 20, 2008, as were referred to by Applicant. On October 7, 2008, 
Department Counsel complied with my order, providing me the documents, his 
response that he did not object to the documents and a written argument. The letter and 
emails from Department Counsel are marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The evidence 
provided is marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 1 through 11. Additional 
correspondence and Department Counsel’s response to the evidence was marked as 
HE II. On October 8, 2008, a conference call was conducted with Department Counsel, 
Applicant’s Counsel and myself. Applicant’s Counsel requested he be permitted to 
provide additional evidence based on Department Counsel’s response in HE II. 
Although I did not rule that Department Counsel’s submission constituted new evidence, 
I reopened the case to allow Applicant to provide additional evidence. He was ordered 
to provide to Department Counsel any additional relevant evidence not later than 
October 20, 2008. Department Counsel was ordered to provide the documents and his 
response to me not later than October 22, 2008. I received additional evidence from 
Applicant that is marked as AE 12. Department Counsel did not object and reiterated his 
prior argument. His response was marked as HE III. 
 
 I have considered all of Applicant’s submissions in addition to all of the evidence 
previously provided. To ensure completeness I have listed below all of the exhibits, AE 
1 through 12 that I have considered. I have also considered all of the evidence 
previously provided in the FORM.  
 
 1.  Facsimile cover sheet, dated August 4, 2008 (1 page). 
 
 2.  Letter from Applicant’s Counsel, dated March 20, 2008 (5 pages). 
 
 3.  Judgment of Divorce, X County, X Court, dated September 3, 2003 (3 pages). 
 
 4.  Letter from Attorney A, Esq. to Applicant, dated September 2, 2004 (1 page). 
 
 5.  Notice of Entry, Case No. xx-xxxxx, dated August 25, 2005 (1 page).  
 
3 
 
 
 6. Letter from Attorney A, Esq. to Applicant, dated November 1, 2004 (1 page). 
 
 7.  Consent to Change Attorney, Case no. xx-xxxxx, dated August 25, 2005 (1 
page). 
 
 8.  Invoice for Attorneys Fees, dated August 22, 2005 (1 page). 
 
 9.  Letter from Attorney B, Esq. to Attorney A, Esq., dated October 1, 2007 (1 
page). 
 
 10.  Information Subpoena with Restraining Notice, Case No. xx-xxxxx, dated 
December 13, 2004, (5 pages). 
 
 11.  Letter from State A, dated December 24, 2004 (1 page). 
 
 12.  Fax cover sheet dated October 17, 2008, from Attorney B; Fax letter from 
Attorney B to Department Counsel dated October 17, 2008; Sworn Affidavit from 
Applicant dated October 16, 2008 (total of 5 pages). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. They are incorporated 
herein. In addition, I have thoroughly and carefully reviewed all of the pleadings and 
exhibits submitted. I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 59 years old and served as a police officer for 20 years attaining the 
rank of Detective. He retired in 1993 and has held various jobs since then. He 
experienced periods of unemployment from May 1999 to September 1999 and May 
2006 to December 2006. He has been employed as a contract investigator with a 
Department of Defense contractor since December 2006. Applicant was married from 
1970 to 2003. He has three adult children.  
 
 A judgment was entered against Applicant in favor of his ex-wife as alleged in 
SOR ¶1.a in the approximate amount of $23,348. The judgment has been owed since 
August 2004. It is a debt for a portion of Applicant’s pension to be paid to his ex-wife 
pursuant to a divorce decree. Applicant’s response to the SOR regarding the debt is as 
follows:  
 
The monies in question were the result of a default judgment found 
against me while I lived in [Place A]. She was and has been receiving 47 
percent of my law enforcement pension and I was to receive 47 percent of 
her teaching pension when she retired which to date has not happened. I 
had been under the assumption that any monies owed would be resolved 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
at that time. These money equations were to be worked out by our 
corresponding attorneys.1 
 
Applicant admitted the debt of $1,739 owed in SOR ¶ 1.b and claimed it was in 
the process of being paid off by monthly payments when the payments were halted due 
to the default judgment listed in SOR ¶ 1.a, that froze his funds and payments. He 
stated in his affidavit that that account is now a problem.2 
 
Applicant provided documentation that shows automatic deductions are taken 
from his pension and paid to his ex-wife as of December 24, 2004, pursuant to their 
divorce settlement.3 However the amount alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is for arrearages owed 
from February 28, 2003 to May 14, 2004, plus an additional amount awarded for 
counsel fees. This judgment was entered in default. Applicant’s original divorce 
attorney, Attorney A, sent Applicant a letter on September 2, 2004, advising him that a 
money judgment in the amount of $20,848 representing the arrearage and attorney fees 
was entered against him on August 25, 2004.4 The letter dated September 2, 2004 to 
Applicant stated the following: 
 
The decision indicates that you did not respond to the motion for the 
money judgment. My office was never served with any motion as the 
procedure requires that you be served since your divorce judgment has 
already been entered by the Court and any new application is considered 
to be post-judgment and requires service upon you and not this office as 
your former attorney.  
 
If you were not served with the motion seeking the money judgment then 
you should contact my office to discuss whether or not you wish to make 
application to modify or reverse the judgment. Of course you will need to 
be able to substantiate that you have made payments to your ex-wife or 
that the amount that you owe is less than the amount granted in the 
decision of the Court.  
 
If you have any further questions regarding this matter please do not 
hesitate to contact my office.5  
 
Applicant changed Attorneys in 2005 and hired Attorney B.6 Applicant provided an 
Invoice from Attorney B dated August 22, 2005, that states: 
1 Item 2. 
 
2 AE 12. 
 
3 AE 10. 
 
4 AE 5. 
 
5 AE 4. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
7/29/2005-Telephone: Finally made contact with attorney for ex-wife will 
not settle for [just] a mere offset [wants] money to settle judgments-also 
has counsel fee awards-doesn’t know exact amount-will provide me with 
documentation once I send letter of representation. 
 
On October 7, 2007, Attorney B again contacted Attorney A and stated he was trying to 
resolve for Applicant the open arrears to his ex-wife. He acknowledged he was 
unsuccessful in doing so in 2005.7  
 
 In Applicant’s affidavit dated October 16, 2008, he stated: 
 
[M]y pension that I received as a retired [X] County Police Office[r] went 
into payout status before the divorce became final. My wife’s pension did 
not go into payout status and is still not in payout status and has not 
be[en] evaluated. I bring this to the attention of this court because of the 
fact that there are set offs that still have to be negotiated with regard to my 
wife’s entitlement to the money she is claiming and the monies I would be 
entitled to by virtue of my long term employment as a police officer. 
 
Appellant went on to say in his affidavit the following: 
 
After the sale of our home, I relocated to the State of [Y] and left 
everything in the hands of my then divorce counsel. My attorney was to 
bring to a conclusion the open issues involving the distribution of my 
property resulting from my marriage. Unbeknownst to me, an application 
was made to the court for a money judgment to be entered against me for 
arrears that had accrued under a temporary order directing that my wife 
was to receive a specified sum each month from the pension that was in 
payout status to me directly. I was unaware that these monies continued 
to accrue or that a judgment had been entered. My pension check, was 
received by direct deposit into an account held at the [County] Federal 
Credit Union. A restraining notice was served on the [County) Federal 
Credit Union and my account was frozen. When I submitted my copy of 
the restraining notice with the other exhibits, it was for the express 
purpose of showing that the issuance of the restraint interrupted the 
repayment of an indebtedness to the credit union. An execution apparently 
was never served on the credit union and the account is still restrained. 
Meanwhile the loan that I had with the [c]redit [u]nion has defaulted and is 
a problem for me as well. I authorize my current attorney to address that 
problem while also attempting to juggle other expenses I was incurring 
with my current income.8   
 
6 AE 7. 
 
7 AE 9. 
 
8 AE 12. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 The debt of $323 in SOR ¶ 1.c is for telephone services. Applicant claimed in his 
answer that the telephone debt was the result of an ongoing dispute he had with the 
telephone company because of “improper services I received from them, improper 
equipment I received and a lack of concern on their part over the quality of service I was 
receiving from them.”9 In documentation provided he noted that his attorney told him to 
pay the debt to resolve it.10 He offered no evidence that he has done so.  
 
 Applicant originally stated he had no knowledge about the debt of $197 listed in 
SOR ¶ 1.d.11 He claimed his account records indicate his prompt payment to this 
creditor until he moved and closed the account. In his affidavit he stated he had 
resolved the utility debt, but did not offer any documentation to support his claim.12 
 
 Applicant stated he provided the aforementioned documentation to show he was 
being responsive to creditors and he is “generally a responsible individual.”13 He further 
stated that his period of divorce and the short time after was extremely difficult and hard 
for him and their children. He and his ex-wife have reconciled their problems with the 
children and with each other 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
9 Answer to SOR. 
 
10 AE 2. 
 
11 Answer to SOR. 
 
12 AE 12. 
 
13 Id. 
 
7 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18: “Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual=s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them, especially AG & 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts”) and (c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). Applicant has a default 
judgment against him that despite being aware of it and its effect on his other debts he 
has not resolved. The default judgment is four years old. He also has other debts and 
he has not provided documentation that he paid or resolved them. I find both 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 
8 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions. I especially considered AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment”); (b) (“the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances”); (c) (“the person has received or is 
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control”); (d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”); and (e) (“the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue”). 
 
 Applicant is aware that he has a legally binding default judgment entered against 
him for approximately $23,348. He is aware of his responsibility toward paying this 
judgment. He apparently believes that somehow this dispute will be resolved at a later 
date. No evidence was provided to show this matter will be resolved later. Although he 
stated he was unaware of the default judgment, he also provided a letter from his 
divorce attorney advising him of the judgment and to contact him if he wanted to dispute 
it. No evidence was provided to show he has legally disputed the judgment in court. He 
apparently was attempting some type of off-set with his ex-wife’s pension, a proposal 
that was refused. Applicant’s proposal was declined three years ago. He failed to 
provide any documented evidence to show he does not owe the debt or is paying the 
debt. The debt is for arrearages owed. According to Applicant’s statements, his ex-
wife’s pension is not yet being paid out. Therefore, it is unclear how he would be in a 
position to off-set the pensions.  
 
 Applicant also claimed that because of the judgment entered against him his 
payments on another debt were frozen. Again he did not offer any evidence to show 
that since the debt was frozen he has done anything to resolve either of the debts. He 
has failed to offer any substantive evidence to show he is resolving his debts. He has 
not provided any documents to support he paid or resolved the remaining debts or is 
formally disputing them. I find (a) does not apply because the debts remain delinquent. I 
have considered (b), but find it does not apply because Applicant has been aware of the 
court ordered judgment and has not complied with it. Although the circumstances of 
some of the debts were the result of his divorce, he has had several years to resolve 
them and has not addressed them in the proper forum. There has not been sufficient 
evidence presented to confirm there has been a good-faith effort to pay his creditors, 
resolve the debts, or provide documented proof to substantiate his disputes. I find none 
of the remaining mitigating conditions apply.  
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant acknowledged and 
admitted his delinquent debts. He has not provided substantive evidence of efforts he 
has made to resolve or pay the debts. I have considered all of the evidence presented. 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from financial 
considerations 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
