1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
             
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-16931
SSN: ----------------
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on October 27,
2006. On June 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the
case assignment on September 9, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on
September 16, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 15, 2008.
The Government offered Exhibits (GE 1-4), which were received without objection.
Applicant testified in her own behalf. She submitted Exhibits (AE A-C), without
2
objection. DOHA received the transcript on October 22, 2008. Based upon a review of
the record, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, dated July 21, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.m, and 1.p through 1.q, of the SOR. She denied the
other allegations in the SOR because the debts were paid or she had no knowledge of
them. She provided additional information to support her request for eligibility for a
security clearance. 
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She graduated from
high school in 1987. She married in 1998 and divorced in 2001. She has no children (Tr.
25). She has been employed since January 2006 with her current employer (GE 1).
In 2005, Applicant was self-employed as a chef. She has continued with the
business on a part time basis (Tr. 113). She worked in various positions since high
school. Applicant had a period of unemployment in 2002 and 2003 totaling
approximately six months (Tr. 26).
Applicant was in an automobile accident in June 2007. She was not at fault in the
accident. She received injuries and lost some time from work (Tr. 23). She is working
with the insurance company to settle the medical debts that she has incurred. The
medical debts are approximately $50,000. She is paying $160 monthly on one of the
large medical debts ($10,000) incurred from the accident. She has not paid the other
medical bills (GE 3).
Applicant had an injury to her knee in 2008 due to a fall at a hockey game. She
required surgery on her knee after that. She was out of work recuperating for
approximately two weeks (Tr. 28). She also received physical therapy. 
The SOR alleges 19 delinquent debts/collection accounts including, unpaid
medical debt and six collection accounts. The total amount of the delinquent debt is
approximately $37,000.
SOR ¶ 1.a is a collection account in the amount of $6,262. Applicant admitted
that she owed the debt. Applicant explained that she met someone on the internet in
2003 and received two money orders from the person when they were out of the
country in 2003. She deposited the money in her bank account and then sent the
person cash from her account. The money orders were fraudulent and her bank
charged the amount against her account (Tr. 58). She attempted to get her money back
from the friend but it was not paid. The amount was sent to collection and is now a
garnishment since July 2008 (Tr. 64). She is paying $112 weekly. The balance is
approximately $3,574 (Tr. 65; AE B).
3
SOR ¶ 1.b is a collection account (cable) in the amount of $309. Applicant is
paying $50 a month (AE C).
SOR ¶ 1.c is a medical account for $27. Applicant’s insurance company did not
pay for this amount. She has not paid the account.
SOR ¶ 1.d is for a medical account in the amount of $15. Applicant has not paid
the amount.
SOR ¶ 1.e is for a medical account in the amount of $12. Applicant has not paid
this account.
SOR ¶ 1.f is for a medical account in the amount of $13. Applicant has not paid
this account.
SOR ¶ 1.g is for a medical account in the amount of $12. Applicant has not paid
the co-payment because she is waiting for an insurance settlement.
SOR ¶ 1.h. is another medical account in the amount of $14. Applicant has not
paid this account.
SOR ¶ 1.i is a collection account for medical in the amount of $318. Applicant
has not paid this account.
SOR ¶1.j is a charged off medical account in the amount of $102. Applicant is
paying on this debt since June 2008. She pays $50 a month (AE C).
SOR 1.k is a medical debt of $270. This account is for a bill that Applicant
believed had already been paid. She is not trying to work out a payment plan at this
point in time (Tr. 73).
SOR 1.l is for a collection account for a mortgage in the amount of $31,481.
Applicant explained that she and her ex-husband purchased a home. She left the home
when they separated. He continued to live in the home. She believed he was paying the
mortgage. In 2002, she learned that she was also responsible for the mortgage (Tr. 76).
The house was auctioned and she owed $17,000. She contacted the mortgage
company but does not have the money to pay at this point in time (Tr. 40). After
speaking to the lawyer for the mortgage company, Applicant has decided that she would
file bankruptcy in the future (Tr. 40).
SOR 1.m is for a medical account $672. This account is the same account as
mentioned in the above SOR 1.j. Applicant is paying on this account.
SOR 1.n is a charged off account in the amount of $848 which Applicant denies.
She explained that she has no idea what the account is for because she never had an
4
account with that company. She wrote to the company recently to dispute it and
provided documentation to support this. 
SOR 1.o is a charged off account in the amount of $575 which Applicant denies.
She disputes the credit card account because she has not had a credit card with the
company since 1999 (Tr. 42). Applicant also noted she believes there is another person
with her name who sometimes appears on her credit report. She has no documentation
for this proposition (Tr. 84).
SOR 1.p is a phone account charged off in the amount of $170. Applicant
explained that the cell phone was one that her ex-husband used. She received a bill in
2000 but did not pay it. She wanted her husband to pay the account. She has not paid it
(Tr. 46).
SOR 1.q is another charged off account for a phone in the amount of $706.
Applicant believes this is a duplicate of the phone bill referenced in the above allegation.
She thinks it is a combination of the disconnection fee and the actual bill. She called
and was told it was written off and no longer on record.
SOR 1.r is a charged off account in the amount of $66 which Applicant denies
because she believes she has paid it. She did not have any documentation to support
this (Tr. 47).
SOR 1.s is for a collection account in the amount of $695 which Applicant denies
because it is a duplicate of the account alleged in 1.o. in the SOR.
Applicant’s current monthly net income is $1,280, decreased from $1,613 on her
personal financial statement. This is due to less overtime work. After monthly expenses
and payment on some debt, she has a negative cash flow (Tr. 121). She is current with
her car payment. She has no bank savings.
Applicant remarried in 2008. She and her husband do not pool their money. He
does pay for certain household expenses. He has his school loans to pay and some
credit card debt that he owns (Tr. 96).
Applicant has not received financial counseling other than speaking to the
attorney for the mortgage company who told her she needed to pay the amount left on
the home or file bankruptcy. She has no repayment plan in place for many of her debts.
She stated at the hearing that she may file for bankruptcy at some point. She has not
paid the remaining medical debts because she is waiting for a settlement from the
insurance company. She did not provide any documentation for this proposition.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
5
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
6
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant has numerous delinquent debts and could not meet her
financial obligations from 2000 until the present. The evidence is sufficient to raise these
potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying
conditions may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@
Applicant=s financial worries are partially the result of an automobile accident and a
divorce. However her delinquent debts have various sources and have been ongoing.
This potentially mitigating condition does not apply. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, her
financial problems may have increased with her divorce and later accident in 2007, but
Applicant did not act responsibly in identifying and resolving her debts which preceded
those events. She did not take an active stance when she learned about many of them.
Applicant has worked steadily for many years with a few periods of unemployment, I
find this potentially mitigating condition does not apply.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). This does not apply. Applicant has no budget
and has had no financial counseling. She is paying one debt through a recent
garnishment. She does not have a handle on her financial affairs. 
AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant waited
many years before attempting to resolve her financial issues. She is paying on some of
7
her debts and one debt has been resolved through a recent garnishment. I conclude
this potentially mitigating condition does not apply.
AG ¶ 20(e) applies where the evidence shows “the individual has a reasonable
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past due debt which is the cause of the problem
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” In this case, Applicant stated that the alleged
debts were unknown to her. She has not provided sufficient documentation. I conclude
this potentially mitigating condition does not apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case and conclude that under the whole
person, there is not sufficient mitigation to overcome the government’s case.
Applicant has worked for number of years. She did have an automobile accident
that was not her fault. She is waiting for an insurance settlement to pay the medical
bills. However, there were a number of small co-payments that could have been paid.
Applicant also separated and divorced her husband. That exacerbated her difficulties.
The largest debt is the result of the marital home mortgage. Applicant has not
addressed this until this year. She is contemplating filing bankruptcy. This is a legal
means of resolving debt. However, she has not initiated any proceedings. Also, her poor
judgment in sending money to someone she met through the internet and then not
paying until a lawsuit resulted in garnishment this year does not provide for mitigation in
this case. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under financial
considerations. 
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.s: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
