                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18831 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on November 15, 2005.  On May 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for 
Applicant under Guideline B, Foreign Influence.  The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on MAY 23, 2008. He answered the 
SOR in writing on May 27, 2008, admitting all factual allegations in the SOR with a 
detailed explanation.  He requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
Department counsel was prepared to proceed on September 2, 2008, and I was 
assigned the case on September 4, 2008.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
September 15, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 9, 2008.  
The government offered two exhibits, marked Gov. Ex. 1-2, which were received without 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
objection.  Applicant submitted nine exhibits, marked App. Ex. A-I, which were received 
without objection.  Applicant testified on his behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on October 17, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted requests for administrative notice of certain facts 
relating to both Iraq and United Arab Emirates (UAE). (Tr. 14-15)  The requests and the 
supporting documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record 
as Hearing Exhibits I and 2.  Applicant had no objection to the requests for 
administrative notice and the attached documents.  The facts administratively noticed 
are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact.  Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the 
SOR with explanation.   
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old interpreter/translator who has worked for a defense 
contractor at a sensitive location performing sensitive translations.  He worked at that 
location for about a year until the SOR was issued.  He held an interim security 
clearance during that time.  He is highly regarded and valued by the United States 
military for his work as an interpreter (Tr. 30-31, 43-44; App. Ex. A, Letter of 
Recommendation, dated December 22, 2006; App. Ex. B, Letter, dated December 22, 
2006; App. Ex. C, Service certificate, undated; App. Ex. D, Performance Certificate, 
dated December 19, 2006; App. Ex. E, Performance Certificate, dated February 2006).  
He is now working for another defense contractor as an interpreter/translator on non-
classified material.  He will resume working for the defense contractor as an 
interpreter/translator when cleared for access to classified information.  He is also 
employed as a furniture salesman when he is not working as a translator/interpreter.  
He is married with four children.  His wife and children were all born in United States 
and are United States citizens (Tr. 27-31, 41-43; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated November 
15, 2005)   
 
Applicant was born in Iraq in 1967.  His father worked in the United Arab 
Emirates (UAE) while the family stayed in Iraq.  The situation for the family because of 
religious, ethnic, and political issues and their father's absence became intolerable, so 
in 1974 the family moved to the UAE to be with their father.  Applicant was seven years 
old at the time.  Neither Applicant nor his family members have been to Iraq since they 
left in 1974.   
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant lived in the UAE from 1974 until 1993.  He completed his schooling, 
through high school, in the UAE.  He tried to become a UAE citizen in 1983 when he 
completed high school, and again in 1989.  He did not qualify for UAE citizenship.  He 
also tried to join the UAE Air Force in 1983 after graduating from high school.  The only 
way to become a UAE citizen is to marry a UAE citizen.  A person can also be 
sponsored for UAE citizenship by a member of the royal family.  Since Applicant did not 
marry a UAE citizen and did not have royal family connections, he was arbitrarily denied 
UAE citizenship (Tr. 29-35, 80-81; Gov. Ex. 2, Interrogatories, dated April 14, 2008). 
 
Applicant and his sister came to the United States on November 15, 1993, for a 
visit, and he remained He has been in the United States for the last 15 years.  He 
received his permanent resident card in 1995 shortly before his original visa for the 
United States expired.  He married his wife in November 1994, and became a United 
States citizen as soon as he could in July 2000 (Tr. 35-37).  He has never been to Iraq 
since he left in 1974.  He returned to the UAE to see his family twice since coming to 
the United States.  He returned in February 2005 when his mother was sick, and 
October 2007 to visit for the religious holidays.  He stays with his relatives when he 
visits.  He also has visited two nephews in Canada who he visited a number of times.  
The last time was a few weeks before the hearing to celebrate the end of a religious 
period (Tr. 25-26, 59-61, 78-81). 
 
Applicant and his wife own the house in which they reside.  They also own a 
former residence now a rental house in another state.  Both houses have a mortgage.  
He also has a checking and savings account in a bank in the United States.  Applicant's 
wife is a customer service representative for a retail chain.  Neither Applicant nor his 
wife own any foreign property or have any foreign assets.  He does not belong to any 
professional or cultural organizations and he has no business or professional contacts 
outside the United States (Tr. 36-43).  
 
Applicant had an Iraqi passport when he came to the United States in 1993.  The 
passport expired in 1995.  He returned the expired passport to the Iraqi Embassy on 
January 11, 2007.  He also informed the Embassy that he renounced his Iraqi 
citizenship (Tr. 28, App. Ex. G, Postal Receipt, dated January 11, 2007).  Applicant 
believed he was not considered an Iraqi citizen when he received his United States 
permanent residence status and his Iraqi passport had expired. (Tr. 48-50).  Applicant 
was issued a United States passport on February 26, 2001, shortly after becoming a 
United States citizen (See Gov. Ex. 2, Interrogatories, dated April 14, 2008 at exhibit B). 
 
Applicant admits his mother, four brothers, and two sisters are citizens of Iraq but 
residents of the UAE.  He admits that two sisters and their husbands are citizens and 
resides of the UAE.  He admits he has a childhood friend who is a citizen and resident 
of the UAE, and a member of the UAE Air Force.  He also admits to traveling to the 
UAE in 2005 and 2007 (See Response to SOR, dated May 27, 2008). 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant's mother was born in Iraq in 1941 and lived there until she emigrated to 
the UAE with her children in 1974.  The family moved because they were living in a 
Baghdad neighborhood where she was home alone with four daughters and no 
husband residing in the home.  Their family was not of the same religion of the 
neighbors.  She also wanted to reunite and live with her husband and the children's 
father.  Applicant's mother is not employed outside the home, and is supported by 
Applicant's brother and sisters with whom she lives.  Applicant will occasionally send 
her money, usually during religious holidays.  However, she does not talk to him 
because she is upset with him for unknown reasons.  When they did talk, they 
discussed her health and his sibling.  His mother came to the United States to visit him 
in 2003 or 2004 and stayed for a month.  She receives her health care through the UAE 
health clinics.  Applicant believes his mother visited Iraq a few times after she left there 
until the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.  She has not visited Iraq since then.  It is not 
considered safe for his family to go to Iraq because of terrorism and the constant 
fighting between the Sunni and Shi'ite religious groups.  His mother cannot become a 
UAE citizen because UAE citizenship can be obtained only if the person marries a UAE 
citizen or is sponsored by the royal family (Tr. 43-48).  Applicant has distant relatives in 
Iraq but has no contact with them.  His mother has contact with them about once a year.  
She has sent them some money to assist them, usually during the religious holidays (Tr. 
48-56, 58-59). 
 
Applicant has four brothers and four sisters, all residents of UAE.  All except two 
sisters, who are married to UAE citizens, may be citizens of Iraq.  When the family left 
Iraq in 1974, they carried the "S" series Iraqi passport.  Iraqi citizens with this passport 
are considered to have the "Ottoman" citizenship which is no longer recognized by the 
new Iraqi government.  The family members, to include his mother, brothers, and non-
UAE citizen sisters, tried to get new updated passports but their requests were denied.  
In effect, Applicant's family members in UAE, except for the two married sisters, are not 
citizens of any country (Tr. 48-54; App. Ex. F, U.S. State Department notice on "S" type 
Iraqi passports, dated October 8, 2008).  
 
Applicant's oldest brother is a real estate agent in UAE.  He is married with four 
children, two of which live in Canada.  Applicant talks to his brother monthly during calls 
initiated by either of them.  Applicant has sent him funds when he needs it for 
prescription drugs and food.  Another brother is a maintenance inspector for a 
government agency, has three children, and lives in the same house with his mother.  
Applicant last talked to this brother in October 2007 during his visit to UAE.  Another 
brother is an actor in commercials.  He also has three children and lives in the same 
house with his mother.  He talks to this brother about once every other month.  His 
fourth brother works in advertising, has two sons, and also lives in the same house with 
their mother.  Applicant usually communicates with him over the internet on a monthly 
basis (Tr. 61-66). 
 
One of Applicant's sisters is a homemaker and married to a UAE citizen who is a 
petroleum engineer working for a UAE government agency.  He talks to her about once 
every few months.  They last talked before the latest religious holiday.  Another sister is 
 
5 
 
 
also a homemaker and married to a UAE citizen who works as a communications 
engineer for a government agency.  This sister and her husband were educated in the 
United States.  His two brothers-in-law are not fully supportive of United States foreign 
policy.  These two sisters are citizens of the UAE since they married UAE citizens (Tr. 
66-73).  He has two other sisters, one is married and a housewife, the other is not 
married and a doctor.  They are not citizens of the UAE even though the housewife is 
married to a UAE citizen and eligible for UAE citizenship.  Applicant has borrowed 
money from his sisters when he needed it and also sent them money when they needed 
it.  He does not talk to his mother, siblings, or in-laws about his work.  None of his 
brothers or brothers-in-law served in the UAE military (Tr. 73-77, 81-83).   
 
Applicant's boyhood friend is a pilot and officer in the UAE Air Force.  His friend 
visited him in the United States twice when the friend was sent to the United States for 
additional training.  He also talks to him about once or twice a year by telephone (Tr. 83-
87). 
 
 A United States led coalition in 2003 removed the Ba’ath regime from power in 
Iraq after more than 30 years of rule.  A new democratic government is being formed 
with citizens participating in democratic elections.  However, remnants of the former 
regime, transnational terrorists, and criminal elements remain very active in the country.  
There are continuous attacks against military and civilian targets.  There are planned 
and random killings, extortions, and kidnappings.  There were reports of arbitrary 
deprivation of life, torture, impunity, and poor prison conditions.  Civic life and the social 
fabric remained under intense strain from the active insurgency, as well as from a 
continuing shortage of basic services and staples.  However, the new government’s 
success in building an accommodating structure for the exercise of civil liberties, 
although burdened by the heritage of dictatorship and disregard for law, was clearly 
shown in the citizens’ embrace of freedoms of speech and press, peaceful assembly, 
association, and religion.  While major problems still remain, they are of a far less 
magnitude and nature than previously (See Hearing Exhibit 1). 
 
 The UAE is a federation of individual ruled emirates.  The government is a 
federal republic with a president and council of ministers.  Its laws and practices come 
from Islamic ideals and beliefs.  Only 15% to 20% of the people living in the UAE are 
considered citizens.  Educational standards are high and continue to improve.   
 
 The UAE has significant gas and oil reserves which are expected to last into the 
next century.  This gives the UAE significant resources to invest around the world.  The 
UAE is a member of the United Nations, the Arab League, and the Gulf Cooperation 
Counsel.  It has diplomatic relations with more than 60 countries including the United 
States and the other major industrial nations.  UAE is also active in the Organization of 
Petroleum Exporting Countries and the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting 
Counties.   
 
The United States and UAE have had friendly relations since 1971.  Friendly 
petroleum commercial relations developed into friendly government-to-government ties 
 
6 
 
 
including security assistance.  The relationship increased dramatically as a result of the 
United States led coalition campaign to end the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait in 1991.  In 
2002, the United States and the UAE launched a strategic partnership dialogue 
covering virtually every aspect of the relationship.  The UAE has been a key partner in 
the War on Terror, and UAE ports host more U.S. Navy ships than any other port 
outside the U.S.  While the UAE has cooperated with the United States on terrorism, the 
UAE was one of three countries to recognize the Taliban rule in Afghanistan. 
 
 The country is one of the leading United States and coalition partners in the 
region against terrorism, providing military, diplomatic and financial assistance.  In 
general, United States intelligence agencies report that terrorists have targeted United 
States personnel and interests to collect intelligence through human espionage and by 
other means.  Travelers are advised by the State Department to be cautious of their 
surroundings and to maintain a high level of vigilance.   
 
 There are limited human rights problems due to lack of elections, a questionably 
independent judiciary, and restrictions on civil liberties in the UAE.  There are no reports 
of arbitrary or unlawful deprivation of life and no politically motivated disappearances.  
There are no reports of torture which is prohibited by the constitution.  However, 
flogging is a recognized punishment.  Prison conditions vary throughout the country with 
women receiving better treatment than men.  Arbitrary arrests and detention are 
prohibited but there are reports of the government holding people without charges.  
While the law prohibits arrests and searches without probable cause, incidents do take 
place in practice.  Fair and public but not timely trials are provided.  United States' 
companies have been convicted of violating export control laws for their trading with 
UAE companies (Hearing Exhibit 2).   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
 
7 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in the United 
States interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interests.  
Adjudication under this guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including but not 
limited to, such consideration as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of 
terrorism (AG ¶ 6). 
 
 Applicant has foreign contacts through his mother, four brothers, and two sisters 
who are considered for security clearance purposes citizens of Iraq but residents of the 
UAE.  He also has foreign contacts with two sisters and their husbands who are citizens 
and residents of the UAE.  He also has foreign contact with a boyhood friend who is a 
citizen and resident of the UAE and an officer in the UAE Air Force.  The government 
 
8 
 
 
has established that these contacts raise security concerns under Foreign Influence 
Disqualifying Conditions (FI DC) AG ¶ 7(a) "Contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion"; and FI DC AG ¶ 7(b) "Connections to 
a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of 
interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information".  Each individual contact by itself may not create a risk of foreign influence, 
but the totality of the contacts may indicate a risk of foreign influence.   
 
 The government has alleged in the SOR a security concern because Applicant's 
family members are citizens of Iraq.  The government established the allegation of Iraqi 
citizenship based solely on the admission of Applicant in his response to the SOR that 
his family members are citizens of Iraqi.  However, Applicant credibly testified that he 
and his mother and siblings left Iraqi in 1974 for the UAE because of political and social 
pressures in Iraq and to join their father who was working in the UAE.  The family has 
not been back to Iraq in 34 years.  Applicant has not been to Iraq since he left at age 
seven.  The present Iraqi government does not consider the family members Iraqi 
citizens since they did not vote in the latest elections held by the new government.  The 
family members hold only the "S" series Iraqi passport which is no longer recognized as 
valid by the Iraqi government.  Iraq will not issue them a new passport because they are 
not considered Iraqi citizens.  In addition, the family members not married to UAE 
citizens cannot become citizens of the UAE under the UAE criteria for citizenship.  They 
are in fact stateless people.  They have no country in which they can call themselves 
citizens.  Applicant has no contact or connection to any persons now in Iraq.  His 
mother occasionally talks to distant relatives still residing in Iraq.  While the country of 
Iraq presents security clearance issues, I find under the circumstances that Applicant 
and his family have such minimal contacts with Iraq that there is no security concern 
based on Iraqi citizenship of the family.  There still remains a security concern for the 
contacts Applicant has with his family members residing in the UAE. 
 
 Under the old adjudicative guidelines, a disqualifying condition based on foreign 
family members could not be mitigated unless an applicant could establish that the 
family members were not “in a position to be exploited.”  The Appeal Board consistently 
applied this mitigating condition narrowly, holding that its underlying premise was that 
an applicant should not be placed in a position where he is forced to make a choice 
between the interest of the family member and the interest of the United States.  (See, 
ISCR Case No. 03-17620, (App. Bd, Apr. 17, 2006); ISCR Case No. 03-24933, (App. 
Bd. Jul. 28, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-02382, (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2005); and ISCR Case 
No. 03-15205, (App. Bd. Jan. 21. 2005)).  Thus, an administrative judge was not 
permitted to apply a balancing test to assess the extent of the security risk.  Under the 
new guidelines, however, the potentially conflicting loyalties may be weighed to 
determine if an applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. 
interest. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Since Applicant admitted the SOR allegations and the government produced 
substantial evidence by way of exhibits to raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 7(a), 
and (b), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns (Directive ¶E3.1.15).  An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government (See, ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 In determining if Applicant’s contacts with his family members and friend in UAE 
cause security concerns, I considered that UAE is an ally of the United States, has a 
defense agreement with the United States, and is one of the United States’ trading 
partners.  I considered that UAE is a member of the United Nations, the Arab League, 
the Gulf Cooperating Counsel, and other international organizations.  I also considered 
the United States relationship with the UAE.  More United States Navy ships make port 
visits to the UAE than any port outside the United States.  The UAE partners with the 
United States and other countries in the fight against global terrorism.  There are no 
indications that the UAE targets United States citizens to provide economic or other 
sensitive information.  There are issues of terrorist activities in the UAE but not any 
more that in any other country. 
 
 While the UAE is a country that is friendly to the United Stares, it could engage in 
espionage against United States interests.  Friendly countries may have profound 
disagreements with the United States and some have engaged in espionage against 
United States economic, scientific, or technical interests.  A friendly relationship is not 
determinative, but it makes it less likely that a foreign government would attempt to 
exploit a United States citizen through relatives or associates in that country.  The UAE 
is not a hostile country, nor is its interests inimical to the United States.  The United 
States and UAE are democracies, enjoy good relations, and are trading partners.  It 
would be considered an act unfriendly to the interest of the United States for the UAE to 
coerce its residents to pressure their United States relatives to provide economic or 
other espionage information against the interest of the United States.  It is reasonable to 
consider that UAE would not take any action to jeopardize their friendly position with the 
United States because of their need for trade and defense assistance from the United 
States.  There is terrorism in the UAE but it is no more prevalent than in any other 
country.  UAE does take steps to limit terrorist activities.  The threat of terrorist action 
against residents of the UAE to coerce United States citizens is no greater than most 
other countries in the region.  While none of the considerations by themselves dispose 
of the issue, they are all factors to be considered in determining Applicant’s vulnerability 
to pressure or coercion from his family members in UAE. 
 
 Applicant has raised Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions (FI MC) ¶ 8(a) "the 
nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interest of 
the United States".  Applicant’s mother is a housewife who lives with some of her 
children and their families.  Applicant’s siblings and their spouses are professionals who 
 
10 
 
 
worked for both private businesses and the UAE government.  Applicant talked to his 
mother frequently in the past even though now they do not talk as much.  He talks to his 
various siblings more often.  Applicant made two trips to UAE since he left there in 1993 
to come to the United States.  His mother has visited him and his family in the United 
States.  Some of his siblings and their spouses have been educated in the United 
States.   
 
 It is clear that there is a close family relationship.  His contacts with his 
immediate family are frequent and not casual.  The information Applicant presented 
concerning his family members’ living conditions, life style, and professions show it is 
unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position to choose between the interests of his 
family in the UAE and the interests of the United States.  Applicant established his 
family members in UAE are ordinary citizens leading normal lives, and that they do not 
present a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.  The positions and activities of his family and the nature of the UAE 
government and terrorist activities show that it is unlikely that Applicant will be placed in 
a position of being coerced or pressured to choose between these people and his 
interests in protecting the national security of the United States.  FI MC ¶ 8(a) applies. 
 
 Applicant also raised FI MC ¶ 8(b) "there is no conflict of interest either because 
the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, 
or country is minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest".  Applicant’s vulnerability to duress is also 
important.  Applicant has been in the United States for over 15 years, and a United 
States citizen for over eight years.  His wife is a native born citizen and resident of the 
United States.  His four children were born in the United States and reside in the United 
States with their parents.  Applicant's assets are in the United States.  Applicant’s two 
trips to UAE were to visit family.  He visited his sick mother and for a religious holiday.  
He traveled on his United States passport.  I also considered that Applicant performed 
very well for the United States in a sensitive and important task in defense of the United 
States (See ISCR Case No. 07-000343 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008), ("an applicant's 
proven record of action on defense of the U.S. is very important and can lead to a 
favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B case").  Applicant has a normal sense 
of loyalty or obligation to his family in UAE.  But he also has long standing relationship 
and connections in the United States.  He has demonstrated that these relationships will 
lead him to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States.  Applicant has 
demonstrated that he is not unusually vulnerable to duress.  FI MC ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant raised in regard to his boyhood friend FI MC ¶ 8(c) "contact or 
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation".  Applicant has 
the burden of presenting information to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security 
concerns raised by the government.  Applicant's contacts with his boyhood friend who is 
a member of the UAE Air Force are casual and infrequent.  He has seen the friend 
when the friend came to the United States for training with the United States Air Force.  
 
11 
 
 
He saw him on his visits to the UAE.  Their telephone or e-mail contacts are minimal, 
usually to exchange greetings during religious holidays.  There is little likelihood that the 
contacts with his friend could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.  
Accordingly, FI MC 8(c) applies to his friend in UAE.   
 
 In sum, Applicant has met his heavy burden to show that the contacts with his 
family and friend in the UAE do not cause a security concern.  I conclude the Foreign 
Influence Mitigating Conditions, at AGs ¶¶ 8(a), (b), and (c), are established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances in this case.  The “whole person” concept requires 
consideration of all available information about Applicant, not a single item in isolation, 
to reach a common sense determination concerning Applicant’s security worthiness.  
Applicant’s family in UAE both individually and collectively are not in positions and 
circumstances that make it likely Applicant will be placed in a position to choose 
between the interests of his family and the interest of the United States, or that he can 
be exploited, pressured, or coerced because of them.  His contacts with his family in 
UAE are strong but they do not create a conflict of interest between the family members 
and his loyalty to the United States.  Applicant has been in the United States for over 15 
years and a citizen of the United States for over eight years.  His wife and children were 
born here and are United States citizens.  He performed well and successfully in 
defense of the United States in a sensitive position.  His travels to UAE were for 
pleasure to visit family members and not connected to the UAE government.  He 
established that his contacts with his family and friend in UAE do not indicate a security 
risk.  
 
 
12 
 
 
Applicant’s life story is an example of the success of many immigrants to the 
United States.  He came to the United States to better himself through education.  He 
remained here, became a United States citizen, established himself in his community, 
and worked to obtain a better life in the United States.  He performed well in a sensitive 
position in defense of the United States.  His family enjoys a typical United States life 
style and he successfully contributed to the United States.  Overall, on balance the 
record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising from foreign influence.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
