                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-16873 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Le'i, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used illegal drugs from 1997 to October 2007. Applicant has not 
rebutted or mitigated the government’s security concerns under drug involvement. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 12, 2008, detailing security concerns under drug 
involvement. 
  
 On June 30, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated August 19, 2008. The FORM contained eight 
attachments (Item). On August 21, 2008, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along 
with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Applicant's response to the FORM was due 30 days after receipt of a copy of the 
FORM. Applicant’s response was due on September 24, 2008. As of October 23, 2008, 
no response had been received. On October 23, 2008, I was assigned the case. On 
October 29, 2008, I received an undated response to the FORM. Government counsel 
having no objection to the material, it was admitted as exhibit (Ex.) A. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations of the SOR.  
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old system analyst who has worked for a defense 
contractor since June 2006, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
 In 1997, Applicant—then age 17—used crack cocaine. He has never again 
smoked crack cocaine and does not associate with the people present when he used it. 
From February 2000 to July 2004, Applicant used cocaine 15 times. This use occurred 
primarily with one person who has since moved from the area. In October 2007, 
Applicant used cocaine with a friend. Applicant regrets using cocaine on this occasion 
and no longer associates with this person.  
 
From May 1996 to February 2005, Applicant used marijuana. (Item 4) In May 
2001, he was charged with possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia. The 
charges were dismissed. During the summer of 2004, Applicant began to re-evaluate 
his drug usage. In August 2004, Applicant married. He continued to occasionally use 
marijuana until February 2005. During this period, there were times when Applicant 
would abstain from using marijuana for extended periods of time. Some friends still use 
marijuana, but Applicant has made it clear he no longer uses marijuana and informed 
his friends not to bring marijuana around him.  
 
From February 2000 to March 2002, Applicant—aged 20 to 22—used LSD six 
times. (Item 6) Applicant has not associated with the people he used LSD with and has 
abstained from further use of LSD.  
 
In September 2008, Applicant and his wife celebrated one year in their home. In 
January 2008, their son was born. Applicant asserts he is drug free and intends to 
remain so. He also asserts the factors leading to his drug usage are no longer in his life. 
 
 
 
3
The people with whom he now associates share his same goals and aspirations for 
raising families.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
 
 
4
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement in that 
the use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical 
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical social 
worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment program; 
 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by a duly 
qualified medical professional; 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and, 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
Between 1997 and October 2007, Applicant purchased and or used cocaine, 
LSD, and marijuana. In 2001, he was arrested for marijuana possession and drug 
paraphernalia possession. AG ¶ 25(a) drug abuse and AG ¶ 25(c) purchasing illegal 
drugs, apply.  
 
AG ¶ 26 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
5
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness during 
which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; and, 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including but 
not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, 
and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional. 
 
Applicant asserts he no longer associates with those individuals with whom he 
used illegal drugs and will no longer use illegal drugs. Because Applicant chose to have 
this matter handled administratively, I am unable to test the veracity of his assertions. I 
am unable to evaluate his demeanor, appearance, or to form a positive determination 
as to his truthfulness. From the record, I am unable to find Applicant was sincere, open, 
and honest. 
 
None of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns apply. AG ¶ 26(a) 
only partially applies because his illegal drug use appears to be infrequent. His use did 
not occur under unusual circumstances and his use does cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Additionally, illegal drugs were used over a period 
of ten years. 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. His assertion he no longer associates with drug-using 
friends does not apply. Applicant acknowledges some of his friends still smoke 
marijuana, but he has made it clear to them not to bring marijuana around him. He still 
sees these individuals. Additionally, I am unable to test the veracity of his statement he 
no longer associates with those individuals with whom he previously used illegal drugs. 
There is no showing he has executed a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. It has been one year since his last use of 
cocaine. Considering the ten year history of his use this period of abstinence is 
insufficient. 
 
 
 
 
6
AG ¶ 26(c) does not apply because prescription drugs were not abused. AG ¶ 
26(d) does not apply because Applicant was never in aftercare.  
 
In May 2001, Applicant was charged with possession of marijuana and 
possession of drug paraphernalia. The charges were dismissed. Without more, the only 
inference to be drawn from these dismissed charges that was that Applicant was on 
notice as to the seriousness of marijuana possession. I find for Applicant as to SOR ¶ 
1.f. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In August 2004, Applicant married. 
However, he continued to use marijuana and cocaine after his marriage. In January 
2008, his son was born, which often has a maturing effect on an individual. Applicant 
asserts he is drug free, intends to remain drug free, and the factors leading to his drug 
usage are no longer in his life. However, I have no way of ascertaining the veracity of 
these assertions 
 
His last cocaine use occurred one year ago. I am unable to make a finding that 
illegal drugs are no longer a part of his life. The awarding of a security clearance is not a 
once in a life time occurrence, but is based on current disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. Although the Applicant=s evidence of rehabilitation is insufficient at this time, 
should he in the future be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security clearance, 
with the passage of sufficient additional time, continued rehabilitation, and no future 
incidents of illegal drug usage or misconduct, he may well demonstrate persuasive 
evidence of his security worthiness. But that time has not yet arrived.  
 
 
 
 
7
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the drug involvement security concerns. 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, drug involvement: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-e: Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
