 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
1
as amended and modified (Directive), and revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-18823
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant mitigated the security concern caused by his misuse of controlled
substances while possessing a security clearance. 
On July 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline H (drug involvement). Applicant
submitted a response to the SOR, dated July 26, 2008, admitted both SOR allegations and
requested a decision based on the written record without a hearing. 
  
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on August 20,
2008, that was received by Applicant on August 28, 2008. Applicant submitted a response
to the FORM, dated September 17, consisting of a cover letter with five attachments.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
Those documents were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1-6, and made part of the
record without objection.  The case was assigned to me on September 24, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings
of fact:
Applicant is a 44-year-old man who has been employed as an electrical engineer
by a defense contractor since July 1991. He has held a security clearance since about
February 1996. He attended graduate school from January 1999 to December 2001, but
did not complete the course work for award of the masters degree in English he had been
pursuing. He submitted letters of recommendation from a co-worker, a friend and a
minister attesting to his reputation as a patriotic, dependable, honest and trustworthy
individual.
Applicant was married in June 1990. That marriage ended in divorce in October
1993. He has been remarried since October 2005. He has one child who was born in
October 2007.
Applicant used marijuana on approximately four occasions between March and July
2006. Each use occurred while he was attending social functions at the homes of his wife’s
friends and consisted of his taking a couple of “hits” from a cigarette or pipe that was being
passed around. He stopped using marijuana in July 2006 because he did not like it and it
had little to no effect on him. Applicant’s wife used marijuana on a fairly regular basis at the
time, but  she stopped using marijuana sometime between July and September 2006
because they wanted to start a family. 
Applicant and his wife have changed residences since they last used marijuana and
no longer remain in close contact with the persons with whom they previously shared
marijuana. They have determined their household will remain drug free and they are
determined to set a good example for their child. Applicant executed an affidavit entitled:
Statement of Intent with Automatic Revocation of Clearance for any Violation on
September 17, 2008. (AE 1) In it, he has agreed to submit to random drug testing and to
an automatic revocation of his clearance for any violation of any policy contained in the
Directive. 
Applicant also used a prescription drug that had not been prescribed for him on at
least six occasions between June 2005 and April 2006. In 2005, Applicant told his wife’s
sister-in-law that he had been experiencing chest pains as a result of stress at work and
planning for his upcoming marriage. The sister-in-law provided him the unused tablets of
a prescription medicine that had been prescribed for her for similar symptoms. He used the
last of those pills in April 2006, and then saw his own physician who prescribed a different
anti-stress medication for him. He took the medication that was prescribed for him for
about a month but has been undergoing chiropractic therapy since. He asserts his change
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
4
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.6
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
3
of attitude, coupled with his willingness to seek continued medical assistance, has had a
positive permanent affect on his physical and mental health. 
    
Applicant disclosed his illegal use of both controlled substances in an Electronic
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) he submitted in or about August 2006.
He also candidly discussed his use of the drugs when he was interviewed about them in
January 2007, and in his responses to the SOR and the FORM. 
POLICIES
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Additionally, each
clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon the
relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors
listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a
particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline H (drug involvement),
with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of2 3
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the5
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to6
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable7
clearance decision.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 Id at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
4
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard9
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access10
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      11
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations.
Applicant used marijuana approximately four times and a prescription drug that had
not been prescribed for him about six times in 2005-06. He possessed a security clearance
at all times while abusing these drugs. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 25(a): any drug
abuse; and DC 25(g): any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance apply.
The last time Applicant misused either drug was July 2006. There is nothing in the
record to suggest he ever misused a controlled substance before or after the relatively brief
period between June 2005 and July 2006. His use of marijuana was situational in that it
occurred at social events he attended with his then new wife. It ended after a few
experiments with the drug that he found he disliked and which had little to no effect on him.
Applicant’s misuse of the prescription drug was likewise situational. The misused drug was
replaced by properly prescribed medication and all pain/stress medication used by
Applicant has now been replaced by chiropractic care.
Since Applicant misused the two controlled substances, he has become a father,
he has averred his household will be drug free, he and his wife have determined they will
not misuse controlled substances in the future, and he and his wife have minimal contact
with the persons with whom they shared drugs in the past. It is extremely troubling that
Applicant misused controlled substances while in possession of a security clearance.
However, and to his credit, he freely disclosed the abuse in the e-QIP he submitted and
during his follow-up interview and in his responses to the SOR and the FORM. 
Considering the situational circumstances when and under which Applicant used
marijuana and the prescription drug, the relatively short  time period during which he used
both drugs, the changes in his life since his last misuse of a controlled substance, including
fatherhood, his minimal continuing contacts with the persons with whom he and his wife
shared marijuana, and his commitment to and apparent relief from chiropractic care as a
5
substitute for any medication, his and his wife’s unequivocal assertion to remain drug free
in the future, and his execution of the document entitled: Statement of Intent with
Automatic Revocation of Clearance for any Violation, I find Mitigating Conditions (MC)
26(a): the behavior happened so long ago . . . or happened under such circumstances that
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and MC 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any
drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence;(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance
for any violation apply.  
The objective of the security-clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, to include Applicant’s letters of recommendation, his lengthy
employment with a defense contractor, the number of years he has held a security
clearance without any other reported violations, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6
of the Directive, and the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, Applicant has
mitigated the security concern caused by his drug involvement. He has overcome the case
against him and satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. Guideline H is decided for
Applicant. It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security
clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a & b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

