 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18031 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his financial issues 
and drug use while holding a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
On July 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 11, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on September 
18, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 22, 2008. I convened the 
 
2 
 
hearing as scheduled on October 8, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 7, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf 
but did not submit any documentary evidence. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on October 16, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding three allegations 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, as follows: 
 
2.a.  Between 1984 and March 1999, you used marijuana, cocaine, 
hashish, and LSD with varying frequency.  
 
2.b.  Between March 1999 and April 2008, you used marijuana with 
varying frequency.  
 
2.c.    You used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance.  
 
Applicant did not object to the amendment and it was granted. Applicant was 
asked if he desired additional time to address the amendment. He affirmatively waived 
his right to additional time and stated that he wanted the hearing to proceed that day.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has a bachelor 
of science degree in aerospace engineering. Applicant was married from 1995 until his 
divorce in 2005. He has two children, ages 13 and 12. He and his former wife have joint 
custody of the children.1  
 
 Applicant worked as an aerospace engineer for the U.S. military from 1984 to 
2000. He had a security clearance during his entire employment with the military. The 
base where he worked closed in 2000, and his position moved to another state under 
the Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) process. Applicant and his wife decided not 
to move to the other state. He started working with computers several years earlier and 
the internet was increasing in popularity. He also admitted that he had “gotten a little bit 
tired of engineering.” He decided to open his own one-man company developing web 
sites.2   
                                                          
1 Tr. at 34; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 25-28, 37; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant tried to make the company work, but it did not have enough business 
and he started running low on money. He worked as a programmer for a company for 
about three months in 2002, while attempting to maintain the business. By 2003, the 
company was generating almost no money. His wife left him in 2003, which further 
decimated his financial situation. He was left with the children and little income. His 
company had some business in 2004 and early 2005, but not enough to sustain it. He 
finally closed the company in 2005, and moved with the children to the state where his 
family lived. He did not have permission from the court to move his children out of state. 
After two months he was ordered back to the state that he had left. He and the children 
lived in a motel for about three months because he was unable to rent a house or 
apartment. He started working again in 2005, and was able to rent a home. He changed 
jobs several times and had additional unemployment until he started work with his 
current employer in about May 2006.3   
 
 The SOR lists seven debts totaling approximately $19,115. Applicant admitted to 
owing all the debts in the SOR. Applicant has spent the last three years attempting to 
get back on his feet. Because of the traumatic effects of being essentially out of work 
and close to being homeless, he stated that until he has banked six months or so of 
salary to preclude that from happening again, he is “disinclined to pay [his] creditors.” 
He indicated that he has about two months saved, or about $3,500. He has not received 
financial counseling.4 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF 86), certified as 
true on January 10, 2007. Question 24A asked about any illegal drug use during the 
previous seven years. He listed one use of marijuana in February 2004.5 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) for his background investigation on September 20, 2007. The 
interview was summarized in a Report of Investigation (ROI). Applicant’s delinquent 
debts were discussed. There is no indication that his drug use was discussed.6 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), on 
April 3, 2008. Question 24a asked about any illegal drug use during the previous seven 
years. Question 24b asked whether he ever used a controlled substance while holding 
certain positions or while holding a security clearance. He answered “yes” to both 
questions. He wrote that he used marijuana, cocaine, hashish, and LSD many times 
between 1984 and March 1999, and marijuana five to ten times between March 1999 
and April 2008. Applicant testified that he last used any illegal drugs in February 2004, 
when he smoked marijuana. He admitted that he held a security clearance during his 
drug use from 1984 through 2000. He categorized his drug use on the questionnaire 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 28-31, 35-37; GE 1, 2, 4, 5. 
 
4 Tr. at 31, 48-49; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 5. 
 
5 GE 2. 
 
6 GE 5. 
 
 
4 
 
into two periods because March 1999 was when he last used any drug other than 
marijuana. He continued to sporadically use marijuana. He put April 2008, as the end 
date of his marijuana use because that is when he submitted the application. He stated 
he has no intent to use illegal drugs in the future. After considering all the evidence, I 
accept Applicant’s testimony as credible and find that he has not used illegal drugs 
since 2004.7  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
                                                          
7 Tr. at 31, 38-43; GE 1. 
 
 
5 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable to pay his 
obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has not made payments on any of the debts alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 
20(a) is not applicable. He attributed his financial problems to the failure of his business, 
unemployment, under-employment, and his separation and divorce. These are 
conditions that were largely beyond his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also 
requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has been 
working consistently for more than two years and he has not made any effort to pay his 
delinquent debts. His goal to save six months of salary is laudable, but not at the 
expense of his creditors. There is insufficient information for a finding that he has acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. There are not clear indications 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable. He 
has not made a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable.  
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates 
from approved medical direction.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;   
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and  
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a clearance.  
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant’s drug possession8 and use are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c) 
as disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 25(g) is also applicable because he held a security 
clearance for many years while using illegal drugs.  
 
Two Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana, cocaine, hashish, and LSD many times between 1984 
and March 1999, while holding a security clearance. He continued to use marijuana 
sporadically until 2004. He has not used illegal drugs in more than four years and stated 
he does not intend to use any illegal drugs in the future. His abstinence since 2004 has 
demonstrated his intent not to abuse any drugs in the future. AG ¶ 26(b) is applicable. 
He also receives some credit under AG ¶ 26(a). However, his drug use while holding a 
security clearance is particularly indicative of poor judgment and continues to cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
                                                          
8 Drugs must be possessed in order to be used. 
 
 
8 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant attempted to start his own 
company after his long-time government job was lost to BRAC. The company was 
unsuccessful and he had long periods of little to no income. His finances were further 
exacerbated by his separation and divorce. Applicant has been steadily employed for 
more than two years and has made no effort to pay his creditors and will not begin to do 
so until he has saved six months salary. He used marijuana, cocaine, hashish, and LSD 
many times between 1984 and March 1999, and occasionally smoked marijuana until 
2004. His abstinence since 2004, allays many of the security concerns about current 
drug use, but does little to alleviate the serious concerns about his judgment generated 
by his drug use while holding a security clearance. His finances and judgment remain 
as security concerns. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
issues and drug use while holding a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
