                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13844 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 24, 2008, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM) on July 24, 2008. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
on July 28, 2008, and it was received on August 26, 2008. Applicant was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the FORM and did not submit additional material. The case 
was assigned to me on October 24, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old and has worked for his present employer, a federal 
contractor, since July 2006. Prior to then from January 2001 until he began his present 
employment he worked for a different federal contractor. He has held a secret security 
clearance since 2004. He is seeking a Top Secret security clearance. 
 
 Applicant began using marijuana when he was 13 years old and continued using 
it until January 2007. He resumed using it in July 2007 and used it after he completed 
his security clearance questionnaire on October 19, 2006. His use continued up to 
November 20, 2007, a week before he completed interrogatories questioning him about 
his drug use. Applicant was using marijuana while he held a secret security clearance.1  
 
 Applicant admitted he used cocaine beginning when he was about 14 years old. 
He listed the frequency of his use as “2-3 lines” at a time on a “monthly” basis.2 A 
statement attached to his response to interrogatories said: “I probably only used once or 
twice over the first three years, until I started working.” He did not further explain his use 
after he started working, although it appears from his first response that his use 
increased. He stated he stopped using cocaine in November 2005. He used cocaine 
while holding a secret security clearance. 
 
 Applicant also used hallucinogenic drugs to include LSD and mushrooms. He 
estimated he used these substances about 15 times over a four to five year period. He 
stopped using them around his 21st birthday. He stated: “What I originally thought was a 
‘good time’ turned into downright frightening situations, and I did indeed stop using.”3 
 
 Applicant stated he is attempting to get a Top Secret security clearance. He 
believes himself to be a hard worker and is proud to be a part of the community where 
he works and is surrounded by very positive role models that are aware of his past 
experiences with drug use. He vows to stop all marijuana use.4  
1 Item 5. 
 
2 Id. 
 
3 Id. 
 
4 Id. 
 
3 
 
 
 On his security clearance application, Applicant noted in Question 24 that he had 
used marijuana in 1997, during the month of July, on five occasions. He made 
additional comments that said: “after high school graduation, not used since.” These 
statements were not alleged as falsifications and they will not be considered for 
disqualifying purposes, but will be considered when evaluating the “whole person.”  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: “Use of 
an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it 
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 I have considered all of the drug involvement disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 
25 and have especially considered (a) (“any drug abuse”); (c) (“illegal drug possession, 
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution, or 
possession of drug paraphernalia”) and (g) (“any illegal drug use after being granted a 
security clearance”). Applicant admitted all of the drug use allegations and that he used 
illegal drugs while holding a security clearance. To use drugs one must possess them. 
Therefore, I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the drug involvement mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 
and especially considered (a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, 
or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”), and (b) (“a 
demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as (1) disassociation from 
drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where 
drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation”). Applicant stated he 
does not intend to use marijuana in the future. He abstained from using illegal drugs for 
one six-month period in the last 16 years, but then lapsed back into using marijuana. 
His statement that he intended to stop using marijuana was made a week after his last 
use when he was answering questions to interrogatories for his security clearance. 
Applicant has a long history of using various illegal drugs. He is past the age of youthful 
indiscretion. He regularly used marijuana and cocaine while holding a secret security 
clearance, even while his background investigation was on-going. His use was frequent 
and recent. He did not offer sufficient evidence to show he has changed his ways. He 
has not met his burden of mitigating the security concerns raised by his drug use. His 
 
5 
 
 
actions cast serious doubt on his judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. Therefore, I 
find that no mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” 
I have considered the personal conduct security concerns. I find, based on the 
facts, AG ¶ 16 (e) (“personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing, or (2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country or that is legal in that country but illegal in the United States and 
may serve as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group”) applies. Almost every aspect of a person’s life can be evaluated 
generally as a security concern under Personal Conduct. I have considered all of the 
facts in this case from that Personal Conduct perspective. I find Applicant’s conduct 
from a whole person analysis raises questions as to his judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness, which could be exploited. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence 
to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 30 years old and has a 
long history of illegal drug use. After obtaining a secret security clearance he continued 
to use illegal drugs. Although he stated he does not intend to use illegal drugs in the 
future he only recently made a commitment to abstinence. Overall the record evidence 
leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
 
6 
 
 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from drug involvement and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
