                                                              
 
 
1 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-16158 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial consideration security concerns. He paid or 
settled and paid the seven debts listed on the statement of reasons (SOR). He does not 
have any delinquent debt. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86). On May 13, 
2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to him,1 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
 
1Government Exhibit (GE) 1 (Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated May 13, 2008). GE I is the 
source for the facts in the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
 
2 
 
                                           
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The 
SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR 
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On June 15, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have an administrative judge decide his case after a hearing. On August 26, 2008, the 
case was assigned to me. A Notice of Hearing was issued on August 28, 2008. At the 
hearing held on September 18, 2008, Department Counsel offered five exhibits (GEs 1-
5) (Transcript (Tr.) 10, 16-17), and Applicant offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A-H (Tr. 
19). There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-4 and AE A-H (Tr. 18-21). 
Additionally, I admitted the Hearing Notice (GE 6), the SOR (GE 7), and Applicant’s 
response to the SOR (GE 8). I granted a delay until October 3, 2008 (Tr. 68, 70, 74). On 
September 25, 2008, I received the transcript. Applicant provided additional 
documentation (AE I-N), which I received on October 3, 2008. Department Counsel did 
not object to my consideration of AE I-N, and I admitted AE I-N. I closed the record that 
same day.    
 
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant admitted in his SOR response that he would take responsibility for the 
seven debts listed in the SOR and documented that he paid five of them in May 2008. 
He said he was current on his payments to the last two creditors (GE 7, 8). His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 34 years old.4 He graduated from high school in 1992 (Tr. 6). He 
attended college for two years and majored in computer programming (Tr. 6). However, 
he has not completed his associate’s degree (Tr. 6). He does not currently hold a 
security clearance (Tr. 7). Applicant is now a career firefighter and emergency medical 
technician (Tr. 25). He married in June 2005 and does not have any children (Tr. 40, 
59).  
 
 
2On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
3Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. GE 8 (Response to SOR) is the source for the facts in this 
section unless stated otherwise.   
  
4GE 1 (2007 security clearance application) is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless 
stated otherwise. 
 
 
3 
 
                                           
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant began working for an insurance company in 1994 (Tr. 45). In 2003, his 
income declined because of lack of sales and commissions (Tr. 40, 45-46). In 2003, 
take home income declined to $600 a month (Tr. 41). His debts became delinquent and 
went to collection (Tr. 41). He left the insurance business and became a government 
contractor in 2005 (Tr. 47).5 Between 2005 and 2008, he paid off four or five non-SOR 
debts including one for $6,000 (Tr. 62).  
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) lists seven delinquent debts. In his 
response to the SOR Applicant provided proof that from May 23 to 30, 2008, he paid or 
satisfied the five smaller SOR debts: SOR ¶ 1.a ($107 paid on May 30, 2008; GE 8 at 1-
2); SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.d ($67 and $865 paid or satisfied on May 28, 2008; GE 8 at 1-2, 
5-6); and SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g. ($186 and $66 paid or settled and paid on May 23, 2008; 
GE 8 at 2, 7-8). Although he did not formally dispute the five small debts, he did not 
believe he was responsible for them (Tr. 57-58). Nevertheless he paid them after 
receiving the SOR to alleviate any security concerns (Tr. 57-58).  
 
In 2002 or 2003, the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e became delinquent (Tr. 42). 
Both of them were credit card debts. However at $14,245 and $10,458, respectively, 
these two debts were still of some concern at his hearing as they had previously been 
delinquent. As of June 2008, the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e were current in that 
Appellant was making required payments (GE 8 at 1-2). In 2006, the creditors for the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e reached agreements with Applicant that he would make 
$100 monthly payments, and Applicant made those agreed upon payments for more 
than a year prior to his hearing (Tr. 38-39, 42-43, 55; AE E-H). Applicant’s $14,245 debt 
was settled for $6,000 and paid on September 26, 2008 (AE K, L). The $10,458 debt 
was settled for $8,381 and paid on September 30, 2008 (AE K, N). 
 
Applicant and his spouse’s current monthly gross pay is $4,300 (Tr. 49). 
Applicant’s current monthly take-home pay is $2,400 and his wife’s current monthly take 
home pay is $1,200 (Tr. 48). They own their home and are current on their mortgage, 
which totals $113,000 (Tr. 48, 54). Their equity in their house is about $100,000 (Tr. 
48). They have $3,000 in IRAs, $1,500 in savings and $1,500 in checking accounts (Tr. 
52). The loans on both of their vehicles are fully paid (Tr. 52-53). Applicant’s wife has 
three credit cards, and they are all current (Tr. 53-54). 
 
Applicant received credit counseling in 2004 (Tr. 59). Their suggested debt 
consolidation plan was impractical to him because he lacked the funds to implement it 
(Tr. 60-61). His spouse pays their bills and is conscientious about keeping their debts 
current.    
 
 
5The District Manager at the insurance company where Applicant was employed provided a letter 
lauding Applicant’s loyalty, dedication and honesty as well as his solid reputation in the business. The 
insurance company regretted his departure (AE C).   
 
 
4 
 
Recommendations 
  
Applicant’s supervisor for the last two years works closely with Applicant as they 
are on 24-hour-shifts together at the fire station (Tr. 23, 25). He described Applicant as 
a good employee and worker, who is dedicated, trustworthy, conscientious and 
responsible (Tr. 23-26). Another friend for the last 30 years has also worked with 
Applicant for the last two years at the fire station (Tr. 30). He indicated Applicant has 
played the organ at the church they both attend for many years and volunteers in the 
community (Tr. 31, 32). He relates Applicant is honest, trustworthy, reliable and 
responsible (Tr. 32). 
 
A third friend and co-worker at the fire station has known Applicant for fifteen 
years (Tr. 35). He described Applicant as trustworthy, loyal and generous (Tr. 35). He is 
one of Applicant’s best friends (Tr. 36). 
 
Two other friends, who have known Applicant for many years, and previously 
employed him (AE A, B) describe Applicant as a generous, compassionate and diligent 
person (AE A). One remarked, “his attitude and job performance were unsurpassed.” 
(AE B). Applicant is honest and has strong integrity (AE B).  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
 
5 
 
                                           
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”6 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).7 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude one relevant security concern is under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
6See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is 
“more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
7“The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
 
6 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, in his SOR 
response and at his hearing. As indicated in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.g, he had seven 
delinquent debts totaling about $26,000. The debts became delinquent in 2003. They 
were not paid until 2008. The government established the disqualifying conditions in AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) or 20(b) 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debt. Because there is more than one delinquent debt, his financial problems are not 
isolated. The debts were not paid until September 2008, and therefore his debt is “a 
continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case 
No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 16, 2002)). He receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because the debt “occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
 
 
7 
 
                                           
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Under AG ¶ 20(b), he 
receives partial mitigation because his financial situation was damaged through 
underemployment when he worked in the insurance industry. He lacked the income to 
pay his debts. In 2005, he obtained his current employment and thereafter he has 
steadily reduced his delinquent debt. However, he did not provide sufficient information 
to establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances from 2005 to May 2008.8  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) fully applies. Applicant received financial counseling. He gradually 
reduced his delinquent debt and in September 2008 paid off the last two SOR debts. 
Moreover, there are “clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control.” He understands the security implications of delinquent debt and will 
scrupulously avoid future delinquent debt. However, there is insufficient information to 
establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) because Applicant did not meet his burden of 
showing good faith9 in the resolution of his SOR debts. There is a paucity of information 
about what he did to resolve the SOR debts between June 2005 and May 2008. 
Moreover, when he started making payments on his two large SOR debts, he could 
have made larger monthly payments or resolved these two debts sooner, but failed to 
do so.   
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable to mitigate any SOR debts because the Applicant 
did not provide “documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute” with respect 
to any SOR debts.    
 
Although he did not formally dispute the five small SOR debts, he did not believe 
he was responsible for them. Nevertheless within 30 days after Applicant received the 
 
8“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his 
debts current. 
 
9The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
 
SOR, he paid those five SOR debts, even though he felt he should have disputed them. 
He had been making monthly payments on the remaining two SOR debts for over a 
year. Although Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve his delinquent debts, his payment of the remaining two SOR debts in 
September 2008 are adequate to fully mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). For purposes of the whole person analysis in 
this case, I will presume that none of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 apply.  
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. The SOR lists seven 
debts totalling $26,000 that were at one time or another delinquent during the last five 
years. He failed to keep his accounts current and negotiate lesser payments when his 
income decreased, showing some financial irresponsibility and lack of judgment. His 
lack of success resolving delinquent debt raises sufficient security concerns to merit 
further inquiry.   
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s record of good employment weighs in his favor. There is no evidence of any 
security violation. He is a law-abiding citizen. Between 2005 and 2008, he paid off four 
or five non-SOR debts, including one for $6,000. His debts are current and his SOR 
debts are all paid. His mortgage and credit cards are current. The loans on both of the 
family cars are paid. He currently does not have any delinquent debt. The Appeal Board 
has addressed a key element in the whole person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
 
 
9 
 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.’) There is no requirement that a plan provide for 
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable 
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in 
the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
Applicant is a fire fighter and emergency medical technician. He attended college, but 
did not graduate. He is not sophisticated in the area of finance. He made mistakes, and 
debts became delinquent. There is, however, simply no reason not to trust him. He has 
paid his debts. Furthermore, he has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
payments. These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
