 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-17019 
                                                            )                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement.   His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(EQIP) on July 30, 2007. He completed and signed a Questionnaire for Non-Sensitive 
Positions (SF-85) on May 31, 2005 and August 3, 2005. On June 5, 2008, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On June 30, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 19, 
2008. I convened a hearing on September 24, 2008, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant.  The Government called no witnesses and introduced six exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through 6 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant 
testified on his own behalf, called one witness, and introduced three exhibits, which 
were marked Exs. A, B, and C.  Applicant’s exhibits were admitted to the record without 
objection.  
 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on October 2, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG H, Drug 
Involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
the three allegations and provided additional information. Applicant’s admissions are 
admitted as findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 29 years old, never married, and employed as an information 
technology consultant by a government contractor. In 2001, he earned a bachelor’s 
degree.  He first went to work for his present employer in 2003.  In 2005, he resigned to 
attend graduate school.  In November 2006, he was rehired by his employer.   (Ex. 1; 
Tr. 39-40.) 
 
 A project manager from Applicant’s employer testified as a witness for Applicant.  
He stated that he had known Applicant professionally since August 2007, and he 
observed that Applicant was dependable, hardworking, even tempered, and respectful.  
Applicant’s witness testified that on the day before his due process hearing, Applicant 
discussed with him the reasons for the government’s concern about Applicant’s security 
worthiness. (Tr. 25-27.) 
 
 In 1998, when he was about 19 years old and a college sophomore, Applicant 
began to use marijuana. For eight years, between 1998 and September 2006, Applicant 
used marijuana approximately 186 times. Between 2002 and 2004, he used cocaine 
approximately four times.  He used ecstasy one time in 1999.  Applicant avers he has 
not used illegal drugs for two years and will never use illegal drugs again. (Tr. 42-45; 
Ex. 1 at 44; Ex. 3 at 7.) 
 
 Applicant sought psychological counseling in 1999, and he continued in weekly 
psychotherapy sessions for nine years.  During that time, he discussed his drug use 
with his therapist, but did not recall his therapist advising him not to use drugs.  His use 
of cocaine and ecstasy occurred in the company of others.  While he used marijuana 
with others, he also used it when alone for relaxation and to control anxiety or 
nervousness.  He denied purchasing drugs.  (Tr. 48, 61-63, 70-74.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In the summer of 2002, Applicant moved in with a friend who introduced him to 
cocaine. In the company of this friend, Applicant’s use of marijuana increased. His 
friends supplied him with marijuana.  In 2004, a coworker gave him marijuana.  (Tr. 74-
77.) 
 
 Applicant admitted he used illegal drugs until September 2006. He stated that he 
stopped using illegal drugs in September 2006. He stated he no longer associated with 
the individuals with whom he had used illegal drugs. He also stated he had found ways 
to cope with stress that did not involve illegal drug use. In his answer to interrogatories 
from DOHA, he said he stopped using marijuana because drug use was incompatible 
with his core values, and he prided himself on being an honest and law-abiding person.  
At his hearing, he defined his core values as “kindness, empathy, understanding, 
honesty, integrity, trustworthiness . . . [and] abiding by the law.”  (Tr. 48, 56, 77-78, 82-
83; Ex. 3 at 7-8.) 
 
 In 2005, Applicant completed a SF-85.  Question 14 on the SF-85 reads, in 
pertinent part, as follows:  
 
In the last year, have you used, possessed, supplied, or manufactured 
illegal drugs?  When used without a prescription, illegal drugs include 
marijuana, cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, 
etc.), stimulants (cocaine, amphetamines, etc.), depressants (barbiturates, 
methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.) 
(NOTE: Neither your truthful response nor information derived from your 
response will be used as evidence against you in any subsequent criminal 
proceeding.) 
 
  Applicant responded “no” to Question 14. On August 3, 2005, he signed and 
certified the following statement about his answers on the SF-85: “My statements on 
this form, and any attachments to it, are true, complete, and correct to the best of my 
knowledge and belief and are made in good faith. I understand that a knowing and 
willful false statement on this form can punished by fine or imprisonment or both. (See 
section 1001 of title 18, United States Code.)” 
(Ex. 2 at 5.)  
 
 At his hearing, Applicant explained his answer to Question 14 as follows: 
 
Unfortunately, I chose to lie on that occasion because I was afraid of 
losing my job. I did not understand, and no one had explained to me, 
exactly what the ramifications would be if I was truthful, and I was very 
afraid that if I answered “yes” that [I] would be terminated.  So in that case, 
that concern overrode, you know, my principle [of] being honest. 
(Tr. 84.) 
 
 Falsification of his SF-85 was not alleged on the SOR. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                         Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations.  AG ¶ 24(a) defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.”  The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.” AG  ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.” 
 
The relevant Guideline H security concern in this case is referenced at AG ¶ 
25(a) of the Drug Involvement guideline.  The record shows that Applicant’s admitted 
illegal use of marijuana began in about 1998, when he was 19 years old and continued 
until 2006, when he was 27 years old. During that time he also used cocaine four times 
and ecstasy one time. He used illegal drugs while employed by a federal contractor. 
This conduct casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  It also 
raises security concerns about his ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations.  I conclude that Applicant’s illegal drug use raises security concerns under 
AG ¶ 24 and AG ¶ 25(a). 
 
Several Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case.  If Applicant’s drug use happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation.  If Applicant demonstrated an intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future by disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used, abstaining from drug use for an 
appropriate period, and signing a statement of intent with the automatic revocation of 
his security clearance for any violation, then AG ¶ 26(b) might be applicable.  
 
The record shows that Applicant’s drug use is not recent, but it is of sufficient 
duration to demonstrate a consistent lifestyle choice. His illegal drug use began when 
he was a sophomore in college and continued in his post-college and professional life 
until two years ago, when he was 27 years old.  While Applicant stated he had not used 
marijuana since September 2006, he failed to provide evidence corroborating his 
statement about his abstinence from friends and others who knew him socially. 
Applicant stated he had changed his behavior and activities after his last use of 
marijuana in September 2006 and his subsequent decision to abstain from illegal drugs. 
These decisions are still somewhat recent and the lifestyle change is of insufficient 
duration to demonstrate a positive and permanent change in behavior. I conclude that 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) do not fully apply in mitigation to the security concerns raised by 
the facts in Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant himself provided 
information about his drug use that was alleged on the SOR. His one-time use of 
ecstasy in 1999 was an isolated use of that illegal drug. He has expressed an intent to 
permanently abstain from illegal drugs in the future, and his manager was positive in his 
evaluation of Applicant’s professional skills. 
 
 I have also considered the Applicant’s falsification of Question 14 on his SF-85 
as a part of this whole person analysis. Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be 
considered: A(a) to assess an applicant=s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant=s 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether 
an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a 
particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide 
evidence for whole person analysis under Directive Section 6.3.@ ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted). Additionally, the Appeal Board 
has determined that even though crucial security concerns are not alleged in the SOR, 
the Judge may consider those security concerns when they are relevant and factually 
related to a disqualifying condition that was alleged in the SOR.  ISCR 05-01820 at 3 
n.4 (App. Bd. Dec. 14, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-18860 at 8 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 
2003) and ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003)). I conclude that 
Applicant’s deliberate falsification of his drug use on his SF-85 and his expressed 
motivation for the falsification occurred when he was a mature adult. (AG ¶ 2(a)(4). His 
motivation for the falsification raises concerns about his credibility, trustworthiness, and 
 
7 
 
 
ability to put the government’s interests before his own in the protection of classified 
information.  AG ¶ 2(a)(7).  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
drug involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
