                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13696 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Emilo Jaksetic, Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) and is a naturalized 
U.S. citizen who has lived in the United States since 1993. Her in-laws are citizens and 
residents of Germany. Her parents are citizens of the PRC living with her in the U.S. 
Her brother and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of the PRC. In 2006, she visited 
the PRC for two weeks. She has substantially more connections to the United States 
than to the PRC. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 3, 2008, detailing security concerns 
under foreign influence. 
 
 On April 25, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
June 10, 2008, I was assigned the case. On July 28, 2008, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing held on September 10, 2008. The government offered 
Exhibits (Ex.) 1 and 2, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on her own 
behalf and submitted Exhibits A through I, which were admitted into evidence. Three 
additional witnesses also testified on her behalf. On September 18, 2008, the transcript 
(Tr.) was received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the PRC. The attached documents were not admitted into 
evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HEx) I─VI. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶ 1.a of the 
SOR. She admitted the remaining factual allegations, with explanations, of the SOR.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old data base engineer/analyst/software designer who has 
worked for a defense contractor since November 2007, and is seeking to maintain a 
security clearance. Her project manager has daily contact with Applicant and has been 
impressed by Applicant’s mission focus and professionalism; dedication to her job; 
support of the client; and her support of the deployed U.S. military forces worldwide has 
been exemplary. (Ex. F) Applicant is one of the best performers. (Tr. 51) Applicant’s 
next door neighbor stated he thinks highly of Applicant and admires her hard work. (Tr. 
56) Applicant is a responsible, wonderful mother. In 2001, Applicant’s parents came to 
live with her. The neighbor reports Applicant’s parents are very nice, and very attentive 
to the grandchildren. (Tr. 58 – 60)  
 
Applicant was born and raised in the PRC and came to the U.S. in 1993 at age 
24. Her parents encouraged her to study in the U.S. (Tr. 115) In March 2003, she 
obtained her “green card” representing her status as a permanent resident. In 1991, she 
had obtained a bachelors of science degree in electrical engineering from a Chinese 
university. (Tr. 114) From 1993 to 1995, she studied at an American University 
obtaining her master’s degree in computer science in May 1995. (Tr. 115) In December 
1998, she married and has two children, a son born in 1999 and a daughter born in 
 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
2004. (Tr. 120, Ex. F) In May 2006, Applicant became a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 101) Applicant 
definitely does not wish to return to living in China. (Tr. 146)  
 
 Applicant was previously married to a citizen and resident of the PRC. They were 
married from May 1993 to April 2005. (Tr. 119) She has had no contact with her ex-
husband since the divorce and there are no children from this marriage. (Tr. 119)  
 
 Applicant’s husband is a citizen of Germany and a permanent resident of the 
United States. He came to the U.S. in 1990 and obtained his permanent residency 
status in July 1995. He came to the U.S. to pursue his studies and obtained a PhD in 
1995. (Tr. 69) He is a full professor at a German university and has been a faculty 
member in German, since 2003. As a faculty member, he is considered a German civil 
servant. (Tr. 74) He is a civil servant employed by the individual state government and 
not by the federal German government. (Tr. 74)  
 
When not in school, her husband lives with her in the U.S. Normally, he spends 
four or five months of the year in the U.S. (Tr. 71) His desire has always been to return 
to the U.S. and to have his home in the U.S. Her husband was previously an assistant 
professor at a state university in the U.S. It has always been Applicant’s and her 
husband’s intention to make the U.S. their home and to raise their family in the U.S. (Tr. 
76, 99) Applicant and her husband intend their children to be only U.S. citizens and not 
dual citizens. (Tr. 100) 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law is 79 years old and her mother-in-law is 75 years old. 
They are both retired high school teachers. Her father-in-law taught high school Greek 
and Latin. (Tr. 79) Her mother-in-law taught home economics and physical education. 
(Tr. 79) They are both citizens and residents of Germany. They separated in 1995. (Tr. 
78) Since the separation, Applicant’s husband has had no contact with his father. 
Applicant has never had contact with her father-in-law. Her mother-in-law has visited the 
U.S. with her longest visit being six weeks. Applicant’s sister-in-law, age 45, is a nurse 
at a children’s hospital and is a citizen and resident of Germany. (Tr. 80) Her sister-in-
law maintains close ties with Applicant’s mother-in-law. They live approximately 50 
miles apart. (Tr. 97) Applicant has infrequent contact with her sister-in-law. Applicant 
exchanges e-mails with her mother-in-law and sister-in-law on birthdays. (Tr. 159) 
 
 Applicant’s parents were born in China and lived in the PRC. Her father, age 68, 
is a retired university biology professor and her mother, age 67, is a retired middle 
school biology teacher. (Tr. 109) They receive monthly retirement checks from the PRC 
of $500 each. (Tr. 124, 147) In 2001, Applicant’s mother came to the live with Applicant 
in the U.S. (Tr. 120) Her mother has returned to China two or three times with her last 
visit in April 2008. (Tr. 121) Before obtaining their permanent resident status, they were 
required to leave the country every six month, although they requested and received 
extensions on that requirement. (Tr. 149 - 150) Her mother’s most recent visit was to 
obtain a medical physical. (Tr. 122) In 2003, Applicant’s father came to live with her full 
time in the U.S. (Tr. 125) In oriental culture, it is natural for parents to live with a 
daughter as they get older. (Tr. 109, 141) Her father has returned to China twice, once 
 
 
 
4
to visit his sick mother. (Tr. 126) In 2006, her parents obtained permanent resident 
status in the U.S. They could not apply for a green card until Applicant had become a 
U.S. citizen. (Tr. 140) In 2011, her parents first become eligible for U.S. citizenship.  
 
 Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of the PRC. He is 42 years old and is 
the editor of an internal newsletter/magazine/publication (Tr. 111, Ex. G) that serves the 
local government agencies in his province. (Tr. 129) The publication is state owned. In 
2006, Applicant visited the PRC for two-weeks. She stayed with her brother during her 
visit and contacts him twice a year by telephone or email. (Ex 2, 9, the first page of a 
June 2007, Personal Subject Interview (PSI)) During the Cultural Revolution the schools 
were closed and the teachers, which included her parents, were sent to the country for 
re-education. (Tr. 143) Applicant’s grandmother, her mother’s mother, raised Applicant 
and Applicant’s brother was raised by her other grandmother, her father’s mother. (Tr. 
143) From the time she was born until age six, she lived with her grandmother. (Tr. 144) 
 
Applicant’s brother and sister-in-law have applied for permanent residence in the 
U.S. and intend to immigrate to the U.S. (Exs. B, C, and D) They are excited about 
becoming U.S. citizens. (Tr. 108) It is estimated, it will take approximately 10 years 
before they are eligible to come to the U.S. Her brother received his education as a 
librarian before obtaining his job as a reporter and then editor for a government 
publication about population control. Applicant’s sister-in-law is a university librarian. 
(Tr. 135)  
 
 In October 2006, Applicant traveled to the PRC for two weeks. (Ex. 2, PSI page 
2) This was the first time since coming to the U.S. in 1993 that she visited the PRC. (Tr. 
112) The primary purpose of the trip was to see her severely ill 90-year-old 
grandmother, who had suffered a heart attack, and to let her grandmother meet 
Applicant’s son. While in the PRC, she met some high school friends. (Tr. 131) She 
exchanged a couple of emails with one friend shortly before her return to the PRC to set 
up a get together with high school friends. The PRC had changed greatly during the 13 
years she has been gone. Her trip reinforced her belief that she made the right decision 
to come to the U.S. and how lucky she is to have the life she has. (Tr. 146)  
 
 Applicant’s father has a sister living in the PRC and her mother has three siblings 
living in the PRC. (Tr. 144) Applicant talks with her mother’s sister a couple of times a 
year. (Tr. 145) They usually talk about how their children are doing.  
 
 Should Applicant’s husband retire in Germany at some future time, the state 
would be responsible to pay his benison benefits. However, if he resigns from his 
position as professor and leaves the European Union, he would forfeit his pension 
benefits. (Tr. 75) Applicant’s husband’s retirement portfolio, as of March 2008, was 
$76,000. (Ex. I) They have approximately $200,000 in equity in their $850,000 house in 
the U.S. which is their residence and $150,000 equity in a $650,000 rental home. (Tr. 
155, 160) They own no property outside the U.S. (Tr. 160) Applicant has approximately 
$8,000 in her 401(k) retirement plan. (Tr. 156) 
 
 
 
 
5
                                                          
China 
 
The Peoples Republic of China (the PRC) is a repressive, totalitarian government 
with foreign policy goals antithetical to the U.S., although it has cooperated with the U.S. 
in the global war on terrorism in recent years. Its authoritarian government is dominated 
by the Chinese Communist Party.2 The PRC possesses large and increasingly 
sophisticated military forces, which include strategic nuclear weapons and missiles. 3 In 
foreign relations, the PRC and the U.S. have been rivals since the Cold War, with 
particular disagreement on the status of Taiwan. The PRC continues to resist what it 
considers U.S. superpower dominance, despite improving economic relations.4 
 
 The PRC has an active, effective intelligence service that targets U.S. 
intelligence and economic information, and operates against its citizens in the U.S.5 The 
PRC obtains access to restricted technology through industrial espionage and the PRC 
operates an aggressive clandestine effort to acquire additional technologies. This is 
such a problem that the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials have rated 
the PRC’s espionage and industrial theft activities as the leading threat to the security of 
U.S. technology.6 
 
The PRC has a poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses political 
dissent, and its practices include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, 
torture, and mistreatment of prisoners.7 PRC authorities monitor telephone 
conversations, e-mail, text messaging, and Internet communication, open and censor 
mail, monitor and enter residences and offices to gain access to computers, telephones, 
and fax machines. All hotels have a sizable internal security presence and hotel 
guestrooms are sometimes bugged and searched for sensitive or proprietary material.8 
 
 Under PRC law, citizens who become naturalized citizens of other countries lose 
their PRC citizenship. 
2 U.S. Department of State, Background Note: China, dated April 2008 (Background Note on 
China), at 16-7. (HEx. I) 
 
3 Id., p. 13-14. 
  
44 Id., p. 14 -17. 
   
5 Interagency OPSEC Support Staff, Intelligence Threat Handbook [Unclassified/For Official Use 
Only] (Intelligence Threat Handbook), dated June 2004, at 17. (HEx. II) 
 
6 U.S – China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2007 Report to Congress of the U.S – 
China Economic and Security Review Commission, dated November 2007, at 104. (HEx. III) 
  
7 Background Note on China, at 7-8. (HEx. I). See U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on 
Human Rights Practices – 2007, China (includes Tibet, Hong Kong, and Macau), dated March 11, 2008, 
at 1-6. (HEx. V) 
 
8 Id., at 8. (HEx. V) 
 
 
 
 
6
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
7
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG & 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual=s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(c) counterintelligence information, that may be classified, indicates that 
the individual=s access to protected information may involve unacceptable 
risk to national security; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of their 
citizenship status, if the potential for adverse foreign influence or duress 
exists; 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation;   
 
(f) failure to report, when required, association with foreign national; 
 
 
 
 
8
                                                          
(g) unauthorized association with a suspected or known agent, associate, 
or employee of a foreign intelligence service; 
 
(h) indications that representatives or nations from a foreign country are 
acting to increase the vulnerability of the individual to possible future 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; [and] 
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make 
the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign 
person, group, government, or country.  
 
 Applicant’s husband is a permanent U.S. resident who is a professor at a 
German university. As such he is a German civil servant. Applicant’s mother-in-law and 
sister-in-law are citizens and residents of Germany. Applicant exchanges emails with 
them twice a year, on birthdays. Applicant’s parents are citizens of the PRC, but are 
permanent U.S. residents, living with her in the U.S. Her brother and sister-in-law are 
citizens and residents of the PRC. She stayed with her brother in 2006, when she 
returned to China for two weeks. This was the only time in since 1993 that she visited 
the PRC. She has contact with her brother twice a year by email. She also emails her 
aunt who lives in the PRC twice a year.  
 
 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an Applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States.  
 
There is no concern with Germany. However, the complicated, competitive 
relationship of the PRC with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her relationship 
with her relatives living in the PRC and her relatives in the U.S. with close relationships 
to family members living in the PRC does not pose a security risk and she is not in a 
position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and these two 
people.9 With its mixed human rights record, and political, economic and military rivalry 
9 The Appeal Board has articulated a “heightened risk” or “very heavy burden” in People’s 
Republic of China (PRC) cases because of that country’s hostility to the United States and aggressive 
intelligence collection efforts. See ISCR Case No. 06-24575 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007) (articulating 
“very heavy burden” standard and reversing grant of clearance in case involving family members living in 
 
 
 
9
                                                                                                                                                                                          
with the United States, it is conceivable that the PRC would target any PRC citizen or 
former citizen living in the United States in an attempt to gather valuable information 
from the United States. 
 
There is evidence that the PRC intelligence operatives seek classified or 
economic information from U.S. businesses and/or government agencies. Applicant’s 
connections to her brother and sister-in-law create a potential conflict of interest 
because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a possible security concern 
about her desire to help these relatives living in the PRC by providing classified 
information.  
 
Having considered all of the Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions, applicable 
conditions that could possibly raise a security concern,  AG & 7(a), AG & 7(b), and  AG 
& 7(d) apply. AG & 7(d) applies to her husband and parents even though her parents 
were born in China, because they live with her in the U.S., which negates any potential 
for adverse foreign influence or duress.  
 
AG & 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of 
loyalty or obligations to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority;  
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; [and] 
 
 
the PRC); ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 4-5 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008); ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 4-5 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2008). 
 
 
 
10
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
 AG & 8(a) applies to Applicant’s husband. He is a permanent U.S. resident, who 
spends part of the year teaching at a German university. As all university professors in 
Germany, he is a German civil servant. There is nothing about the country of Germany, 
her husband’s position there, or his activities in Germany that will place Applicant in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of her husband, the interests of 
Germany, and the interests of the U.S.  Ever since the end of World War II, Germany 
and the U.S. have been close allies.  The U.S. and Germany are members of NATO.  
The U.S. and Germany routinely share classified NATO information.  Germany would 
not coerce Applicant through her husband.  
 In 1993, Applicant left the PRC, and returned just once in 1996. She and her in-
laws in Germany and relatives in the PRC usually exchange greetings on birthdays. Her 
relationship with these individuals is not a security concern. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b) and 8(c) 
partly apply with respect to Applicant’s former classmates, her mother-in-law, and sister-
in-law in Germany, her brother, sister-in-law, aunt and grandmother in the PRC because 
of her limited contacts with them. Because of her limited contact, “it is unlikely [she] will 
be placed in a position of having to choose between the interest of [her relatives and in-
laws] and the interest of the U.S.” Her infrequent contacts (once or twice a year) and not 
particularly close relationship with her in-laws in Germany have a very low potential for 
forcing her to choose between the United States and Germany. She has infrequent 
contacts with her grandmother, aunt, brother, and sister-in-law in the PRC.  
 With her infrequent contacts and not particularly close relationships there is a low 
potential of forcing her to choose between the United States and the PRC. Applicant 
met her burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [her relationship with her 
relatives and in-laws] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” See 
generally ISCR Case No. 03-04300 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002)). Her contacts and communications with her in-
laws and relatives in the PRC are sufficiently casual and infrequent as to not create a 
risk of foreign influence or exploitation.  
 Applicant has an emotional bond with her brother. Her brother hopes to 
immigrate to the U.S. as soon as possible and the paperwork has been submitted, but it 
is likely to be another 10 years before he is able to come to the U.S. Applicant 
communicates with her brother infrequently. Applicant’s relationship with her brother 
and sister-in-law requires a closer examination than her relationship with her German 
in-laws and other relatives in the PRC. 
 There is no evidence that her brother or sister-in-law have been political activists, 
challenging the policies of the PRC Government. Both currently work for the PRC 
Government. Her sister-in-law works as a librarian for a university and all PRC 
universities are state run. Her brother was a librarian before he became a reporter and 
then the editor of a population control publication which is a PRC publication. There is 
 
 
 
11
                                                          
no evidence that terrorists or the PRC Government have approached or threatened 
Applicant, her brother, or sister-in-law for any reason. There is no evidence that these 
relatives living in the PRC currently engage in activities which would bring attention to 
them or that they or other PRC elements are even aware that Applicant works for a 
government contractor or might have access to classified information. As such, there is 
a reduced possibility that her brother and sister-in-law would be targets for coercion or 
exploitation. But see n. 10, infra (discussing limited weight that can be given to the 
absence of such information). 
 Applicant’s relationship with her brother and the nature of the PRC Government 
and its complicated and sometimes contentious relationship to the United States, all 
weigh against mitigating security concerns. See ADP Case No. 05-17812 at 2, 3 n.2 
(App. Bd. Jun. 11, 2007) (finding contacts with siblings in PRC “once every two or three 
months” not to be casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 2, 4 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s parents and sisters a total of about 20 
times per year not casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings once every four or five months 
not casual and infrequent).10 Here, Applicant’s contact with her brother is twice a year 
and, as such, is considered infrequent. Her communications are not casual because 
she has a warm regard for her brother. 
 Applicant’s deep relationship with her children and her strong connections to the 
United States mitigates foreign interest security concerns. Applicant has “such deep and 
10In ISCR Case No. 06-17838 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 28, 2008), the Appeal Board discussed the 
precedential value of the decisions predating the revision of the Adjudicative Guidelines indicated in n. 3, 
supra, and determined where the language of the Directive is unchanged or not substantively altered, the 
precedent remains valid. AG ¶ 8(c) apparently adopted the Appeal Board’s interpretation of Foreign 
Influence Mitigating Condition 1 (FIMC 1) under the previous guidelines. The Appeal Board had 
determined that contacts with relatives living in a foreign country must be both casual and infrequent to 
apply FIMC 1. See ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). Moreover, contacts with such 
family members are presumed to be “not casual.” Id. In the analysis of countervailing evidence, it is legal 
error to give significant weight to any of the following facts or factors: applicant’s ties to the United States 
(ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 5 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005)); lack of prominence of relatives living in a 
foreign country (Id.); “family members’ low-key and noncontroversial lifestyle, and the fact that the Iranian 
government has not contacted them about Applicant” (ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006); one relative living in a foreign country may be sufficient to negate FIMC 1 (ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006)); a foreign relative’s fragile health (ISCR Case No. 02-29403 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 14, 2004)), advanced age (ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 7 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003), 
financial independence (ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005), or lack of financial 
dependency upon applicant (ISCR Case No. 03-15205 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan 21, 2005)); foreign relatives 
spend part of each year in the U.S. (ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)); the lack of 
any connection between the foreign relative and the foreign government in question (ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)); the absence of any attempt at exploitation in the past (ISCR Case 
No. 03-15205 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005)); a foreign country’s friendly relationship with the U.S., its 
stable, democratic government, or its extensive foreign military agreements with the United States (ISCR 
Case No. 02-22461 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2005))  and an applicant’s “refusal to travel to Iran” and 
“meticulous work habits and practice of strictly following the rules relating to his work” (ISCR Case No. 03-
15205 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005)). Notwithstanding the Appeal Board’s position, I conclude that many 
of these attributes are pertinent to the analysis in this case under the whole person concept. 
 
 
 
 
12
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [she] can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Her children are U.S. citizens, and 
reside in the United States. Her husband and parents are U.S. permanent residents 
living in the United States since 1990, 2001, and 2003. Applicant has worked for her 
government contractor with dedication and distinction. She has substantial property and 
investments in the United States, and no property or investments in the PRC or other 
foreign location. She has many friends and colleagues in the United States. She has no 
desire to return to live in the PRC. She is a loyal, dedicated U.S. citizen. She has 
provided letters and witness statements to corroborate her loyalty and trustworthiness. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Security clearance 
decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past 
transgressions. Rather, the objective of the adjudicative process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person=s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole person 
concept in evaluating Applicant=s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national 
interests. I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to the PRC and the heavy 
burden an Applicant carries when she has family members in a foreign country.  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning the PRC must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in the PRC. The PRC has a mixed to poor human rights record. 
The PRC is one of the most aggressive nations in the collection of U.S. intelligence and 
sensitive economic information.  
 
One element increasing the foreign influence security concern is Applicant’s 
contacts with her brother and her 2006 two week visit to the PRC. Her brother and 
 
 
 
13
                                                          
sister-in-law could be vulnerable to PRC coercion and non-coercive measures because 
of their PRC citizenship and where they live. They also work for the PRC government 
and the PRC government could exert pressure on them by threatening to stop or 
stopping their salary or firing them from their jobs.  
 
There are significant factors supporting approval of Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant has lived in the United States since 1993 (except for 
her two-week visit to the PRC. She became a U.S. citizen in 2006. Her children and 
parents live with her in the United States. Her children are U.S. citizens and her parents 
U.S. permanent residents. She compellingly explained why her loyalty is to the United 
States, rather than to the PRC. She thoroughly developed the evidence showing her 
connections to the United States and the remote connections to the PRC. I found her 
statements to be honest, candid and credible. She provided corroborating statements 
concerning her loyalty and trustworthiness. She provided favorable recommendations of 
employers and friends going back to the time of her entry into the United States.  
 
In a 2006 decision, the Appeal Board held the Judge properly determined under 
the “whole person” concept that an applicant with very significant connections to a 
foreign country had mitigated security concerns under Guideline B. In ISCR Case No. 
03-04300, 2006 DOHA Lexis 264 at *17-*21 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006),11 the applicant 
had weekly contact with her mother (who lives in Russia), contact three times per year 
with her aunt (who lives in Russia); contact about four times per year with her father-in-
law (who lives in Russia); and multiple annual contacts with other relatives living in 
Israel. She had visited her family in Russia and Israel, on more than one occasion, after 
immigrating to the United States. Moreover, she owned a half interest in her mother’s 
apartment in Russia, and provided financial support to her mother and aunt. The 
Judge’s whole person analysis (that the Appeal Board determined was sufficient to 
mitigate such significant foreign influence security concerns) provides: 
  
Looking at all of [whole person] factors, I conclude Applicant has 
overcome foreign influence security concerns. Given her strong ties to the 
U.S. and her limited contact with Russia and Israel since she became a 
U.S. naturalized citizen, there is limited potential for coercion, exploitation 
or duress. (E.2.2.1.8. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress.) All of her immediate family are in the U.S., and the majority of her 
financial ties are in the U.S. Applicant has been a naturalized U.S. citizen 
for over fifteen years. She returned to Russia in April 2005 to abjure her 
Russian citizenship and has had limited visits with her mother, aunt and 
father-in-law in 1995 and 2002. She provides minimal support to her 
mother and aunt. She has only visited her sister and family in Israel in 
1991, 1994, and 1997. While she has contact with her relatives in Russia 
and her relatives in Israel, that contact is limited. While her niece serves in 
11The Appeal Board reversed the Judge’s decision to grant a clearance because of the strict 
requirements of the Money Memorandum (Applicant in ISCR Case No. 03-04300 had not turned in her 
Russian passport to the Russian government by the close of evidence).   
 
 
 
 
14
                                                          
the Israeli military, she has limited contact with her. Clearly, she put her 
interests in the U.S. ahead of her loyalty to her elderly mother when she 
chose to renounce her Russian citizenship. 
 
Given her long history with her employer since April 2000, it is unlikely that 
she could be exploited by coercive or non-coercive means by the 
government in Russia or in Israel in a way that could force Applicant to 
choose between loyalty to her mother, aunt, father-in-law, her sibling and 
family and her loyalty to the United States. She stated that should any 
such attempt be made she would immediately contact the appropriate 
U.S. authorities. Thus, any risk of either coercive or non-coercive foreign 
duress or influence on Applicant and/or her immediate family would 
appear to be slight and clearly manageable. Contacts with citizens of other 
countries are relevant to security determinations only if they make an 
individual potentially vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure 
through threats against those foreign relatives. 
 
 While clearance decisions are inherently based on numerous facts, and as such 
are made after a case-by-case analysis, it is beyond debate that the applicant in ISCR 
Case No. 03-04300 had more significant connections to Russia than the Applicant does 
to the PRC in this case. Whereas, the applicant’s connections to the United States in 
ISCR Case No. 03-04300 and in this case are similar.12  
  
After carefully weighing the evidence of her connections to PRC, and to the 
United States, I conclude Applicant has carried her burden of fully mitigating the foreign 
influence security concerns. I take this position based on the law, as set forth in 
Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole person factors”13 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
I have carefully weighed the evidence in favor of Applicant against the 
government=s concerns about Applicant=s ability to protect classified information. I find 
that there is little potential for Applicant to be pressured, coerced, or exploited because 
her brother lives in the PRC. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions 
or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
 
12In ISCR Case No. 03-04300 the applicant’s connections to the U.S. are as follows:  (1) the 
applicant’s husband and son live in the United States, and they are both dual citizens of Russia and the 
U.S.; and (2) The applicant has lived in the U.S. since 1989.  The applicant in ISCR Case No. 03-04300 is 
a professional with post-doctorate teaching employment. 
 
13See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
 
 
15
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence: FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
