                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-14772 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kathleen E. Voelker, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on December 13, 2006.  On March 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
for Applicant for criminal conduct under Guideline J.  The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 
31, 2008. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 18, 2008.  He admitted the 
factual allegations of arrests and charges as alleged in the SOR under Guideline J, but 
denied there was criminal behavior because the offenses were either not pursued, 
dismissed, or there were findings of not guilty.  He requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 6, 2008.  
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
On May 13, 2008, the government amended the SOR to add security concern 
allegations under Guideline E as noted below for the same incidents.  On June 18, 
2008, Applicant again admitted the factual allegations but denied that there were 
personal conduct security concerns.  The case was assigned to another administrative 
judge before being transferred to me on July 30, 2008.  DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on August 6, 2008, for a hearing on September 24, 2008.  I convened the 
hearing as scheduled.  The government offered 14 government exhibits marked (Gov. 
Ex.) 1 through 14 which were received without objection.  One government witness 
testified in rebuttal.  Applicant submitted nine Applicant Exhibits marked (App. Ex.) A-I 
which were received without objection.  Applicant and two witnesses testified on his 
behalf.  Applicant offered one document for administrative notice (Hearing Exhibit 1).  
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 2, 2008.  Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
The March 20, 2008 SOR alleges four criminal acts of security concern.  The 
Government amended the SOR on May 13, 2008, to add allegation 2, the same four 
criminal acts as personal conduct security concerns under Guideline E.  Allegation 1.c 
alleges a grand jury indictment for aggravated sexual battery and object sexual 
penetration.  In the amended SOR, the government alleged a personal conduct security 
concern against Applicant in allegation 2.c for being arrested and charged with 
aggravated sexual battery on March 29, 2003. In allegation 2.d SOR, the government 
alleged a personal conduct security concern against Applicant for being arrested and 
charged with attempted object penetration on March 29, 2008.  The personal conduct 
allegation in 2.c and 2.d arose from the same March 29, 2003 incident or event and will 
be considered as one allegation.  It is the same incident raised as a single criminal 
conduct security concern under SOR paragraph 1.c.  Applicant did not object to the 
additional allegations under Guideline E.  Applicant admitted the May 13, 2008 SOR 
factual allegations.  The SOR was amended to add SOR allegation paragraph 2. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 32 years old and has worked as a software developer for a defense 
contractor for almost two years.  He is a college graduate with a degree in mathematical 
science with concentration in operations research and statistics.  He is presently 
enrolled for his employer in an accelerated combined master's program in systems 
engineering and business administration with expected graduation in May 2009.  He 
has never been married but has a 14 year old daughter who lives with her mother.  He 
sees his daughter frequently and pays child support (Tr. 55-60; Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated 
December 13, 2006).  This is his first application for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant worked part time for a company from 2000 until 2004 while he attended 
college.  When he completed college in 2004, he continued to work for the company full 
time.  In December 2006, he left the company to move to his present location to work 
 
3 
 
 
for the defense contractor (Tr. 62-64).  The president of the defense contractor 
sponsored Applicant for the combined master's degree program.  He informed the 
university that Applicant's performance with his company has been outstanding and his 
programming and analytical skills are being continually tested in complex projects for 
the Department of Defense.  He notes Applicant has met every challenge and produced 
excellent results.  He vouches for Applicant's intelligence, common sense, and ability to 
find solutions to different type problems (App. Ex. A, Recommendation letter, dated 
March 17, 2008).  Applicant was a member of the team that received the company's 
outstanding team award (App. Ex. B, Award memorandum, dated November 14, 2007).  
Applicant's performance reviews with the defense contractor shows he has exceeded all 
expectations and his performance and goal achievement have been exceptional (App. 
Ex. C, Performance review, December 4, 2006 to July 18, 2007; App. Ex. D, 
Performance Review, July 18, 2007 to August 7, 2008). 
 
Applicant stated that when he accepted the position with the defense contractor 
in December 2006, he left his old college friends and area and now has new friends 
who are mostly defense contractors.  He has "grown up" and is working hard to be 
mature.  He is very serious about life and making good long-term decisions (Tr. 92-94).   
 
Applicant admitted he was charged with and pled guilty to possession of Drug 
Paraphernalia in 1996 (SOR 1.a, 2.a).  Applicant admitted he was charged with assault 
and battery on a family member in October 1999, but the charge was not prosecuted 
(SOR 1.b, 2.b).  Applicant admitted he was arrested for, charged with, indicted for, but 
found not guilty of aggravated sexual battery and object sexual penetration in June 
2003 (SOR 1c., 2.c and 2.d).  Applicant admitted he was arrested and charged with two 
counts of profane, threatening language over public airways on July 2004.  The 2004 
charge was dismissed. (SOR 1.d, 2.e) 
 
In July 1996, Applicant, then 19 years old, had just dropped a friend at his house 
after returning from a holiday concert.  As he exited the highway to go to his own house, 
he hit a patch of gravel and spun his tires.  He got out of his car to see if there was any 
damage.  A police officer was parked near-by and saw the incident.  The police officer 
stopped Applicant because she believed he had been speeding.  While looking into the 
car, the police officer spotted a drug pipe on the passenger side floor.  Applicant 
recognized the pipe as belonging to his friend, since he had also used it, but did not 
know it was in the car.  He was arrested for possession of drug paraphernalia.  He pled 
guilty and was sentenced to six months probation and a fine (Tr. 64-66, 94-96). 
 
While a college student, Applicant was arrested for assault and battery in 
October 1999.  Applicant was sharing living arrangements with his girlfriend, a college 
student.  The two had an argument after Appellant learned that she recently had an 
affair with a male friend while visiting him in another state.  Applicant also learned she 
had been using drugs in their apartment when he was not home.  The girlfriend slapped 
him in the face and he pushed her very hard knocking her to the ground.  The girlfriend 
received a minor injury from the fall.  Applicant left the apartment to cool off and the 
girlfriend called the police.  He was arrested for domestic assault since they were living 
 
4 
 
 
together.  The charges were not prosecuted when the girlfriend informed the prosecutor 
she did not wish to continue with the case.  Applicant and his girlfriend continued to live 
together for another six months (Tr. 66-70, 96-106; Gov. Ex. 2, Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) Criminal Justice Report, dated December 31, 2006; Gov. Ex. 3, 
Arrest Record, dated October 28, 1999). 
 
Applicant shared living arrangement starting in 2001 with another girlfriend, Ms. 
E.  They lived together for a few years at two separate locations while both attended 
college.  They were to evenly split the living expense to include rent, utilities, and food.  
They did not always agree on the payments needed and there were constant arguments 
over sharing and paying expenses.  At one time, Applicant observed what he believed 
to be drug activity by Ms. E. in the apartment.  He called Ms. E's mother to report her 
behavior.  Ms. E vehemently denied the activity and was angry with Applicant for calling 
her mother.  In January 2003, the arrangement was deteriorating so Applicant had her 
sign an agreement to stay in the apartment and share expenses until May 2003 when 
school ended.   
 
In March 2003, Applicant called Ms. E's alleged other boyfriend and drug supplier 
and told him that he and Ms. E were still living together.  Ms. E was very angry with 
Applicant and threatened him if he continued to interfere in her life.  Later that month, 
they were to attend a film festival as part of a college language course.  Applicant 
bought two tickets.  They were to meet at the theater, but when they met, Ms. E refused 
to sit with Applicant and sat with a friend.  Applicant attended the festival and met a new 
girlfriend.  Later that evening, Applicant was involved in an automobile accident on the 
way to a party.  He tried to call Ms E to inform her of the accident but she did not 
answer the telephone.  Applicant returned home in the early morning and was in bed 
when Ms. E returned home.  They engaged in a heated argument moving from room to 
room in the house.  At one time, Applicant pushed open and broke the door to a room 
where Ms. E had fled.  Ms. E punched Applicant in the eye and scratched him on the 
neck (App. Ex. E, photographs of Applicant).  Ms. E left and went to another girl's house 
complaining that Applicant sexually assaulted her.  The other girl convinced her to call 
the police and she filed a complaint with the police and was taken to a local hospital and 
examined by the nursing staff.  Applicant was arrested the next day and charged with 
sexual assault and sexual object penetration.  The case was sent to a grand jury and 
Applicant was indicted and again arrested for the alleged offense.   
 
Applicant was tried before a jury for the sexual assault and sexual object 
penetration in October 2003 (Tr. 72-82, 106-131; Gov. Ex. 4, Arrest Record, dated 
March 29, 2003; Gov. Ex. 5, Arrest Record, undated; Gov. Ex. 7, Incident Report, dated 
March 29, 2003; Gov, Ex. 9, Incident Report, dated March 29, 2003; Gov. Ex. 14, trial 
transcript).  Applicant was acquitted by the jury of both sexual assault and sexual object 
penetration.  The prosecutor stated at the hearing she presented testimony from the 
complaining witness, Ms. E, her friend, the forensic nurse who examined Ms. E, her 
report, and photographs taken during the examination. Also, the forensic nurse 
coordinator testified as an expert witness.  The case was heard on a Friday, the 
testimony ended at about 7 PM, and the jury deliberated about 20 minutes before 
 
5 
 
 
rendering a not guilty finding on all charges (Tr.144-156; Gov. Ex. 12, Case Information, 
dated October 29, 2003).  
 
At the criminal trial, Ms. E testified that she and Applicant had argued frequently 
and heatedly.  She testified that at one time he grabbed her around the throat and 
forced his fingers in her mouth to make her stop talking.  On the night of March 29-30, 
2003, they had a very heated and vehement argument.  They went from room to room 
arguing.  She tried to get away from Applicant and closed or locked doors to the 
bathroom and bedroom.  She was in her bedroom lying on her bed when Applicant 
broke the door to the bedroom and assaulted her when he lay on top of her trying to 
insert his tongue in her mouth, and placing his fingers in her vagina.  She was able to 
get away from Applicant and leave the apartment.  She went to a friend's house who 
urged her to call police and go to the hospital to be examined.  She called the police 
and was examined at the hospital (Gov. Ex. 14, trial transcript, at 4-42).   
 
A friend testified at the criminal trial that she went to the film festival with Ms. E 
and then attended a party with her.  Ms. E received a number of telephone calls from 
Applicant while at the party.  Later that morning, Ms. E came to her house and was 
hysterical and crying, complaining that Applicant assaulted her.  The friend urged her to 
call the police and go to the hospital.  She accompanied Ms. E to the hospital and 
stayed with her for a short time (Gov. Ex. 14, trial transcript, at 42-49). 
 
At the criminal trial, a forensic nurse, who had been in that position in the hospital 
for about nine months, testified that she examined Ms. E at the hospital and took 
photographs of her genital area.  She noticed a small tear in the labia minora, and Ms. E 
complained of some soreness in the area.  The nurse noted the tear but no lacerations, 
bruising, abrasions, redness, or swelling (Gov. Ex. 14, trial transcript, at 49-59).   
 
The forensic nurse coordinator for the hospital testified that the photographs 
taken of Ms. E indicate redness and an abrasion in the area of the tear.  This was the 
only injury she could observe.  The injury happened within 12 to 24 hours before the 
examination.  The only conclusion she could draw was that there was some type of 
sheering force, but not just from fingers.  It would have to come from something 
attached to the finger, a ring or fingernails.  The injury could also be caused by Ms. E's 
use of sexual objects (Gov. Ex. 14, 59-68).  
 
Ms. E's mother testified she received a call from her daughter in the middle of the 
night telling her that Applicant had physically hurt her.  Since she was over 800 miles 
away, she told her daughter to go to a hotel and she would pay for the room.  She noted 
that Applicant and her daughter had visited her and also Applicant's parents.  She last 
visited her daughter and Applicant about seven days before the alleged sexual assault.  
There seemed to be no issues between her daughter and Applicant (Gov. Ex. 14, trial 
transcript, at 69-74). 
 
The forensic nurse coordinator from another hospital testified for Applicant at the 
criminal trial that she has done forensic nursing for about 15 years.  She reviewed the 
 
6 
 
 
examination records of Ms. E but did not examine her.  In her opinion, the forensic 
nurse examination report is defective and does not conform to the required standard of 
care.  However based on her reading of the report, she classified the injury or tear as a 
non-specific finding in that the tear could have been caused by a number of means.  It 
could come from trauma, disease, yeast infection, or been self-inflicted.  Sexual toys 
belonging to and used by Ms. E could have caused the injury.  The injury could also 
have been caused by a fingernail.  She observed no other injury in her examination of 
the photographs (Gov. Ex. 14, trial transcript, at 75-88). 
 
Applicant's father testified at the criminal trial that he has never seen his son 
wear finger jewelry.  Also, his son does not have long fingernails since he has the bad 
habit of biting his nails to the nub since he was 3 or 4 years old.  He saw his son in 
March 2003 and he did not have finger jewelry or finger nails (Gov. Ex. 14, trial 
transcript, at 88-90).  
 
Applicant's friend testified at the criminal trial that she knows both Applicant and 
Ms. E.  She discussed their relationship with Ms. E in February and March 2003.  Ms. E 
told her she intended to move out of the house with Applicant because she wanted 
freedom.  She did not mention she was moving because he abused her.  Applicant 
came to her house on the morning of March 30, 2003.  He was crying and bleeding from 
the neck and had a black eye.  He told her he and Ms. E had a fight (Gov. Ex. Trial 
transcript, at 14, 90-94).   
 
A neighbor of Applicant and Ms. E testified that she heard no violent conduct 
between them.  Ms. E did tell her she was moving to get her freedom.  She saw Ms. E 
the morning after the incident and she told her Applicant was in jail.  She was with some 
other friends and asked her if she wanted to come to the apartment because they were 
having a party (Gov. Ex. 14, Trial transcript, at 96-103). 
 
 Applicant testified in the criminal trial that shortly after meeting Ms. E at 
school, they started living together.  They argued frequently and vehemently.  The only 
time he touched her was in a previous argument after she pushed him in the bathroom 
and he fell over the toilet and hit his head on a window.  He got up and pushed her out 
of the bathroom.  She did not hit anything nor was she hurt.  Ms. E on one other 
occasion while they were arguing slapped him in the face but he did not hit her.  When 
they moved to their second apartment they agreed to continue to share all expense 
evenly.  They argued continuously about paying the bills.  He did admit to calling Ms. 
E's other alleged boyfriend and telling him that he and Ms. E were still together and 
were intimate.  Ms. E was upset with him for making this call.   
 
On the night of March 29-30, 2003, he tried to call Ms. E after he was involved in 
an automobile accident.  She did not answer the phone.  When Ms. E. returned to the 
apartment, they argued and she called him various obscene names.  She pushed him 
when he followed her into the bathroom and he pushed her back.  Ms. E. went to the 
bedroom and closed the door.  He pushed it open damaging the door and frame.  Ms. E 
was on the bed and he sat down next to her.  She got up and he reached for her, 
 
7 
 
 
grabbing her underwear.  She then punched him in the eye and scratched him with her 
long fingernails on the neck.  He got dressed and left the apartment.  At no time did he 
try to sexually assault her or place his fingers in her vagina (Gov. Ex. 14, trial transcript, 
at 104-130).  
 
Applicant testified at the security clearance hearing that in July 2004, he was now 
dating Ms. I.  He learned that a Ms. C, a married friend of Ms. I, was having an affair 
with another man who was a reputed drug dealer.  He called Ms. C's husband, R, and 
reported Ms. C's actions.  Ms. C was home at the time he called R and she took the 
phone and accused Applicant of trying to ruin her life.  Applicant terminated the call.  
The next morning Applicant left to go to work and obscene words and phrases had been 
scratched into every panel of his car.  He received an estimate of over $4,000 to get the 
damage repaired.  He called R and told him he was calling the police on Ms. C.  He did 
not threaten R or Ms. C, but did use excessive profanity in the conversation.  He did not 
say "Do not let me catch [Ms. C] alone" or "I am going to get you guys."  Applicant filed 
a report with the police for damage and destruction of private property for the car 
damage (App. Ex. F, Incident Report, dated July 27, 2004).  The police did not charge 
anyone with this offense because there was no evidence to show who committed the 
offense (Tr. 84-89).   
 
R and Ms. C also filed an incident report with the local police concerning 
Applicant using the telephone to threaten bodily harm (Tr. 84-87; Gov. Ex. 8, 10, and 
11, incident report, dated July 27, 2004).  Applicant was arrested in January 2005 for 
the offense of profane, threatening or indecent language over public airways.  The 
criminal offense involves the use of obscene, vulgar, profane, lewd, lascivious, or 
indecent language, or making any suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature, or 
threatening an illegal or immoral act with the intent to coerce, intimidate, or harass any 
person over any telephone.  It is a class I misdemeanor (Hearing Exhibit 1, statute).  
Applicant appeared in court on the offense but it was dismissed because R did not 
press the charge and Ms. C did not appear for the trial (Tr. 88-92, 131-142; Gov. Ex. 13, 
Case Information, dated February 17, 2005). 
 
Applicant's present girlfriend, Ms. J, testified that she met Applicant in December 
2006 after he moved to his present location.  She has a bachelor and masters degree 
and works for the federal government.  After meeting Applicant, they lived together and 
purchased a condominium together.  They recently agreed not to live together but are 
still dating.  During their over two year relationship, Applicant has never hit her or yelled 
at her.  Applicant does not have a temper and she has never heard him threatening 
anyone.  His friends are mainly quiet professionals.  Applicant is a kind and loving father 
to his daughter.  She described him as kind, generous, intelligent and loyal.  He is 
reliable, honest, and trustworthy (Tr. 44-55). 
 
Applicant's fellow worker testified that he sees Applicant on a daily basis.  He 
believes Applicant is honest, trustworthy, and has good judgment.  He has never seen 
Applicant lose his temper.  Applicant is cool and calm and very level-headed.  He is 
 
8 
 
 
aware of the incidents Applicant was involved in that cause security concerns (Tr. 36-
43). 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Analysis 
 
 There are four incidents that are of security concern for Applicant.  The incidents 
are alleged to raise both criminal conduct and personal conduct security concerns.  The 
incidents are the possession of drug paraphernalia in July 1996, the assault in October 
1999, the sexual assault and sexual object penetration in March 2003, and the profane 
and threatening language over the telephone in July 2004.  Even though the actions of 
Applicant give rise to two similar security concerns, each security concern will be 
treated separately.   
 
Criminal Conduct  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  By its very nature it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations (AG ¶ 30).  Appellant admitted that he was 
arrested for and pled guilty to possession of drug paraphernalia.  He admitted he was 
arrested for assault even though the charge was not prosecuted.  He was arrested, 
charged, indicted and tried for and found not guilty by a jury of sexual assault and 
sexual object penetration.  He was arrested and charged with the offense of profane 
and threatening language over the telephone even though the charge was dismissed.  
The government must establish by substantial evidence controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR.  Substantial evidence is such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might 
accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the 
record (See, directive ¶ E3.1.14, ISCR Case No. 04-11463 (App. Bd. Aug 4, 2006)).  
Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance (See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F. 3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994)).  The 
government, based on Applicant's admissions and the fact that he was arrested and 
charged with criminal offenses, has established by substantial evidence the four 
criminal offenses alleged in the SOR.  These facts raise Criminal Conduct Disqualifying 
Conditions (CC DC) ¶ 31(a) "a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses", and CD 
DC ¶ 31(c) "allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted".  The alleged offenses 
are serious crimes.  Even though charges may not have been prosecuted, or findings of 
not guilty entered, or charges dismissed, they are still allegations of criminal conduct 
that raise a security concern.  
 
 The government produced substantial evidence to establish the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c).  The burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence 
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the illegal drug use (Directive ¶ E3.1.15).  An 
applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation or prove a mitigating 
condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government (See ISCR 
Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)).   
 
 Appellant has raised by his testimony Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions 
(CC MC) ¶ 32 (a) "so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
10 
 
 
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment"; CC MC ¶ 
32(c) "evidence that the person did not commit the offense"; and CC MC ¶ 32(d) "there 
is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse, or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement".  The 
possession of drug paraphernalia happened in 1996, and the domestic assault 
happened in 1999, over 12 and nine years ago when Applicant was a teenager or in 
college.  The passage of time since the offenses were committed is sufficient especially 
when coupled with the fact the acts were committed as a teenager and college student 
to show that the acts are unlikely to recur and no longer cast doubt on his reliability and 
trustworthiness.   
 
 There are two remaining criminal conduct security concerns established by the 
government to consider.  Applicant was tried for sexual assault and sexual object 
penetration in 2003 and found not guilty in a jury trial.  The offense of use of profane 
and threatening language over the telephone in 2004 was dismissed. Since the 
government has established these concerns, Applicant must refute, explain, mitigate, or 
extenuate these facts by a preponderance of the evidence.  A preponderance of the 
evidence requires that the prevailing factual conclusions must be based on the weight of 
the evidence.  The preponderance test means that the fact finder must be convinced 
that the factual conclusion chosen is more likely than not, (See Steadman v. SEC, 450 
U.S. 91 (1981), or whether the favorable evidence out weighs the unfavorable evidence 
or vice versa (See ISCR Case No. 07-16442 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2008)).   
 
 Applicant denied the sexual assault and sexual object penetration.  The not guilty 
disposition of these cases is a jury's determination that the prosecution failed to prove 
the crimes beyond a reasonable doubt.  I am not bound by the jury determination and 
must independently evaluate the evidence whether he committed the offenses.  There 
was evidence of an acrimonious relationship.  There was testimony of a mutual 
argument and fight between Applicant and the girlfriend.  The girlfriend accused 
Applicant of sexual assault and object penetration.  Applicant admitted the argument 
and fight but denied a sexual assault or penetration.   The forensic nurses noted a 
vaginal area tear but could not establish what caused the tear.  A finger itself would not 
cause the tear.  There was testimony that Applicant did not wear finger jewelry or did 
not have long fingernails.  The two forensic nurse coordinators were unable to state with 
certainty whether the tear was caused by an assault or some other action.  I am 
convinced by a preponderance of the evidence from the criminal trial transcript and 
Applicant's testimony at the hearing that he did not commit the criminal offense of 
sexual assault or sexual object penetration.  There was a fight and argument but not a 
criminal sexual assault or sexual foreign object penetration.  I draw no inference from 
the fact the case went to the jury at 7 PM on a Friday night and the jury deliberated only 
20 minutes.  The only inference I draw is that the jury did its civic duty of following the 
judge's instruction in reaching a fair and impartial verdict. 
 
 Applicant admitted he called Ms. C's husband and told him she was having an 
affair.  Applicant's car was damaged and he believed Ms. C caused the damage.  He 
 
11 
 
 
called her and her husband and vehemently complained about the damage.  Both 
parties used profane language in the call.  Based on the testimony of Applicant at the 
hearing and the dismissal of the profane and threatening language offense, I am 
convinced by a preponderance of the evidence that he did not communicate by 
threatening language with intent to coerce, intimidate, or harass.   
 
 Even if it was determined that Applicant committed the criminal offenses of 
sexual assault and sexual foreign object penetration and communicating a threat over 
the telephone, there is evidence the security concerns have been mitigated.  There is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation.  Applicant was in an environment in which others 
used drugs, but he did not use drugs.  The incident that resulted in profane telephone 
calls could have evolved into a physical confrontation but did not.  He established he is 
considered now quiet and peaceful by those who know him.  Applicant completed 
college, is employed by a defense contractor and is consider an excellent employee.  
He is enrolled in an accelerated two degree masters program.  He has moved from the 
college environment and now lives in a professional environment.  Applicant has 
established he is successfully rehabilitated by his new life style and successes and the 
passage of time.  AG ¶¶ 32(a), 32(c), and 32(d) all apply.  Applicant has mitigated or 
refuted the criminal conduct security concerns alleged under Guideline J. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information, AG ¶ 
15.  While the four incidents have been refuted or mitigated as criminal conduct security 
concerns, the government has established by substantial evidence that they are 
incidents of personal conduct that raise questionable judgment and unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulation affecting Applicant's reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information.  As noted above, there were only four incidents.  
The government alleged the same action as two allegations of security concern under 
Guideline E, one when Applicant was arrested, and another when he was arraigned on 
the charge.  Since there was only one incident, SOR allegations 2.c and 2.d are treated 
together.   
 
 The government established by substantial evidence, relying on Applicant's 
admissions and testimony as well as evidence of the arrests and charges, that Applicant 
possessed drug paraphernalia in 1996, assaulted a girlfriend during an argument in 
1999, was involved to some extent in another argument and assault in 2003, and used 
profane, threatening, and vulgar language towards others in 2004.  These four incidents 
raise Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (PC DC) ¶ 16(c) "credible adverse 
information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse 
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, or other characteristic indicating hat the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information"; PC DC ¶ 16 (d) "credible adverse information that is not explicitly 
 
12 
 
 
covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which when combined with all available information supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules or regulation, or other characteristic 
indicting that the person may not properly safeguard protected information"; and PC DC 
¶ (16(e) "personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in 
activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, professional, or community 
standing, . . . ".  
 
 I considered Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (PC MC) ¶ 17(c) "the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability trustworthiness, or good judgment"; and PC MC ¶ 
17(e) "the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress"; and PC MC ¶ 17(f) "the information was 
unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability".  The mitigating conditions 
for both the personal conduct and criminal conduct security concerns are similar.  They 
involve consideration of the minor nature of the offense, the passage of time, and the 
unusual or unique circumstances of the events to show that the events are unlikely to 
recur, and that Applicant did not commit the offenses.  Also the mitigating conditions 
under both guidelines consider that rehabilitation or positive steps can establish 
mitigation.  As noted under criminal conduct, the first two incidents happened in 1996 
and 1999.  Applicant was a young college student at the time.  Twelve years have 
passed since the possession of drug paraphernalia incident.  In the meantime, Applicant 
has seen drugs being used around him, but there is no evidence he used drugs since 
1996.  There is evidence he tried to stop others from using drugs.  The passage of time 
and his action in not using drugs mitigates the possession of drug paraphernalia 
incident.   
 
 There is evidence Applicant was involved in assaults and argumentative 
behavior, so PC MC 17(f) does not apply.  One domestic assault happened over nine 
years ago.  Applicant had an argument with his girlfriend and pushed her after she 
slapped him.  He also engaged in argumentative behavior leading to a physical 
encounter with his live-in girlfriend in March 2003 that resulted in an arrest, indictment, 
and criminal trial.  In July 2004, he provided personal information about a wife to her 
husband that led to an argument using profane and threatening language.  However 
since 2004, he has not been involved in any argumentative or violent incidents and he 
has a peaceful relationship with his current girlfriend.  Applicant established that since 
2004, over four year ago, he has not been involved in any improper personal conduct.  
He established that he moved to a different area, and changed his working and living 
environment.  He now has a professional position and is pursuing a master's degree in 
an accelerated program.  His friends now are mostly professionals.  Applicant has 
established by a preponderance of the evidence that since the last incident of personal 
conduct concern happened over four years ago, sufficient time has passed that such 
incidents are unlikely to recur.  He has established by a preponderance of that evidence 
 
13 
 
 
that he been rehabilitated by his new lifestyle, work environment, new friends, and living 
environment so that his previous actions do not case doubt on his reliability and 
trustworthiness.  He established these as positive steps taken to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulate, or duress.  Applicant has mitigated security 
concerns for personal conduct. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
“(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered that since the incidents 
of security concern Applicant completed college and is a highly regarded employee of a 
defense contractor.  I considered that two of the offenses leading to criminal conduct 
and personal conduct security concerns happened over twelve and nine years ago and 
are not likely to recur.  I considered he did not commit two criminal conduct offenses.  I 
considered he mitigated the personal conduct security concerns by establishing 
successful rehabilitation and that sufficient time has passed to show the offense are not 
likely to recur.  He has established that the criminal and personal conduct security 
concerns are unlikely to recur.  Overall, on balance the record evidence leaves me with 
no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising 
from his personal and criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:     
                                                                                                                                                                  
 
 
14 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
