 As defined in Appendix 10 of DoD Regulation 5220.2-R, as amended.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )
SSN: ----------------- )       ADP Case No. 07-18423
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
request for eligibility for a public trust position is denied.
On January 19, 2007, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust
Positions (SF 85P) to request eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  involving access to1
sensitive information as part of her employment with a defense contractor. After
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary
affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant2
Applicant’s request. On June 19, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the Revised
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
 I excluded Gx. 4 and Gx. 5 because they did not meet the authentication requirements of Directive Enclosure4
3, ¶ E3.1.20. (Tr. 22 - 33)
2
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E3
(personal conduct).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on August 6, 2008, and I convened a hearing on September 3, 2008.
The parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented five exhibits (Gx. 1 -
5).  Applicant testified in her own behalf, offered two exhibits admitted without objection4
as Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A and B, and presented one witness. DOHA received the
transcript (Tr.) on September 18, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the government alleged she owed approximately $19,003 for
19 delinquent debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.s. Applicant admitted without explanation all
of the Guideline F allegations. Under Guideline E, the government alleged that, by
answering “no” to question 22 (debts greater than 180 days past due)of the SF 85P she
submitted, Applicant had deliberately made a false statement to the government.
Applicant admitted she had answered “no” but denied any intent to falsify her answer or
to mislead the government about her finances. In addition to the facts admitted through
her response to the SOR, I make the following findings of fact based on my review of
the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits. 
Applicant is 23 years old and employed by a health care and medical insurance
company contracted to manage medical insurance claims and information for
TRICARE, the Department of Defense (DoD) medical insurance system for military
personnel and their families. She has held her current position since January 2007, and
has performed well in all her assigned duties. Friends, family, and co-workers hold
Applicant in high regard for her trustworthiness, hard work and reliability. (Gx. 1; Ax. A;
Ax. B; Tr. 74 - 77) Appellant is currently attending school to study surgical technology as
part of her plan to become a nurse. (Tr. 6 - 7)
Applicant graduated from high school in June 2003. Thereafter, she attended
technical and vocational schools through at least January 2007. She financed her tuition
through student loans and she has always lived at home with her mother and step-
father. She has accrued numerous other delinquent or past due debts. The background
investigation included a check of her credit (Gx. 3), which revealed she owed at least
$10,273 for 11 delinquent accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.l). The same credit report also
showed she had five student loans totaling approximately $7,308, which were in deferral
as of February 2007 (SOR ¶¶ 1.o - 1.s). She admitted in response to the SOR that, as
 Applicant has paid off her car. (Tr. 64)5
3
of January 2008, those loans were delinquent. In response to DOHA interrogatories
(Gx. 2), Appellant also conformed she owed the debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.m and 1.n.
Aside from occasional minimal payments of $10 or $20 depending on available
cash, Applicant has not paid or otherwise resolved any of the debts listed in the SOR.
She earns about $1,200 in take home pay each month. Aside from expenses related to
her car,  miscellaneous purchases and occasional dining out, and payments on a line of5
credit (World Finance) and a personal loan (Sunset Finance) (Tr. 67 - 69), Applicant has
no major expenses. Gx. 3 contains multiple account entries for both Sunset and World
Finance. This suggests that Applicant uses these creditors as a source of funds to pay
other debts on a recurring basis. Additionally, her mother and step-father have struggled
financially due to employment problems and, most recently, her step-father’s poor
health. Applicant contributes between $300 and $500 each month (sometimes much
more) to help her parents with mortgage, utilities, and other necessities. Applicant
estimates she has about $40 0r $50 remaining after expenses each month. (Tr. 61 - 67)
The debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.c arose when Applicant’s brother wrecked her car.
Because Applicant did not carry enough insurance to fix the car, it was a total loss and
Applicant stopped paying on the note. However, the creditor forgave the debt, resulting
in a taxable benefit to Applicant reflected in an IRS Form 1099 for the 2007 tax year.
There is no indication she did not pay her taxes for 2007. (Tr. 45 - 46)
Applicant contacted a credit counseling and debt consolidation company in
September 2007. She made one payment on a debt repayment plan, but left the
program in October 2007 when her step-father became ill. (Gx. 2) She also made
inquiries about financial counseling through her employer but never actually enrolled in
any program. (Tr. 52, 69 - 71)
On January 19, 2007, Applicant signed and submitted her SF 85P. In response
to question 22.b, which asked if she was, at that time, more than 180 days past due on
any loan or other financial obligation, she answered “no.” Applicant denied intentionally
falsifying her answer to mislead the government about her finances, claiming she had
never looked at her credit report before she submitted the SF 85P. However, she
admitted in her testimony that she was aware at the time she completed the form that
she had several past due debts. (Tr. 49 - 50, 58 - 59) She further claimed that she
contacted her company’s human resources department after she saw her credit report
and asked if she could make changes to the form. She was told it was too late to do so.
(Gx. 2; Tr. 50)
Policies
Each trustworthiness decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
 Directive. 6.3.6
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
4
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors6
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factor are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to sensitive
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
Guideline F (financial considerations), at AG ¶ 18, and Guideline E (personal conduct),
at AG ¶ 15.
A trustworthiness determination is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to7
have access to automated sensitive information. The government bears the initial
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to
deny or revoke a position of trust for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be
able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden,
it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. 
A person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.8
5
Analysis
Personal Conduct.
Applicant’s personal conduct may be a concern because, as stated in AG ¶ 15, is
that 
[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
The government’s information shows Applicant answered “no” to questions about
her finances. Gx. 1 reflects she answered the questions as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a;
however, to be disqualifying, it must be shown Applicant knowingly intended it as a false
answer so as to mislead the government by concealing her financial problems. Because
Applicant denied this allegation, the government bore the burden of “presenting
witnesses and other evidence to establish facts that have been controverted.”
(Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.14) In this case, there is sufficient evidence
showing Applicant has had debts that have been unresolved for well more than 180
days. It is also clear from her testimony that she was aware of her delinquent debts
when she completed the SF 85P, even if she did not have a complete and detailed
record of her debts that could be found in a credit report. 
Applicants are required to provide truthful answers at all times during the
investigative and adjudicative process. Withholding relevant information about one’s
background can potentially impede the government’s ability to make an accurate
decision about granting access to sensitive information. To satisfy her obligation to be
truthful, Applicant could have simply answered “yes” without providing any factual detail.
Yet her failure to do so and the information available information bearing on this issue
support application of the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities).
Applicant claimed she wanted to correct her answers after she saw her credit
report, but was told it was too late. Her claim requires consideration of the mitigating
condition at AG ¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts). Her
statement in this regard is credible. Applicant’s testimony was straightforward, and her
demeanor was sincere. It does not appear that Applicant was interviewed by a
government agent during her background investigation, so there was no confrontation
until DOHA adjudicators sent her interrogatories. While she knew about her debts and
deliberately answered “no” to question 22, her subsequent intent to correct must be
considered and that she is entitled to some benefit from AG ¶ 17(a). In light of all of the
available information about the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a, I conclude the security concerns
about Applicant’s personal conduct are mitigated. 
6
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Notwithstanding the exclusion of Gx. 4 and Gx. 5, the government presented
sufficient information to support the allegations in the SOR. However, SOR ¶ 1.l
appears to be a duplicate of the debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.j. Further, the debt listed at SOR
¶ 1.c is no longer a debt. Accordingly, I find for the Applicant as to SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.l.
Otherwise, available information shows she still owes at least $14,600 in past due
debts. As to her student loans, (SOR ¶¶ 1.o - 1.s total $7,308), available information
shows that they are no longer in deferral and are now past due. Available information
also shows that Applicant does not have the means to satisfy her debts. She helps
support her parents, leaving  her with less than $100 to spare each month. Accordingly,
available information requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations).
In response to the government’s information, Applicant has been unable to show
she has acted to resolve her debts, that her financial problems are past and will not
recur, or that she is getting any financial help and/or counseling to help improve her
finances. In short, there is no information before me that supports application of any of
the mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 20. Applicant has failed to overcome the adverse
information about her finances on which DOHA adjudicators relied when they issued the
SOR. 
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines E and F. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 23 years
old. She is a reliable worker for her company and a devoted daughter to her parents.
While she is sincere in her desire to resolve her financial problems, she is simply unable
to do so. There is no information about her finances that suggests her circumstances
will change in the near term. It is laudable that she is helping her parents through
difficult times, but the fact remains that her personal circumstances undermine the
government’s confidence about her suitability for a sensitive position. In short, the
favorable information in her background is insufficient to overcome the security
concerns about her already (at age 23) lengthy history of bad debt. The facts and
circumstances of Applicant’s finances present an unacceptable risk were she to be
granted access to sensitive information. 
 See footnote 6, supra.9
 See footnote 8, supra. 10
7
A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available information bearing on9
Applicant’s finances shows there are still doubts about her ability or willingness to
protect the government’s interests as her own. Because protection of the national
interest is paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be resolved for the
government.10
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d - 1.k: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m - 1.s: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a position of trust. Eligibility for access to sensitive
information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
