 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-16680 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard B. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), on January 8, 2007. On June 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 2, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 17, 
2008. The case was assigned to me on August 1, 2008. On August 15, 2008, a Notice 
of Hearing was issued scheduling the hearing for September 11, 2008. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. The Government offered four exhibits which were admitted as 
Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 - 4, without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
five exhibits which were marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, and admitted 
 
2 
 
 
without objection. The record was held open until September 25, 2008, to allow 
Applicant to offer additional documents. Applicant timely submitted a 14 page document 
which was admitted as AE F. Department Counsel’s response to Applicant’s post-
hearing submission is marked as Hearing Exhibit 1.  DOHA received the transcript of 
hearing on September 22, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 On July 17, 2008, Department Counsel prepared a motion to amend the SOR 
and forwarded the amendment to Applicant. The motion to amend added language to 
SOR ¶ 1.a. On July 30, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR amendment. I conclude 
Applicant had adequate notice of the motion to amend. There being no objection to the 
amendment from Applicant at hearing, the amendment was allowed in accordance with 
Enclosure 3, Additional Procedural Guidance, of the Directive, ¶ E3.1.17.  
 
 During the hearing, a minor amendment the SOR ¶ 1.a was made on the third 
line down, by changing the word “of” located between the words “alcohol” and “drugs” to 
word “or” due to a typographical error.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, and in his Answer to the Amendment to the SOR,  
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old computer technician employed with a Department of 
Defense contractor seeking a security clearance.  He has been employed with the 
defense contractor for the past five years. He served 12 years on active duty in the 
United States Navy. He separated as an E-6 with an Honorable Discharge. He has 
worked for defense contractors since separating from active duty. He has held a 
security clearance since 1991 with no security incidents. His highest level of education 
is an associates degree. He is married and has one son, age 24, from a previous 
marriage. (Tr at 4-6, 54; Gov 1; AE F.) 
 
In 2003, Applicant worked as a contractor on a military installation located in 
Germany. On July 8, 2003, Applicant played in a softball tournament and later 
volunteered to work in a booth during a fest held on the military installation. He and a 
couple friends went out after the fest was over around midnight. Applicant drank 
approximately four to five half liters of alcohol. (Tr at 35-36, 39.)   
 
Around 2 am, Applicant drove home. He was stopped by a German police officer. 
The German police officer smelled alcohol on Applicant’s breath. He was told to lock his 
car. He was put in the German police vehicle and taken to the German police station. At 
the station, his blood was taken and paperwork was filled out.  The military police 
arrived and Applicant was transported to the military police station. More paperwork was 
completed. Applicant’s driver’s license was confiscated and his base driving privileges 
 
3 
 
 
were revoked. He was released about an hour later. His car was recovered the next 
day.  (Tr at 37-41; Gov 3.) 
 
On the night of his apprehension, the only document Applicant received was a 
DA Form 4137, Evidence/Property Custody Document related to his driver’s license 
being confiscated.  Applicant consulted a judge advocate about whether any charges 
were being brought against him. She advised him that they were waiting for information 
from the German police.  Applicant transferred back to the U.S. in September 2003. He 
was scheduled to transfer back to the U.S. prior to his apprehension. He was given his 
license back just prior to moving back to the U.S.  In October 2003 after he moved to 
the U.S., he called the judge advocate again. She indicated that they had received no 
information from the German police.  (Tr at 27, 41; Gov 4; AE A.) 
 
While Applicant admits that he was arrested by the German police, he did not 
believe that charges were ever filed against him. He believed that administrative actions 
were taken rather than criminal charges filed.  He initially was not sure that it was an 
arrest.  He was not handcuffed or put in a jail cell. He was not photographed. No 
fingerprints were taken. It was his belief that these sort of actions would occur if he had 
been arrested. (Tr at 43; Answer to SOR; Answer to Amendment to SOR.)     
 
On January 8, 2007, Applicant submitted an e-QIP application as part of a 
periodic background investigation related to his security clearance. (Gov 1.) He 
answered, “No,” in response to section 23(d) which asks, “Have you ever been charged 
or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?” (Gov 2) Applicant answered 
“No” because he believed he was never charged with any offense. (Tr at 50; Answer to 
SOR.) 
 
On the same e-QIP application, Applicant answered, “No” in response to section 
23(f) which asks, “In the last 7 years, have you been arrested for, charged with, or 
convicted of any offense(s) not listed in response to a, b, c, d, or e above? (Leave out 
traffic fines of less than $150 unless the violation was alcohol or drug related.)” 
Applicant understood this question asked about other incidents that may have 
happened for which he was arrested.  In his response to the amendment to the SOR, he 
indicated, “I understood the question to refer to incidents other than ones already 
addressed by previous questions. This is also why I responded to the OPM investigator 
in this same fashion. As I stated in my last answer this was something that I should 
have asked for clarification about but failed to do so.” (Gov 1; Gov 2; Answer to 
Amendment to SOR.)  
 
It is also alleged that Applicant deliberately provided false information when he 
initially confirmed his negative responses on his security clearance application during an 
interview with an employee of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Specifically, 
he denied having been charged with or convicted of any charges associated with the 
use of alcohol or drugs.  The evidence in support of this allegation is a summary of the 
personal subject interview contained in the report of investigation apparently prepared 
by the OPM investigator. During the interview, the investigator specifically asked 
 
4 
 
 
whether Applicant had ever been charged with or convicted of any charges associated 
with the use of alcohol of drugs. Applicant answered, “No”. The investigator disclosed 
that the government was aware of his arrest for Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol 
in Germany in July 2003. Applicant admitted he had been arrested and discussed the 
arrest in detail. (Gov 4.) Applicant admits that disclosure of his arrest had the potential 
to have a negative impact on his security clearance. (Tr at 45.)   
 
Applicant maintains that the questions on the e-QIP application are not as clear 
as the questions pertaining to arrest history on previous applications. He provided a 
previous version of the security clearance application which asks the following 
pertaining to arrest history “18(a) Have you ever been arrested, charged, cited, held, or 
detained by Federal, State of other law enforcement or juvenile authorities regardless of 
whether the charge was dropped or dismissed or you were found not guilty?” He 
indicated he would have listed the arrest in response to this question. (Tr at 45-50; AE 
B.)  
 
Applicant’s wife wrote a letter on his behalf.  They married in March 2006. They 
began dating when they both were working in Germany. She has no firsthand 
knowledge of the July 2003 incident because she was sightseeing in another country. 
Applicant immediately told her about the incident. She is aware that his license was 
taken by the military police. He never received negative counseling by his employer. He 
continued to work in a classified environment.  His driver’s license was returned when 
he moved back to the U.S. He contacted the judge advocate’s office on at least two 
occasions. Having lived in Germany, she is aware that German authorities impose 
significant fines on individuals charged with DUIs. As far as they both know, no charges 
were ever imposed or fines levied.  She states her husband is honest and trustworthy. 
He is a good father and husband. Applicant has always held his security clearance in 
high regard and would never jeopardize national security. (AE C.)  
 
Applicant’s manager has known Applicant since January 2007. Applicant has 
been one of the best and most reliable people he has working for him.  Applicant is a 
very valuable team member because of his attention to detail and ability to figure out 
some of the most difficult problems. He is also willing to lend a hand to fellow team 
members. He socializes with Applicant outside of work and values him as a friend and 
mentor. (AE F at 10.)  
 
A family friend of Applicant’s has known him for three years. Their families spend 
almost every weekend together. She states Applicant is a very honest and kind 
individual with an extremely high level of integrity. When her mother underwent 
chemotherapy and radiation treatment for lung cancer, he would visit her every 
Saturday. He displayed a lot of compassion and concern. He serves as a mentor to her 
son. Applicant is an individual with strong morals and integrity. (AE D.) 
 
A performance appraisal covering January 22, 2007 to December 31, 2007, 
indicates that Applicant exceeds expectations. (AE E.) He was awarded numerous 
 
5 
 
 
awards and commendations during his Navy career. He has earned four Microsoft 
certifications which enhances his ability to make a contribution at work. (AE F.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
6 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 There are specific disqualifying conditions which may be raised. The following 
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (PC DC) potentially apply to the facts of this 
case: 
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities) potentially applies with respect to Applicant’s failure to list his July 2003 
arrest on his e-QIP application dated January 8, 2007. Applicant denies that he 
intentionally falsified his e-QIP application by omitting this arrest in response to section 
23(d) which reads: “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) 
related to alcohol of drugs?” and 23(f) which reads: “In the last 7 years, have you been 
arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not listed in response to a, b, 
c, d, or e above? (Leave out traffic fines of less than $150 unless the violation was 
alcohol or drug-related.)”  
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s 
state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct of circumstantial 
evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant claims that he responded “No” to section 23(d) because he believed he 
was never formally charged after his apprehension in Germany in July 2003. I find his 
explanation credible.  Applicant is not a lawyer. Although he was taken to the police 
station and his driver’s license was revoked. He never received any official documents 
pertaining to charges or a court date. Applicant contacted the local staff judge 
 
7 
 
 
advocate’s office prior to leaving Germany in September 2003 and after he transferred 
back to the U.S. in October 2003. The judge advocate’s office had no information as to 
whether the German authorities were going to pursue charges.  
 
 Applicant responded “No” to section 23(f) because he believed that question 
pertained to arrests, charges or convictions for offenses that were not mentioned in the 
previous four questions sections 23(a) – 23(e).  I find his explanation credible.  
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(b) (deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, 
or other official government representative) potentially applies in regards to the SOR ¶ 
1.b. It is alleged Applicant deliberately provided false information to an OPM employee  
during a July 9, 2007, interview when he denied having been charged with or convicted 
of any charges associated with the use of alcohol or drugs.  
 
 Applicant initially confirmed his negative response on his e-QIP application 
pertaining to his arrest history during an interview with an OPM employee on July 9, 
2007. As mentioned above, Applicant was under the belief that he was never charged 
with or convicted of any alcohol or drug offenses.  When the OPM employee mentioned 
that they had information that he was arrested for DUI in Germany in July 2003, 
Applicant acknowledged the arrest and provided additional details related to the arrest.  
While Applicant acknowledged that he knew that his arrest would potentially have a 
negative impact on his security clearance, his explanation that he believed that he was 
not charged or convicted of any alcohol or drug offense(s) remains plausible.    
 
 I find Applicant did not intentionally withhold information about his 2003 arrest on 
his security clearance application or during his subsequent interview on July 9, 2007.  
The personal conduct concern is found for Applicant.  
   
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 17-year 
history of handling classified information with no security incidents. I considered his 
record of military service and his favorable duty performance. Although Applicant admits 
in hindsight that he should have asked for clarification when completing his security 
clearance application, his explanation for not listing the July 2003 arrest for DUI is 
credible.  His explanation for not initially disclosing the arrest during an interview about 
his background investigation on July 9, 2007 is also credible. Applicant learned a very 
difficult lesson. He understands that on future security clearance applications, he should 
err on providing too much information as opposed to minimal information.  
 
I find for Applicant under Personal Conduct. 
  
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
    
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant   
   Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
