 
 1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-10795 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to Criminal Conduct, 
Sexual Behavior, and Personal Conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on March 2, 2006. On February 28, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines J, D, and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 17, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received his response on March 19, 
2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 14, 2008, and I received 
 
 2
the case assignment on April 16, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 8, 
2008, scheduling the hearing for June 17, 2008. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through C. 
Department Counsel had no objection to AE A and AE C, but did object to AE B on the 
grounds of hearsay and lack of timely submission. AE B is a letter dated June 13, 2008 
from Applicant’s therapist. After argument by counsel, I overruled Department Counsel’s 
objection, and admitted AE A through C. Tr. 20-22. Applicant testified on his own behalf. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 27, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations as alleged. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
   
Applicant is a 31-year-old Information Release Officer, who has been employed 
by a defense contractor since August 2005. GE 1. He previously held a security 
clearance when employed as a compliance specialist by a Government agency from 
January 2003 to May 2005. In May 2005, he resigned from that position after being 
charged with sexual abuse and simple assault in lieu of being involuntarily terminated, 
discussed infra. Applicant. GE 1. He seeks a security clearance because there are 
occasions where “it would be very useful to have one.” Tr. 176. 
 
Applicant completed his undergraduate studies in April 2002, and was awarded a 
Bachelor of Arts degree. He attended graduate school from September 2002 to May 
2004, and was awarded a Master’s Degree. GE 1, Tr. 172-173. Applicant was married 
from May 2001 to December 2004. That marriage ended by divorce. He has no 
dependents. GE 1. 
 
The thrust of this case centers on an incident that occurred in August 2003 in a 
major metropolitan area. While walking to work, Applicant noticed a young woman who 
he found “attractive” and stated “I wanted to go up and talk to her, get to know her.” Tr. 
105. Applicant said “hello and talked to her for a moment and she turned around and 
that was when I – that was when I groped her (breast).” Tr. 106, 108. After being 
groped, she reacted, “What the [expletive deleted] are you doing?” Tr. 107. Referring to 
what happened next, Applicant testified, “Well I said, “I’m sorry. It’s – I’m sorry, it’s 
nothing personal.” “That’s a stupid thing to say in hindsight, but that was what I said.” Tr. 
108. Applicant initially ran “a few paces” and continued on to work. At that time, no law 
enforcement involvement occurred because Applicant left the scene before the victim 
could summon the authorities. Tr. 109. 
 
In May 2004, the victim later saw Applicant near the location where the incident 
occurred. This time, she was successful in summoning the police. Applicant was 
confronted by the police, and was interviewed and photographed. Later that month, the 
police issued an arrest warrant and Applicant was charged with sexual abuse and 
 
 3
simple assault. In November 2004, Applicant appeared in court and the sexual abuse 
charge was dismissed, and he was convicted of simple assault pursuant to his guilty 
plea. He was sentenced to 6 months incarceration, which was suspended, 18 months 
probation, 60 hours of community service, 6 months mandatory behavioral counselling 
and ordered to pay approximately $250 in fines and court costs. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 2.a., 
3.a.). GE 6 – 8. 
 
In May 2005, as a result of his arrest and conviction discussed supra, Applicant 
resigned in lieu of being terminated from his job as a compliance specialist with a 
Government agency. (SOR ¶ 3.b.). Tr. 71-72. 
 
Applicant’s immediate supervisor testified on his behalf. He stated he has been 
Applicant’s supervisor for three years, that he knows him well, and has written three 
evaluations on Applicant, which were all commendable, i.e. “commendable, exceptional 
being the top.” He found Applicant to have many good qualities to include honesty and 
dependability. He added that he was familiar with Applicant’s past and the underlying 
facts in the SOR, and in spite of Applicant’s past supports him for a security clearance. 
Tr. 24-37. 
 
Applicant’s father testified on his behalf. He stated he and his wife were present 
to support their son. He described the relationship with his son as “close,” and they 
share many interests. In that regard, he stated that Applicant informed him of all aspects 
regarding his May 2004 charges. He has counselled his son “to do the right thing,” and 
“deal with the consequences of the actions that he had done.” He stated their family has 
been and remains very involved with their Church, and that their Church has been a 
significant source of support for Applicant during this process. Based on how well he 
knows his son, the fact this incident occurred over four years ago, and the progress 
Applicant has made, Applicant’s father believes Applicant has put this incident behind 
him. He communicates with his son by telephone. Tr. 37-52. 
 
Applicant’s former girlfriend testified on his behalf. She met him at Church and 
dated him for approximately six months in 2005. She began dating him while he was on 
probation, and stated Applicant informed her of his past assault on their first date. She 
was initially taken aback, but proceeded with caution. She stated that while she and 
Applicant were dating, he did not give her any reason to feel uncomfortable nor did she 
notice anything unusual about his behavior. She has remained friends with Applicant 
since they stopped dating. Tr. 52-68. 
 
Applicant spoke of the important role his Church has played and continues to 
play in his life. Applicant was precluded from attending his Church from August 2004 to 
November 2007 as a result of this incident. As a precondition of being allowed to return 
to Church, he met with his Church leaders, came to terms with his actions, repented, 
and took the necessary corrective action to ensure he did not make the same mistakes 
again. One of the preconditions of being allowed to return to Church was to meet with 
his therapist, who communicated with Church leaders regarding Applicant’s progress. 
Tr. 68-78. 
 
 4
 In March 2004, Applicant was involved in an incident similar to the one that 
occurred in August 2003. His in-laws took him and his then-wife to a vacation in Mexico 
around the time they were completing graduate school. While on vacation and out of the 
presence of his in-laws and wife, Applicant groped an 18-year-old woman on her breast 
he met at their hotel. He stated he did so “impulsively” and that he “was not acting on 
[his] best judgment.” The woman reported her being groped by Applicant to the hotel 
management, who in turn reported the incident to his in-laws and wife. Applicant stated 
“things fell apart from that point.” After this incident, Applicant and his wife separated 
and eventually divorced. Tr. 78-84, 130-132. 
 
After Applicant’s wife left, he sought counselling in April 2004 and continued with 
counselling until February 2008. Applicant’s therapist diagnosed him with “Impulse 
Control Disorder NOS 312.3 (due to ego-dystonic involvement with pornography); 
Partner Relationship Problems V61.10; r/o depression.” GE 3. He initially started 
counselling in a group format, which he participated for “about a year” and then 
switched to individual counselling. Applicant’s therapist informed him he was moving 
from the area and the decision to terminate counselling was “mutual.” Applicant stated 
while employed by the Government agency, he held a top secret clearance, which was 
later upgraded to sensitive compartmented information. He held a clearance during the 
2003 and 2004 groping incidents. Tr. 84-88, 90, 95-96. 
 
 Applicant provided the following explanation regarding how he could engage in 
such behavior given his background: 
 
You know, when I look at it now I don’t know the answer to that question. I 
know that at the time I was – I was not acting in my best judgment. I felt – 
felt isolated in the marriage relationship. I was ashamed of the struggles 
that I was having in my marriage. 
 
I knew that I was not living up to the standards of the Church, and I got 
caught in, you know, a bit of a downward spiral that culminated with this 
incident. 
 
And if I could go back and reverse those decisions, I absolutely would, but 
the best that I could do was to exert my full effort into recovering, taking 
responsibility for what I did.  
 
I wanted to save the marriage relationship, but I had made decisions that 
had taken it out of my hands. My wife was not – she didn’t want to 
continue with that. And, looking back, I don’t blame her. Tr. 88-89. 
 
On cross examination, Department Counsel reviewed Applicant’s counseling 
records with him. Applicant acknowledged there were several additional “incidents” that 
occurred in addition to the two incidents already identified. When pressed for a number, 
Applicant conceded there were “[m]ore than three, less than ten.” Tr. 117. These other 
incidents occurred on public transportation or on the street. Tr. 118. Applicant testified 
he has gotten over his fetish with breasts, which was identified in his counseling records 
 
 5
in July 2004. GE 3, Tr. 132. Applicant’s counseling records also identified his having 
sent text messages to women regarding their breasts and having been with a woman, 
who worked for an escort service. GE 3, Tr. 133-136. The counseling records also 
reported that that Applicant was being treated for issues pertaining to being “sober as it 
pertains to pornography” and ongoing issues with nocturnal masturbation. GE 3, Tr. 
139-140. The counseling records document four years of therapy, which Department 
Counsel queried the Applicant about at some length. These records document a 
number of sexually related issues that Applicant had discussed with his therapist, and 
how these problems affected his ability to function as a well adjusted responsible 
member of society. GE 3, Tr. 132-171. 
 
 Applicant submitted a Final Summary Report from this therapist dated June 13, 
2008, which is summarized in part: 
 
1. Applicant initiated therapy in April 2004 for problems with his personal life, 
including his marriage, feelings of depression, and compulsive sexual 
behaviors that involved groping women’s breasts. 
 
2. Applicant was diagnosed with Impulse Control Disorder, NOS, DSM IV code 
313.30.  
 
3. His treatment involved twice monthly individual and weekly group 
psychotherapy sessions for about 24 months. The individual counseling was 
later reduced to monthly sessions.  
 
4. Applicant’s therapy continued until February 2008, primarily as a result of his 
therapist moving out of state, but also due to mutual agreement that the work 
of psychotherapy had concluded. The therapist determined it was 
unnecessary to refer Applicant to another local psychotherapeutic recourse. 
AE B. 
 
Applicant submitted a signed, sworn statement from a religious leader from his 
Church. This religious leader has known Applicant since June 2005, and dealt with 
Applicant after he had been “disfellowshipped” through a Church disciplinary council. He 
met with Applicant from June 2005 to November 2007 in his capacity as a religious 
leader. He concluded by stating Applicant had atoned for his actions and made the 
requisite changes in his life to avoid past bad behavior. He found Applicant to 
dependable, honest and trustworthy and believes Applicant would be a positive 
responsible and loyal employee to any employer including the U.S. Government. AE C. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 6
                                                          
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”1 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).2 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
1 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something less 
than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
2 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
 
 7
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Conclusions 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 The Government established its case under Guideline J by Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented that Applicant was issued an arrest warrant in May 
2004 that he was charged with sexual abuse and simple assault in May 2004, and was 
convicted pursuant to his guilty plea of simple assault in November 2004, and 
sentenced. 
 
Of the six Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions listed under AG  ¶ 31, two 
are applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
Of the five Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions listed under AG ¶ 32, two are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 
 
 
 8
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for Sexual Behavior is set out in 
AG ¶ 12: 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 The Government established its case under Guideline D by Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented that Applicant sexually abused a woman in a 
public area in August 2003. 
Of the four Sexual Behavior Disqualifying Conditions listed under AG ¶ 13, four 
are applicable: 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
Of the four Sexual Behavior Mitigating Conditions listed under AG ¶ 14, two are 
potentially applicable: 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the Guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
 9
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
The Government established its case under Guideline E by Applicant’s 
admissions and evidence presented that he sexually abused a woman in a public area 
while holding a security clearance, and that he resigned in lieu of being terminated from 
his Government position as a result of conduct, described supra, in May 2005. 
 
Of the seven Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions listed under ¶ AG 15, 
one is applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, . . .  . 
 
Of the seven Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions listed under AG ¶ 17, two 
are potentially applicable: 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant’s arrest warrant issued in May 2004 following his sexual abuse of a 
woman in a public area in August 2003 brought to the forefront his criminal conduct, 
sexual behavior, and personal conduct concerns. However, the evidence developed a 
much broader account than a single incident of groping on a public street. Not long after 
Applicant’s groping incident in August 2003, he groped a woman’s breast while on 
vacation with his wife and in-laws.  
 
During cross examination, Department Counsel uncovered more incidents than 
the two already identified. He gleaned from Applicant that he had been involved with 
more than three, but less than ten similar incidents that occurred on public 
transportation or on the street. Applicant’s therapy records document a four-year 
struggle to overcome not only Applicant’s infatuation with breasts and socially 
unacceptable behavior, but also other sexually dysfunctional issues. His therapy 
recently ended in February 2008, and although ended in part by “mutual agreement,” 
the primary reason was prompted as a result of Applicant’s therapist moving out of 
state.  
 
 10
                                                          
 Applicant’s counseling records note in great detail the groping incidents and 
other sexually dysfunctional problems that have plagued him. To Applicant’s credit, he 
has made great strides in coming to terms with his past, and has the good fortune of 
having very supportive parents and a Church community that he has reconnected with. 
However, the repetitive nature of Applicant’s reprehensible conduct and the extremely 
poor judgment he exercised while holding a security clearance causes me to have 
serious doubts whether it is in the best interest of national security to grant Applicant a 
security clearance. It is noteworthy from Applicant’s testimony that his strong levels of 
religious and family influence failed to prevent his inappropriate conduct. 
 
 I find the facts warrant application of all the Disqualifying Conditions listed, supra. 
The only Mitigating Conditions listed supra that I find partially applicable are those under  
AGs ¶¶ 32(d), 17(d) and 17(e). Applicant has acknowledged his behavior and did obtain 
counseling; however, I am reluctant to accept the notion such behavior is unlikely to 
recur given the fact Applicant recently terminated therapy. Further time is required to 
evaluate Applicant’s behavior. Applicant’s family, employer, and some of friends are 
aware of his past.  
 
I am required to consider Applicant’s overall questionable behavior when 
evaluating the seriousness of the conduct alleged in the SOR to determine factors such 
as the extent to which his behavior is recent; the likelihood of recurrence; Applicant’s 
explanations concerning the circumstances of the incidents alleged; and his 
rehabilitation.3 
 
 Under the totality of the circumstances, I find Applicant’s behavior is relatively 
recent and not isolated. Considering his past behavior, the nature and seriousness of 
his misconduct, and his unwillingness to avoid unlawful and/or unacceptable conduct 
over a period of time, I find his favorable information is not sufficient to mitigate 
Guidelines J, D, and E security concerns. His behavior raises questions about his ability 
and willingness to follow the law, and ultimately, to protect classified information. His 
conduct in which he exercised extremely poor judgment on a number of occasions, 
spanning a several year period, weighs against a finding of rehabilitation and positive 
behavioral changes.  
 
To conclude, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the 
whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis does not support a 
favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”4 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant has 
3 ISCR Case No. 04-09959 at 3 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006). 
 
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
 11
not mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he 
is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline D:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
        Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 3, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
         Subparagraph 3.a.:   Against Applicant 
         Subparagraph 3.b.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
