 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )  ISCR Case No. 08-02930 
                                                            )                                                                                           
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire,  Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the hearing transcript, pleadings, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct, but failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations.   Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) Questionnaire on August 27, 2007. On July 14, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On August 8, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 26, 
2008. I convened a hearing on September 19, 2008, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant.  The Government called no witnesses and introduced five exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through 5 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant 
testified on her own behalf. She called no witnesses and offered no exhibits. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on September 22, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains 16 allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.p.) and one allegation of disqualifying conduct 
under AG E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶ 2.a.).  In her Answer to the SOR, dated August 
8, 2008, Applicant admitted all Guideline F and Guideline E allegations. At her hearing, 
she admitted again that she was responsible for and had not paid the debts alleged on 
the SOR. She also admitted that she failed to acknowledge the debts in response to 
Question 28a on the e-QIP she signed and certified on August 27, 2008.  Applicant’s 
admissions are admitted herein as findings of fact. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 21, 35; Ex. D.)  
 
 Applicant is 27 years old, unmarried, and the mother of a six-year-old child.  She 
is a high school graduate and holds an associate of arts degree in general studies.  She 
has been employed as a contract security guard for at least seven years.  From 
September 2004 until June 2006, Applicant worked full-time as a contract security 
guard.  From June 2006 until December 2006, she had part-time employment as a 
security guard. She resumed full-time employment as a security guard in January 2007 
with her present employer, a government contractor. She was employed in that status 
until July 2008, when her eligibility for a security clearance was suspended as a result of 
receiving the SOR.  She has been unemployed since July 2008.  She is not receiving 
unemployment compensation. (Ex. 1; Tr. 39-43, 49-52.)   
  
 The SOR alleged, and Applicant admitted, that she was responsible for 16 
financial delinquencies totaling approximately $15,503. The SOR alleged the following 
delinquencies: an unsatisfied deficiency balance of approximately $8,745 owed to a 
credit union for a charged-off loan financing an automobile that was voluntarily 
repossessed (SOR ¶ 1.h.); a $108 debt, in collection status, to a utility company which 
was unpaid as of June 24, 2008 (SOR ¶1.a.); a $760 debt, in collection status, for cable 
television service, which was unpaid as of June 24, 2008 (SOR ¶1.b.); a $512 debt, in 
collection status, which was unpaid as of June 24, 2008 (SOR ¶1.c.); a medical debt of 
$1,123, referred for collection and unpaid as of June 24, 2008 (SOR ¶1.d.); a debt of 
$897, referred for collection and unpaid as of June 24, 2008 (SOR ¶1.e.); a debt of 
$536, referred for collection and unpaid as of June 24, 2008 (SOR ¶1.f.); and a debt of 
$401 to a utility company, which had been referred for collection and was unpaid as of 
June 24, 2008 (SOR ¶1.g.). (Ex. 5.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR also alleged the following unpaid financial delinquencies: a $345 debt 
in collection status, which was unpaid as of September 7, 2007 (SOR ¶1.i.); a medical 
debt of $286, referred for collection and unpaid as of September 7, 2007 (SOR ¶1.j.); a  
debt of $150, referred for collection and unpaid as of September 7, 2007 (SOR ¶1.k.); 
and debts of $72, $111, $894, $330, and $233, all in collection status and all unpaid as 
of September 7, 2007 (SOR ¶¶ 1.l., 1.m., 1.n., 1.o., and 1.p.)  (Ex. 2.) 
  
 Applicant’s current financial problems began in about June 2006 when her 
employer put her on part-time work and pay for six months.  From January 2007 until 
she was suspended in July 2008, she held a full-time job. Her credit bureau report of 
September 7, 2007, showed two judgments, one for $703 and one for $1,229, filed 
against her in 2001. The record reflected that Applicant satisfied both judgments in May 
2005. (Tr. 21-22;  Ex.2.) 
 
 Applicant has not received child support from her son’s father for over a year. 
She is receiving some support from her state’s social services program. Her son was 
born prematurely and suffers from asthma and allergies; he requires year-round medical 
attention for these conditions. Applicant reported that a Federal health insurance 
program was paying her son’s medical expenses.  (Tr. 22, 44, 53.)  
 
 Applicant inquired about consumer credit counseling in July 2007 and May 2008.  
She has discussed credit counseling over the telephone with a representative of a credit 
counseling program, but she has been advised that she lacks sufficient financial stability 
to take advantage of the program’s services.  Applicant applied for debt consolidation 
loans in May, July, and August 2008. Each time she applied, she was turned down 
because of her weak financial position.  At the time of her hearing, she was not current 
on her rent payments.  (Tr. 28-29, 31-32, 38.)  
 
 Applicant completed and certified her e-QIP on August 27, 2007. In response to 
Section 28, entitled “Your Financial Delinquencies,” Applicant responded “no” to 
Question 28a.  Question 28a reads: “In the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days 
delinquent on any debt(s)?”  Directions following Question 28a read: “If you answered 
“Yes” to [28]a . . . provide an entry for each occurrence to report.” 
 
 Applicant admitted she knew she had debts that were over 180 days delinquent 
when she completed Question 28a.  She was unsure and didn’t know about all of her 
debts.  However, when she tried to answer “yes,” she did not know how many debts to 
list. She was advised by the person who helped all employees at her company fill out 
their security clearances to answer the question “no” and address the delinquencies 
later.   (Tr. 27, 54-57.)        
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
 
4 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable 
or unwilling to pay her creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties. Many of her current 
delinquencies began in about 2006, when her income was significantly reduced for 
about six months. However, from January 2007 until July 2008, she was employed full 
time. Applicant admitted that the 16 financial delinquencies alleged on the SOR 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
remained unresolved, resulting in substantial debt which continues to the present day, a 
situation which raises concerns about Applicant’s good judgment.   
 
Applicant has experienced reductions in her employment and, subsequently, her 
pay.  Her young son has health problems which require medical attention.  Applicant 
has not received financial counseling. While she did not dispute her debts and admitted 
that she was responsible for them, it was not clear that she understood her financial 
problems or how to resolve them. She had no plan in place to systematically resolve her 
substantial delinquent debt and prepare for future contingencies. I conclude that AG ¶ 
20(b) applies in part in mitigation, but that AG ¶ 20(a), AG ¶ 20(c), AG ¶ 20(d) and AG 
20(e) do not apply in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, a personal conduct security concern arises when an 
applicant displays “[conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations” because such 
conduct “can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability 
to protect classified information.” Additionally, Guideline E takes special note of “any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.” AG ¶ 15. 
 
 I have carefully considered all of the potentially disqualifying conditions under 
Guideline E.  I have especially considered AG ¶ 16(a).1 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant falsified material facts on her August 27, 2007 e-
QIP by failing to admit any current financial delinquencies of over 90 days and any 
financial delinquencies within the past seven years of over 180 days. Applicant admitted 
the falsification but denied that it was intentional.  She reported that the person who was 
tasked by her employer to advise employees in completing their e-QIP applications 
advised her to answer “no” to question 28a and provide the details of her financial 
delinquencies at a later time.  Applicant complied with this advice.  
 
 I carefully observed Applicant’s demeanor when she testified about completing 
her e-QIP and consulting with the advisor her employer provided about how she should 
answer Question 28a.  I found Applicant’s statement of her state of mind to be credible, 
and I conclude that her falsification was not intended to mislead or deceive.  
Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 16 (a) does not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
 
 
 
 
 
1 AG ¶16(a) reads as follows: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security 
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” 
 
7 
 
 
Whole Person Concept  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial problems began 
at least two years ago and continued while she was steadily employed. She has not 
taken affirmative action to contact her creditors to discuss how she might pay or resolve 
her 16 delinquent debts. Her many financial delinquencies and her lack of attention to 
them continue to raise security concerns.  Her current financial overextension is serious: 
she lacks sufficient funds to pay her monthly rent, and she has been unable to find 
work. It is unclear at this time how she will support herself and her young son. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the personal conduct security concerns but 
failed to mitigate security concerns arising from her financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.p: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:             FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
                        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
