 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05310 
                                                            )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.   His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(EQIP) Questionnaire on January 23, 2008. On July 14, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 11, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 25, 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
2008. I convened a hearing on September 22, 2008 to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant.  The Government called no witnesses and introduced six exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through 6 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and called no witnesses. He introduced two exhibits, which 
were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A and B and admitted to the record 
without objection.1   
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open for one week, until close of 
business September 29, 2008, so that Applicant could provide additional information for 
the record. Applicant timely filed a document clarifying his employment between 
December 1992 and November 1995 and two of his personal checking account 
statements. I marked Applicant’s additional submissions as his Ex. C, D, and E, and 
they were admitted to the record without objection.  DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
of the hearing on September 26, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains seven allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.g.)  In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted five of the allegations (¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.f., and 1.g.); he denied 
two allegations (¶¶ 1.d. and 1.e.). Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of 
fact. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 19-20, 28-31, 35-46, 55-63.)  
 
 Applicant is 54 years old and a high school graduate. He has been married to his 
wife for 34 years.  They are the parents of five adult children.  All of Applicant’s children 
are self-supporting, although he provides some financial help to a daughter who has 
three children. Applicant’s annual gross salary is approximately $41,000.  His wife’s 
annual gross salary is about $25,000. Applicant also receives about $13,000 annually in 
military retirement pay.  His total gross annual household income is approximately 
$80,000. (Tr. 25-27, 73-74.) 
 
 Applicant enlisted in the U.S. military at age 18 and served for 20 years.  He held 
a security clearance while in the military. He retired in 1992. (Tr. 25-26, 89-90; Ex. 1.) 
 
 Since his retirement, Applicant has held a number of civilian jobs.  From June 
1992 to December 1992, he worked as a sales associate. From December 1992 until 
November 1995, he was a computer helpdesk technician. From December 1995 to 
February 2003, he was employed as a contract computer technician. He earned about 
$42,000 a year in that job.  (Tr. 30-31.) 
 
 
1 While the Government did not object to the admission of Applicant’s Ex. B, Counsel noted that Applicant 
had previously submitted the document identified as Ex. B in response to DOHA interrogatories on June 
19, 2008. (Ex. 3 at 9.)  
 
3 
 
 
 In 1996, Applicant’s wife became ill, required surgery, and lost her job.  Applicant 
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in January 1996 (SOR ¶ 1.f.) In May 1996, the 
bankruptcy court discharged approximately $14,000 in debts owed by Applicant and his 
wife. Applicant’s wife’s health improved, and, with a few exceptions, she has been 
steadily employed since the end of 1996.  (Tr. 28-30, 69-70; Ex. 6.) 
 
 For about 3½ years between 2003 and September 2006, Applicant had a series 
of short-term jobs as a contractor.  In September 2006, he began to work as a computer 
technician for his present employer, a government contractor. His job requires a security 
clearance.  (Tr. 30-32.) 
 
 In 1993, Applicant and his wife purchased a home. In 2004, they sold the home 
and realized a profit of about $41,000. They did not purchase another home, but used 
some of the proceeds from the sale of their house to pay credit card debt.  (Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 In 1999 and 2000, Applicant opened two credit card accounts with the same 
creditor. He defaulted on these accounts in about 2004, and both accounts were placed 
for collection. These accounts are alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b. of the SOR. The 
delinquency alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. is approximately $4,515. The delinquency alleged at 
SOR 1.b. is approximately $2,707. Applicant entered into a judgment agreement with 
the creditor on the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. The judgment entered against Applicant 
reduced the debt to $2,500, and he agreed to pay the creditor $25 a month, with interest 
continuing to accrue. Applicant believes he has paid about $600 on the debt, and he 
estimates it will take him approximately 80 months to pay off the principal amount of the 
debt.  He has taken no action to pay the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. (Tr. 37-42.) 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied he had not satisfied a delinquent 
medical debt of approximately $492 alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. He provided a cancelled 
check for $60, $30 of which he claimed was related to the medical debt alleged at SOR 
¶ 1.d. He also provided documentation that showed insurance payments of $445.  At his 
hearing, he stated he had recently paid a balance due of $20 on the account. He failed 
to provide documentation to show that his payments were directly related to the debt 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. or that the debt had been satisfied in full. (Ex. 3 at 8, 9; Ex. B; Tr. 
60-63.) 
 
 Applicant also denied a debt in collection status alleged at SOR ¶1.e. He claimed 
that the debt of approximately $205 to an electric company had been satisfied. In a 
post-hearing submission, Applicant provided copies of his bank statement corroborating 
that the debt had been satisfied by a payment of $104.50 on April 9, 2008, and a 
payment of $105.28 0n May 12, 2008. (Tr. 55-60; Ex. D; Ex. E.)  
 
 In the last seven years, Applicant has purchased a number of automobiles. In 
2001, he acquired a loan of $27,000 to purchase an automobile. In 2005, the 
automobile was voluntarily repossessed and sold, leaving a deficiency balance of 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
$7,000.2 In 2002, he borrowed $33,000 to purchase a vehicle for his wife. He was 
unable to make the monthly loan payments on the vehicle, and it was also voluntarily 
repossessed in 2005. After it was sold by the creditor, Applicant owed a deficiency 
balance of approximately $13,000, which he did not pay. The debt grew to 
approximately $14,400, was placed for collection, and was alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. The 
debt remains unsatisfied.  (Tr.  42-46.) 
 
 In October 2005, Applicant purchased another vehicle with a loan of   
approximately $20,000.  Applicant’s monthly payments on this vehicle are $470. In May 
2007, Applicant borrowed $10,000 to purchase another vehicle for his wife. In February 
2008, he traded that vehicle to a dealer, and took out another loan of $25,000 to 
purchase still another vehicle. His monthly payments on his most recently-acquired 
vehicle are $485.  (Tr. 48-52.) 
 
 In June 19, 2008, Applicant responded to financial interrogatories sent to him by 
DOHA.  In a personal financial statement, he reported his net monthly income as $2,340 
and his wife’s net monthly income as $1,630. He also reported that each month he 
received $1,019 in military retirement pay. His total net monthly income was $4,989.  
After subtracting his monthly living expenses, Applicant had $20 remaining at the end of 
each month. He reported he had owned no real estate and had no savings. At his 
hearing, Applicant reported an increase of $54 in his net monthly salary, making his 
total net monthly income $5,043.  (Ex. 3; Ex. A.) 
 
 Applicant listed his monthly expenses in a personal financial statement he 
prepared for his hearing as follows: rent: $1,220; utilities, cable and internet: $578; 
payments on loans for his two automobiles: $952; medical insurance: $226; car 
insurance: $370; gas at $4.00 per gallon: $512; automobile repairs and upkeep: $30; 
clothing: $100; groceries: $800; miscellaneous: $125; and payment of debt identified at 
SOR ¶ 1.b. These expenses left him with a monthly remainder of $41.  He indicated he 
could cut some of his costs by spending about $270 less for gasoline, $50 less for 
clothing, and $200 less for groceries. He noted he no longer paid $64 a month for his 
son’s orthodontia. Applicant acknowledged that his monthly expenses related to paying 
for, operating, and insuring his automobiles were approximately $1,900 or 38% of his 
monthly income. (Ex. A; Tr. 74-78)  
 
 Applicant has not had financial credit counseling. He has lived from paycheck to 
paycheck for most of his life.  (Tr. 85, 89.) 
 
 
 
  
 
2 This debt was not alleged on the SOR and is included only to show Applicant’s pattern of debt 
acquisition to purchase automobiles. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable 
or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g.,loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties that spanned the period from  
at least 1996, when he declared Chapter 7 bankruptcy, to the present time. While his 
wife fell ill and required surgery in 1996, she recovered and was back at work by the 
end of 1996.  Applicant and his wife have, for the most part, been steadily employed 
 
7 
 
 
since he retired from the military in 1992. Their annual income, including his military 
pension, is approximately $80,000. 
 
 Applicant provided documentation to corroborate that he had paid a debt of 
$205, alleged at SOR ¶1.e.  He failed to provide documentation to prove that he had 
satisfied a medical debt of $492, alleged at SOR ¶1.d. He provided documentation to 
show he had entered into a settlement agreement to pay the creditor identified at SOR ¶ 
1.b. $25 a month, plus accruing interest, on a debt of $2,500, an arrangement that will 
cost him money in interest and not retire the debt for many years. He acknowledged two 
debts, totaling almost $19,000, but has made no arrangements to pay those debts.   
 
Applicant had not received financial counseling. While he admitted his financial 
delinquencies, it was not clear that he understood his financial problems or how to 
resolve them. He was financially over-extended, had no savings, and had very little 
money left at the end of each month. Nearly 40% of his income went to maintain, 
operate, and insure his two automobiles. He had no plan in place to systematically 
resolve his substantial delinquent debt and prepare for future contingencies. I conclude 
that none of the Financial Consideration mitigating conditions apply to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 54 
years. His financial problems began at least 12 years ago. During that time, he has lived 
from one paycheck to another.  Despite an annual income of $80,000, he has not taken 
affirmative action to live within his means and to pay or resolve his substantial 
delinquent debts. His lack of attention to his financial delinquencies continues to raise 
 
8 
 
 
security concerns. He has borrowed large sums of money to purchase automobiles.  
Nearly 40% of his monthly income goes to pay his automobile loans and to maintain 
and insure his automobiles. Despite a steady income for several years, he failed to 
budget his income to satisfy his many other debts. Instead, he continued on a pattern of 
over-extension, which, in the past, led to vehicle repossessions. He has a low net 
remainder at the end of every month, and he has no savings, raising concerns about his 
judgment and potential financial vulnerability. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s judgment and eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
his financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:           Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
