 
1 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-04273 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his family members 
in Cuba and his possession of a current Cuban passport. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
On July 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence and Guideline C, Foreign Preference. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 13, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to another 
Administrative Judge on August 25, 2008, and reassigned to me on September 16, 
 
2 
 
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 9, 2008. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on September 23, 2008. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on September 30, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Cuba. Applicant did not object and the request was approved. 
The request and the attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were 
included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The facts administratively noticed are 
set out in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Evidence 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibit (AE) A, which was 
received without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was born in 
Cuba. He attended college in Cuba for a period but did not graduate. While in college 
his eyes were opened to the nature of the Cuban government and the opportunities and 
freedom that the United States offered. He attempted to escape Cuba on a raft in 1988. 
He was unsuccessful and returned to Cuba. He left college and went to work. He 
eventually met his ex-wife in Havana. She is a United States citizen. She visited him in 
Cuba on several occasions and they married in 1994. She sponsored him to immigrate 
to the United States. Applicant came to the U.S. in 1995. They divorced in 1997. He 
became a U.S. citizen in 2000.1  
 
 Applicant’s parents and one brother are citizens and residents of Cuba. His 
family members are farmers with no direct connection to the Cuban government. He 
also has extended family members, including cousins, who are citizens and residents of 
Cuba. He has another brother that is a Cuban citizen who lives in the U.S. with 
Applicant as a permanent resident. He also has other cousins who are Cuban citizens 
living in the United States.2  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 17-21, 26-27; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 23-24, 27-30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant visited Cuba on four occasions between 2001 and 2007. He started 
dating a Cuban citizen during his trips to Cuba. He has known her since they were in 
school. They married in Cuba during his trip there in 2007. Applicant has no children. 
He has sponsored his wife to immigrate to the United States and he hopes that she will 
be able to arrive here by the end of 2008. She was an office worker with no association 
with the Cuban government, but she is currently not working.3 
 
 Applicant is a dual citizen of the United States and Cuba. He continued to 
maintain and use a Cuban passport after he became a U.S. citizen. He used his Cuban 
passport on all his trips to Cuba, but has never used it in a third country. He possesses 
a current Cuban passport that was issued in 2006, and is valid until 2012. He intends to 
maintain the Cuban passport in case he has to travel to Cuba on short notice if there is 
any kind of emergency.4  
 
 Applicant does not own any foreign assets. He sends his wife about $100 a 
month and his parents about $300 every six months. He also sends clothes and 
medicine. He calls his wife about once a week and his mother about once a month. He 
calls his brother about every three months. He has a stable employment history and his 
performance appraisal indicates that he is an excellent employee.5 
 
Cuba 
 
Cuba is a totalitarian state. The government controls all aspects of life through 
the Communist Party and its affiliated organizations. It has a poor human rights record 
including unlawful killings; beatings, and abuse of detainees and prisoners; harsh prison 
conditions; arbitrary arrest and detention of human rights advocates; denial of fair trial; 
pervasive monitoring of private communications; limitations on freedom of speech and 
press; denial of peaceful assembly and association; and restrictions on freedom of 
movement, including selective denial of exit permits. The government and its agents are 
not known to engage in politically motivated killings or disappearances, but dissidents 
risk being jailed.  
 
Cuba is a state sponsor of terrorism and maintains close relationships with other 
state sponsors of terrorism such as Iran and Syria. The Cuban government has long 
targeted the U.S. for intensive espionage. Cuba’s modus operandi in espionage 
operations is to use spies to infiltrate U.S. activities and U.S.-based anti-government 
organizations. The U.S. and Cuba have had a strained relationship since the early 
1960s. U.S. policy has been to isolate Cuba through comprehensive economic 
sanctions. At the same time, the U.S. has supported humanitarian efforts and continues 
to work for a “Free Cuba.”  
 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 28; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 33, 35-39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 34-35; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
  Applicant’s wife, parents, and brother are citizens and residents of Cuba. He has 
visited his family in Cuba on four occasions between 2001 and 2007. Another brother 
lives with Applicant. He is a Cuban citizen, but a U.S. permanent resident. Cuba has an 
authoritarian government, dominated by the Communist Party. It is a state sponsor of 
terrorism, and the government of Cuba has committed numerous, serious human rights 
abuses against its people. It also targets the U.S. for espionage. His family members’ 
presence in Cuba creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion, both through him and through his brother in the 
U.S. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (d) have been 
raised by the evidence. Applicant’s contacts and connections to his extended family 
members in Cuba are not enough to create a conflict of interest, or a heightened risk of 
 
6 
 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. SOR ¶ 1.f is 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Applicant has been in this country for about 13 years and has been a U.S. citizen 
since 2000. His brother lives with him and he has a good job where he is a valued 
employee. However, because of his close family ties to Cuba and the nature of the 
Cuban government, I am unable to find any of the mitigating conditions to be fully 
applicable.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
 
7 
 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
  Applicant possesses a current Cuban passport, which is a right and privilege of 
foreign citizenship. AG ¶ 10(a) is applicable. The renewal of his Cuban passport while a 
U.S. citizen could also raise concerns under AG ¶ 10(b), as an action to obtain 
recognition of his Cuban citizenship.  
 
  SOR ¶ 2.c alleges that Applicant was “unwilling to surrender [his] Cuban 
passport.” This is true. However, the possession of the Cuban passport is already 
alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b. SOR ¶ 2.c does not allege a separate disqualifying fact; it alleges 
that Applicant does not meet a mitigating condition, as addressed below. A failure to 
meet a mitigating condition should not be the basis of a separate allegation. SOR ¶ 2.c 
is concluded for Applicant.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. Three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant actively sought recognition of his Cuban citizenship by renewing his 
Cuban passport after he became an American citizen. He is maintaining the passport to 
visit his family and for use in an emergency. As such, he is unwilling to renounce the 
dual citizenship that accompanies the Cuban passport. No mitigating condition is 
completely applicable.  
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in Cuba. He 
realized when he was in college that he wanted the freedoms we enjoy in the United 
States. He attempted to escape Cuba on a raft but was unsuccessful. He eventually 
married a U.S. citizen and fulfilled his dream of coming to America. He became a U.S. 
citizen in 2000. He was obviously sincere, open, and honest at his hearing. He has 
thrived in the United States and is recognized by his company as an excellent 
employee.  
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Cuba, The nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism. Cuba has an authoritarian government, a bad human rights record, is a state 
sponsor of terrorism, and conducts espionage against the United States. Applicant has 
a significant amount of close family members who are citizens and residents of Cuba. 
He has maintained his Cuban citizenship and passport because it is necessary if he 
wants to visit them. There is no evidence that Applicant is anything other than an 
intelligent, honest, trustworthy, and loyal U.S. citizen. He just was unable to mitigate the 
considerable security concerns raised by his ties to Cuba. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
9 
 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
