 
1 
 
 
                                                     
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-00212 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the criminal conduct security concerns raised by his 
misconduct. Furthermore, he falsified his security clearance application. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) or Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86 Format) on June 15, 
2007. On June 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security concerns under 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1  
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                     
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on August 6, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 3, 
2008. The Notice of Hearing was issued on September 17, 2008, convening a hearing 
on October 9, 2008. At the hearing, the Government presented five exhibits, marked GE 
1-5. GEs 1, and 3 - 5, were admitted without objection. Applicant objected to GE 2 and I 
excluded the exhibit (Tr. 32).2 Applicant testified on his own behalf, and presented no 
witnesses or documents. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 17, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, with 
explanations. He denied, however, that the alleged criminal charges were valid. 
Concerning SOR ¶ 2.a, Applicant admitted he provided incorrect information in his 
answers to e-QIP section 23. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of all evidence of record, including his demeanor, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
  
  Applicant is a 24-year-old computer hardware technician working for a 
government contractor. He has never been married and has no children. He graduated 
from college in December 2006, and received a Bachelor of Science degree in 
computer information systems (Tr. 5). He intends to pursue a master’s degree in 
computer science. 
 
  In October 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with Abduction and 
Kidnapping (both felony charges) of his then girlfriend; Assault and Battery on his 
girlfriend, and Petit Larceny.  
 
  Applicant explained that during his last year in college, he shared an apartment 
with his girlfriend (Tr. 49-51). In October 2006, he invited some of his relatives to stay 
with them during a homecoming football game weekend. His girlfriend disapproved 
because she was not consulted ahead of time and they became involved in a verbal 
argument. During the argument, Applicant told his girlfriend he was leaving her. 
According to Applicant, his girlfriend lost it and began hitting him. To defend himself, he 
had to restrain her for some time until he was able to leave the apartment. The 
neighbors heard the commotion and called the police department. Applicant’s girlfriend 
accused him of blocking and preventing her from leaving her apartment. This allegation 
let to the abduction and kidnapping charges. She also accused him of assault and 
battery, and with stealing money from her.  
 
  After leaving his apartment, Applicant was stopped by a police officer, placed 
under arrest, and transported to a magistrate. At the magistrate’s office, Applicant used 
abusive language and made some improper comments (Tr. 72). He was arrested and 
2  GE 2 is a report of investigation summarizing Applicant’s interview conducted by a Government 
investigator in July 31, 2007. I excluded it pursuant to Directive, Enclosure 3, Additional Procedural 
Guidance. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                     
placed in jail for four days pending bail (Tr. 100). Applicant was assigned a court-
appointed attorney to assist him with his criminal defense representation (Tr. 88). 
  Applicant denied he ever assaulted his girlfriend. He claimed he had to restrain 
her for some time to prevent her from hitting him. He denied he prevented her from 
leaving their apartment. He claimed he was trying to enter the apartment to retrieve his 
car keys and leave and she kept blocking and preventing him from entering the 
apartment (Tr. 52-57). 
 
  Several days after his release from jail, Applicant confronted his girlfriend about 
the charges she filed against him. They became involved in another verbal argument 
and he lost his temper. He took her car keys from her and threw the keys away. He also 
broke her car’s side mirror and the windshield. Additionally, he used abusive language 
against her. On November 27, 2006, Applicant appeared in court to address the initial 
set of charges filed against him in early October 2006 (Tr. 86). At the arraignment, 
Applicant was served with the following additional charges resulting from his second 
altercation: Petit Larceny Under $200, Destruction of Property of a Value Under $1,000, 
and Abusive Language to Another (Tr. 102). 
 
  Applicant’s trial was scheduled for January 22, 2007 (Tr. 88-91). With the 
assistance of his court appointed attorney, Applicant entered into a pre-trial agreement. 
He pled Nolo Contendere to the assault and battery charge. Applicant was required to 
make restitution, to pay a fine, to attend a five week anger management counseling, to 
perform 40 hours community service, and to serve two years probation. The disposition 
of the assault and battery charge was deferred until February 2009 (Tr. 92). Pursuant to 
the pre-trial agreement, all the remaining charges against him were Nolle Prossed.  
 
  Applicant believes that if he complies with all the conditions imposed by the court 
and stays out of trouble, all the charges against him, including the assault and battery 
charge, will be dismissed and/or set aside. As of his hearing day, Applicant was serving 
probation waiting for the final disposition of the assault and battery charge scheduled for 
February 2009. 
 
  In June 2007, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. In his 
response to Section 23.a,3 Applicant answered “No” to the question of whether he had 
ever been charged with or convicted of any felony offense. He deliberately failed to 
disclose his October 2006 charges of Abduction and Kidnapping, both felony charges. 
In response to Section 23.c, Applicant answered “No” to the questions of whether there 
were currently any charges pending against him for any criminal offenses. He 
deliberately failed to disclose he is pending the adjudication of the Assault and Battery 
charge scheduled for February 2009. Question 23.f asked whether in the last seven 
years Applicant had been arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offenses not 
3  Section 23 of the security clearance application reads in its pertinent part as follow: “Section 23: 
Your Police Record.  For this item, report information regardless of whether the record in your case has 
been sealed or otherwise stricken from the court record. The single exception to this requirement is for 
certain conviction under the Federal Control Substances Act for which the court issued and expungement 
order under the authority of 21 U.S.C. 844 or 18 U.S.C. 3607.” 
 
4 
 
 
                                                     
listed in response to other questions in the security clearance application. Applicant 
answered “No” and failed to disclose his October 2006 arrest and charges of Abduction 
and Kidnapping (both felony charges), Assault and Battery, and Petit Larceny. He also 
failed to disclose his November 2006 charges of Petit Larceny, Destruction of Property 
less than $1,000, and Abusive Language to Another. 
 
  Applicant explained he failed to disclose his arrest and the charges for several 
reasons: (1) he was unfamiliar with the application and did not fully understand the 
questions (Answer, Tr. 97); (2) he believed the charges were dismissed (Nolle Process), 
and as such, the questions did not apply to him (Answer), and (3) his girlfriend admitted 
the charges were false and they were dropped (Tr. 39-41, 96); (4) the assault and 
battery charge was to be set aside and removed from his records in February 2009 (Tr. 
111); (5) he did not know the abduction and kidnapping charges were felony charges 
(Tr. 95); (6) he had not seen his criminal record and did not know the charges would 
show up (Tr. 98); and (7) he did not read the questions (Tr. 101).  
 
  In mitigation, Applicant asserted that although he mistakenly failed to disclose his 
arrest and charges, he corrected his mistake by being candid and forthcoming with a 
Government investigator during an interview conducted after he submitted his security 
clearance application. Applicant was called for a follow-up interview with a Government 
investigator in July 2007. Applicant did not request the interview. During the interview, 
the investigator confronted Applicant with the undisclosed arrest and charges.  
 
  Applicant has been working for his current employer, a defense contractor, since 
April 2007. He has performed well and has received no complaints from his supervisors 
or customers. There is no evidence he has ever compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information. Outside of the arrest and charges involved in this 
SOR, Applicant has never been arrested, charged or convicted of any offenses. He has 
been involved in community and volunteer work with his fraternity and church. Applicant 
expressed remorse for his questionable behavior and lack of judgment. He averred he 
has matured and now understands the serious consequences of his actions.  
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.4 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). The 
adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, 
which are to be considered in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
4  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                     
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”5 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the security concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt 
about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
5  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                     
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 Applicant was 22 years old and had almost completed four years of college when 
he was involved in two altercations with his girlfriend. As a result of the first altercation 
he was arrested and charged with Abduction and Kidnapping (both felony charges), 
Assault and Battery, and Petit Larceny. After the second altercation he was charged 
with Petit Larceny Under $200, Destruction of Property of a Value Under $1,000, and 
Abusive Language to Another. He pled Nolo Contendere to the Assault and Battery 
charge. The disposition of the Assault and Battery charge was deferred until February 
2009. He was placed on probation pending the disposition of the Assault and Battery 
charge. All of the remaining charges were Nolle Prossed.  
 
 Furthermore, Applicant falsified his security clearance application when he failed 
to disclose he was arrested and charged with the above charges in 2006. His 
falsification of the security clearance application is material and a violation of 18 U.S.C. 
§ 1001. Making a false statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony 
(the maximum potential sentence includes confinement for five years and a $10,000 
fine).6 
 
Applicant’s overall behavior raises security concerns under Criminal Conduct 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 31(a) “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” 
AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted,” and AG ¶ 31(d) 
“individual is currently on probation or parole or probation.” Applicant’s recent 
falsification brings to the forefront the criminal conduct concerns raised by his past 
behavior. The Government did not allege the falsification under Guideline J. Thus, the 
falsification of the security clearance cannot be used as grounds to deny Applicant’s 
application under Guideline J. However, I am required to consider Applicant’s overall 
questionable behavior when evaluating the seriousness of the conduct alleged in the 
SOR to determine factors such as the extent to which his behavior is recent; the 
likelihood of recurrence; Applicant’s explanations concerning the circumstances of the 
incidents alleged; and his rehabilitation.7 
 
 AG ¶ 32 lists four conditions that could mitigate the criminal conduct security 
concerns raised under AG ¶ 31. After considering all the mitigating conditions, I find that 
none apply. Applicant’s arrest and charges are recent. He is serving probation and 
pending the adjudication of the assault and battery charge. Applicant receives some 
6  It is a criminal offense to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent statement or representation, or knowingly make or use a false writing in any matter within the 
jurisdiction of the executive branch of the Government of the United States. Security clearances are 
within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the Government of the United States. See Egan, 484 
U.S. at 527. The SOR does not allege a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 as criminal conduct, and I have not 
based my determination on the applicability of 18 U.S.C. § 1001.  
7  ISCR Case No. 04-09959 at 3 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006). 
 
7 
 
 
credit in mitigation because he expressed remorse for his past behavior, attended anger 
management counseling, participated in community work, is doing well during his 
probation, and he has a good employment record working for a defense contractor.  
 
 Several factors weigh against mitigation including the nature and seriousness of 
the offenses, his age, education, and the fact that he is still on probation. Other factors 
tend to mitigate concerns such as the passage of time, his counseling, ongoing 
rehabilitation, expressed remorse, and good job performance. The positive factors are 
insufficient to mitigate his criminal behavior. Applicant’s overall behavior casts serious 
doubts about his judgment, reliability, and willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations.  
 
Personal Conduct  
 
Under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), conduct involving questionable judgment, 
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can 
raise questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. AG ¶ 15. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose relevant information in his answers to Section 23 of 
his security clearance application. Considering the record as a whole, I am convinced 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the information. Numerous factors weighed in 
my analysis to reach that conclusion, including: Applicant’s age, his level of education, 
and his demeanor and testimony.  
 
I find Applicant’s excuses for his failure to disclose the information not credible. 
Section 23 of the security clearance application is written in plain, simple English 
language. Applicant is a college graduate and is an articulate and bright person. He 
provided extensive explanations minimizing his actions on the events that let to his 
arrest and the filing of charges against him. He completed the security clearance 
application in June 2007, only five months after his criminal trial hearing in which all but 
one of the charges against him were Nolle Prossed. At the time he completed the 
application, he was serving probation and pending the adjudication of his Assault and 
Battery charge, which was scheduled for disposition in February 2009. He knew that it 
would not be until his February 2009 trial when all charges against him would be 
“completely removed” from his record (Answer, 3rd paragraph). 
 
Applicant knew or should have known the importance of accurate completion of 
his security clearance application, and nevertheless failed to provide information that 
was material to making an informed security decision. Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 
16(a): “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire,” applies. 
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered all Guideline E mitigating conditions and conclude that none apply. 
Applicant’s falsification is recent, and his favorable information is not sufficient to apply 
any of the mitigating conditions. I specifically considered AG ¶ 17.a: “the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts,” and find it does not apply. A Government 
investigator arranged for the interview and confronted Applicant with the undisclosed 
information. Applicant’s evidence failed to establish he disclosed his arrest and charges 
before confrontation. Applicant’s omission was not caused by improper advice of legal 
counsel advising him concerning the security clearance process, thus, AG ¶ 17.b, does 
not apply. I do not consider Applicant’s falsification a minor offense, and it is temporally 
recent, AG ¶ 17.c, does not apply. Additionally, for the same reasons outlined under the 
discussion of Guidelines J, incorporated herein, I conclude Applicant’s behavior shows 
questionable judgment, lack of reliability, and untrustworthiness. Finally, Applicant was 
unable to candidly admit the falsification at his hearing. He attempted to rationalize and 
minimize his falsification. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I have carefully weighed all evidence, and I applied the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as listed under the applicable adjudicative guidelines in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s age, 
education, maturity level, both at the time of each incident of misconduct and at the time 
of his hearing. I considered his good performance for a defense contractor. I considered 
that he is doing well on his probation, and in his rehabilitation efforts. On balance, the 
record evidence does not convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his 
criminal conduct and personal conduct concerns.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
