 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05060 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial issues. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
 
On July 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 14, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to another 
Administrative Judge on August 25, 2008, and reassigned to me on September 16, 
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 4, 2008. I convened the hearing 
 
2 
 
as scheduled on September 24, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
3, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through L, which were received without objection. I granted 
Applicant’s request to keep the record open to submit additional information. Applicant 
submitted eight documents, marked AE E through T and admitted without objection.1 
Department Counsel’s memo is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 8, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is a skilled 
tradesman and has worked on the same military installation since 1985. He has worked 
for various companies as the contracts have changed hands. He is a high school 
graduate.2  
 
 Applicant was married in 1984, and divorced in 1991. He has a 23-year-old child 
from that marriage. Applicant paid $410 per month in child support until the child turned 
18 in 2003.3 
 
 Applicant married again in 1991. He has a 15-year-old child from this marriage. 
They separated in 2002, after his second wife left the home, and divorced in 2004. She 
developed psychological problems during the marriage and was hospitalized on two 
occasions for her condition. Her illness forced her to resign from her job in 1997. 
Applicant was unable to pay their debts, which included her numerous medical bills. He 
filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1998, and his debts were discharged the same year. He 
fell behind on his debts again and filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2001. He attempted to 
maintain the payments to the trustee, but was unable to do so. The Chapter 13 
bankruptcy was dismissed in August 2002, and re-filed the same month.4 
 
 After his second wife left him, Applicant attempted to pay the trustee on his 
income alone, but could not keep up the payments. His wife had custody of their child. 
Applicant was ordered to pay $750 per month in child support. He paid the child support 
until November 2006, when he obtained custody of their child. His second wife does not 
pay child support for this child. The bankruptcy was dismissed in March 2003. 
Applicant’s car was repossessed and he lost his house to foreclosure. There was no 
deficiency owed on the mortgage.5 
                                                          
1 Applicant provided several documents about his bankruptcy immediately following the hearing. 
The documents were submitted again in the more extensive package submitted by Applicant on October 
10, 2008. I have not separately marked the documents received immediately after the hearing. 
 
2 Tr. at 19-21; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 19-22; GE 1; AE E. 
 
4 Tr. at 22-24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3; AE E, F. 
 
5 Tr. at 23-24, 37-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3. 
 
 
3 
 
 In about 2002, Applicant started having back problems which caused him to miss 
work. He is also diabetic. In March 2004, Applicant had a series of seizures which led to 
a very serious brain illness. He was hospitalized for about four to six weeks over a two 
month period. He had hallucinations and was catatonic at times. He was out of work for 
about six months. He eventually had some recovery. He suffered long term memory 
loss. He does not remember many of the debts that were discussed at the hearing, but 
assumed he was responsible for them because of the supporting documentation. 
Applicant has continued to have medical problems which has resulted in numerous 
doctor visits and unpaid time off work. Applicant’s Social Security statement shows his 
annual earnings increasing every year until it topped out at $50,000 in 2002. It then 
started declining because of unpaid time off work for medical reasons. He earned 
$44,000 in 2003; $30,000 in 2004; $34,000 in 2005; $35,000 in 2006; and $36,000 in 
2007.6 
 
 Applicant married for the third time in 2004. His wife developed severe medical 
problems. She has a debilitating and potentially life-threatening disease. She is unable 
to work and is essentially bedridden. He and his wife separated in about January 2007, 
when he was no longer able to care for her. She has returned to live with her parents 
who are retired and able to provide full-time care for her. She is covered by his health 
insurance, but there continues to be numerous medical expenses above what is paid by 
the insurance.7 
 
 The SOR lists 28 delinquent debts. Applicant admitted to owing all the debts in 
the SOR with explanations, with the exception of ¶¶ 1.e and 1.q, which he denied. He 
also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance. The 26 debts that he admitted he owes total approximately $22,657. Of 
those 26 debts, 22 are medical debts. Applicant has not ignored his medical debts, but 
has paid whatever he could. The medical debts in the SOR reflect those medical debts 
above what he has been able to pay.8  
 
 The largest debt, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.v, is to an automobile finance company for 
$11,194. Applicant admitted the debt was for a car loan after his car was repossessed 
following the dismissal of his Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The debt is listed on the July 11, 
2007 credit report, with a balance of $11,194 and a high credit of $13,394. It is not clear 
whether $11,194 reflects what was owed on the loan after repossession or the 
deficiency balance owed on the loan after the car was sold at auction. The June 24, 
2008 credit report lists a debt to the same automobile finance company but shows the 
debt as “closed or paid account/zero balance.” This is likely a second car loan. If it is a 
second car loan, then the debt alleged in the SOR is not listed on the credit report.9 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 24-28; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE F, G, I, J 
 
7 Tr. at 33-37. 
 
8 Tr. at 27-29; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
9 Tr. at 37-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant denied owing the debt of $209 to a collection company, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.e. He stated that the original creditor was a phone/internet/cable provider and 
he was current on the debt. He also denied SOR ¶ 1.q, which alleges that he is $610 
past due on a car loan, with a balance of $17,355. Applicant provided documentation 
that while he may have been late on payments, he is currently up-to-date on his 
payments and in good standing on the loan.10 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in July 2008. He listed only one secured 
claim, his auto loan as discussed above. He reaffirmed this debt. Under Schedule E – 
Creditors Holding Unsecured Priority Claims, he listed back taxes owed to the IRS for 
tax years 2005 and 2006, in the total amount of $4,369. Schedule F – Creditors Holding 
Unsecured Nonpriority Claims listed 42 creditors and debts totaling $16,895.11  
 
 Applicant has received counseling pursuant to his bankruptcy. He also joined an 
on-line service that provides advice and answers on money management and personal 
finances. He has a booklet from the company and has referenced it extensively. He has 
established a budget and is working diligently at maintaining the budget and not 
incurring new delinquent debts.12  
 
 Applicant submitted numerous letters of appreciation and character letters stating 
he is honest, trustworthy, responsible, professional, and reliable; a man of sound moral 
principles and integrity; and a real asset to his employer and the U.S. military.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 39-41; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-3; AE A, O. 
 
11 Tr. at 41-47; AE Q-T. The tax debts were not alleged in the SOR and are not considered for 
disqualifying purposes. They are considered for the purposes of determining mitigation and under the 
whole person.  
 
12 Tr. at 32-34; AE B, H, Q, R.  
 
13 AE K, L. 
 
 
5 
 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable to pay his 
obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of financial problems. He recently filed a Chapter 7 
bankruptcy, but the debts have not yet been discharged. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable at 
this time.  
 
 Applicant and his family have had extensive medical problems causing him to 
have much unpaid time off work and leaving him with large medical bills. He is a 
diabetic with back problems and was hospitalized with a serious brain illness in 2004. 
He was out of work for about six months. He is still recovering from that illness and has 
long term memory loss. His wife’s medical conditions became so severe that Applicant 
could no longer care for her and she moved back to live with her retired parents who 
could provide her with full-time care. His former wife developed psychological problems 
requiring much medical attention and two hospitalizations. These are conditions that 
 
7 
 
were beyond his control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the 
individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant has not been able to pay 
the debts alleged in the SOR. He has filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Bankruptcy is a 
legally viable option to handle one’s burdensome debts. The Supreme Court made this 
point about the purpose of the bankruptcy law in a 1934 decision: 
 
[I]t gives to the honest but unfortunate debtor . . . a new opportunity in life 
and a clear field for future effort, unhampered by the pressure and 
discouragement of preexisting debt.14 
 
Applicant is the very definition of “honest but unfortunate debtor.” Under the limited 
circumstances of this case, I find that he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is applicable.  
 
Applicant has received financial counseling. He has filed bankruptcy, which will 
provide him a clean start. There are clear indications that the problem is being resolved. 
AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable.  
 
Applicant has been unable to pay his delinquent debts. Bankruptcy will resolve 
his debts, but AG ¶ 20(d) does not fully apply because he has not taken “good faith” 
steps to pay or resolve his debts other than filing for bankruptcy.15 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
                                                          
14 Local Loan Co. v. Hunt, 292 U.S. 234, 244 (1934). 
15 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No.  99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a decent, hard-working 
man who has endured many trials and tribulations. His second wife had many 
psychological problems, resulting in numerous medical bills, hospitalizations, and the 
loss of her job and income. He was financially devastated and had his debts discharged 
in bankruptcy in 1998. He was unable to stay out from under financial distress and filed 
a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2001 and 2002. He could not maintain the payments to the 
trustee and both bankruptcies were dismissed. Applicant started having his own medical 
issues in about 2002. He had back problems and is a diabetic. He was out of work for 
six months in 2004, due to a severe brain illness, for which he is still recovering. His 
Social Security statement documents how his income has declined because of unpaid 
time off work. His current wife is a bedridden invalid. Her medical condition deteriorated 
to where she had to move back to live with her retired parents, who could provide her 
with the full-time care that she requires.  
 
As a result of all the above, Applicant incurred much delinquent debt. At least 22 
of the SOR allegations are medical debts. Applicant has taken his only viable option, 
and filed for bankruptcy in July 2008. He is attempting to manage his finances. He 
attended counseling, utilizes an on-line money management service, and established a 
budget. His unpaid taxes, while not alleged in the SOR, are a concern. However, once 
his debts are discharged in bankruptcy, he will be able to address his taxes.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.ee:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
