                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-00956 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Guideline H (Drug Involvement) security concerns. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 10, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On June 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security 
 
1  Item 4.  
 
2  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, 
and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On June 11, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 3). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated July 29, 2008, was provided to him, 
and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant answered the FORM on August 27, 2008. His 
answer included a Statement of Intent, dated August 29, 2008, in which Applicant 
promised to abstain from all use of marijuana or any other illegal drugs. The case was 
assigned to me on September 29, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the two SOR allegations. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of 
record, I make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 24-year-old computer engineer.3 He attended college from 
September 2002 to March 2007, and earned a Bachelor’s degree in computer 
engineering. He has been a part-time graduate student in electrical engineering since 
the fall of 2007. From 2001 to early 2007, Applicant worked part-time as a web 
developer and programmer. In April 2007, he was hired by his current employer, a 
defense contractor. He has never been married and has no children. He did not serve in 
the military. While in college during 2003–2004, Applicant was convicted twice at a 
municipal court for underage consumption of alcohol. He was fined and required to 
perform community service both times. 
 
Applicant started using marijuana in August 2004. He used marijuana 
intermittently until March 2007 (Item 4, section 24). During this period, he used 
marijuana approximately 30 times in a variety of environments such as in party-like 
situations and when alone to enhance his senses while listening to music. He 
purchased marijuana from close friends twice, but claimed he has never sold it. He paid 
$45 for one quarter ounce of marijuana on both occasions (Item 6). 
 
Applicant stated he has never used any other illegal drugs. He has never 
received any treatment of counseling as a result of his marijuana use (Item 6). His 
 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
3  Items 4 and 5 are the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
parents are aware of his two convictions for underage drinking as well as his use of 
marijuana. Applicant acknowledged he knew the use of illegal drugs, including 
marijuana, is inappropriate for a responsible adult, especially for someone with access 
to classified information. He stopped using marijuana in March 2007, and promised 
never to use illegal drugs again (Items 4 and 6). 
 
Applicant willingly used marijuana when the opportunity arose.4 He 
acknowledged that his decisions to purchase and use marijuana were both illegal and 
dangerous to him, and reflect poor judgment. Applicant justified his past use of 
marijuana on the fact that he “disagreed strongly with the prohibition of using [an] 
ostensibly harmless drug as marijuana.” He was “operating under the philosophy that 
“an unjust law is no law at all.”  
 
Applicant acknowledged he was wrong in his justification for using marijuana and 
that he was simply breaking the law. He claimed he now has a different perspective and 
respect for the law. To show he has matured, he noted he was candid and truthful on 
his answers to the e-QIP. He disclosed all his past use of marijuana because of his 
belief in the importance of complete openness in issues pertaining to national security.  
 
Applicant stated that since March 2007, his personal situation and attitude toward 
the use of drugs have changed significantly. He noted that since he stopped using 
marijuana he changed his lifestyle and his environment. He stopped attending college 
parties and meeting with people who use illegal drugs. He explained this was the result 
of his move to another residence (9 miles away from his previous residence) after 
finishing college and his increased job responsibilities. He “now believes that using 
marijuana would be negligent to his present responsibilities, ethically wrong due to the 
breaking of the law, and dangerous due to the potential consequences (e.g. legal 
repercussions).” He loves the United States dearly and averred that under no 
circumstance would he betray his country.  
 
Applicant stated that after he began his marijuana abstinence, on several 
occasions he has been in an environment in which marijuana was used. He believes 
that in the future he could find himself in a similar environment when he is around his 
long-time grade school and college friends. In Applicant’s own words: 
 
All the people with whom I used to use marijuana and who still use it 
themselves, are very close friends who I have known either since grade 
school or for many years since I first came to [city] to attend college. To 
me their marijuana use, though I no longer agree with it, is their choice 
and does not affect on who they are. That being the case, disassociation 
has not been demonstrated because I am unwilling to end these highly 
valued friendships for the sole purpose of avoiding potentially negative 
consequences to my career. Furthermore, for the aforementioned 
 
4  Applicant’s response to the FORM is the source for the facts in the following paragraphs unless 
otherwise stated. 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
reasons, avoidance of these environments and people is unnecessary and 
would not affect my continued abstinence.  
 
Applicant’s response to the Form, at 5 and 6. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”5 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
5  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).6 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement). AG ¶ 24 articulates the government’s security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
Applicant’s frequent use and purchase of marijuana from August 2004 to March 
2007, raised security concerns under AG ¶ 25(a): “any drug abuse,” and AG ¶ 25(c): 
“illegal drug possession, including . . . purchase,” apply. 
 
I specifically considered all Guideline H Mitigating Conditions (MC) and conclude 
that none fully apply.7 Considering the record evidence as a whole, I find Applicant’s 
 
6  “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
  7 AG ¶ 26. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: (a) the behavior happened so 
long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; (b) a demonstrated 
intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and 
contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of 
abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation; (c) 
 
6 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
marijuana use frequent and relatively recent. I also find Applicant failed to establish that 
his questionable behavior is not likely to recur. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has not used marijuana since March 2007 and promised several times 
never to used illegal drugs ever again. He even signed a statement agreeing to an 
automatic revocation of his security clearance for any further illegal use of drugs. 
Notwithstanding, I find Applicant’s promises are not persuasive for several reasons. 
Applicant continues to associate with friends who he knows are long-time marijuana 
users, and he is not avoiding environments where marijuana is likely to be used.  
 
Although he professed to have rejected marijuana, Applicant has not fully 
accepted the validity of the government’s rationale for prohibiting its use. He considers 
his friends’ use of marijuana as “their choice.” He is unwilling to end his “highly valued 
friendships” with known illegal drug users for the sole purpose of avoiding potentially 
negative consequences to his career. AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. He presented no 
evidence of drug abuse counseling or attendance in a rehabilitation program. AG ¶ 
26(d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant received favorable mitigating credit for not using marijuana since March 
2007 and for signing a statement of intent never to use illegal drugs again. Considering 
the record evidence as a whole, however, I conclude Applicant=s behavior shows 
questionable judgment and leaves doubt about Applicant’s ability or willingness to 
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness during which these drugs were 
prescribed, and abuse has since ended; (d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment 
program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without recurrence of 
abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.  
 
7 
 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
Applicant’s educational achievements and record of good employment for a 
government contractor weighs in his favor. He promised to abstain from any illegal drug 
use and has initiated some changes in his lifestyle. These factors show some 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. He has 
a significant history of frequent illegal drug abuse. Applicant was well aware of the 
illegality of using marijuana and the adverse legal consequences for his actions. 
Although he stopped using marijuana in 2007, he continued his association with known 
illegal drug users and frequented environments where the use of illegal drugs was likely. 
He is unwilling to fully disassociate himself from friends who are illegal drug users. His 
behavior weighs against finding that he will not use marijuana in the future, that he is 
rehabilitated, and that he has good judgment. In sum, his favorable evidence is not 
adequate to fully resolve the security concerns. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole 
person, I conclude he has not fully mitigated the security concerns pertaining to drug 
involvement.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a & 1.b: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Juan J. Rivera 
Administrative Judge 
