                                                              
 
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-05035 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used and continues to possess a currently valid French passport, which 
she obtained to facilitate travel to France. She visited France in 2001, 2005 and 2006. 
Security concerns pertaining to foreign influence are mitigated; however, security 
concerns pertaining to foreign preference are not mitigated. Eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 31, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) 
(Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On August 15, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her (GE 4), pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised. The SOR alleges security 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
concerns under Guidelines B (Foreign Influence) and C (Foreign Preference).1 The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for her, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
On September 4, 2008, the Department of Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) received Applicant’s response to the SOR allegations (GE 5). On 
September 29, 2008, Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed. The 
case was assigned to me on October 2, 2008.  
 
At the hearing held on October 16, 2008, Department Counsel offered two 
exhibits (GEs 1-2) (Transcript (Tr.) 17). There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-
2 (Tr. 17-18). Applicant did not offer any exhibits (Tr. 7-8). Additionally, I admitted the 
Hearing Notice (GE 3), SOR (GE 4), and Applicant’s response to the SOR (GE 5). I 
received the transcript on October 23, 2008. I admitted additional documentation on 
October 28, 2008, to support facts regarding the French Republic section of the 
Findings of Fact (Administrative Judge’s Exhibit  (AJ Ex.) I).  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
After the hearing, I decided it was appropriate to take administrative notice of 
some basic facts concerning France, as well as about France’s relationship to the 
United States.2 I emailed the parties, offering an opportunity to object to my 
consideration of the contents of AJ Ex. I for administrative notice. I did not receive any 
objections. The specific facts noticed are in the section of this opinion labeled “French 
Republic.”  
 
 
 
 
1On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
2Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative 
proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 
at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for 
administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen 
types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize authoritative 
information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 126 S.Ct. 2749 (2006) (citing 
internet sources for numerous documents). In this case the source for the facts is the U.S. Department of 
State, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs August 2008, “Background Note: France,” available at 
http://www.state.gov. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
Findings of Fact3 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 2.a and 2.b (GE 
5). Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant was born in the United States in 1981 (Tr. 3, GE 1). Eight months after 
Applicant was born, she was declared a French citizen at the French embassy (GE 2 at 
3). She has worked for a U.S. government contractor for the last 18 months (Tr. 32). 
She provides research and budgeting for a government contractor (Tr. 32). She does 
not require a clearance for her current position (Tr. 32). Her employer wanted her to 
perform other duties, which require a clearance (Tr. 32). She is not married and does 
not have any children (Tr. 25). She does not share her residence with anyone (Tr. 25). 
She attended college in Canada from 1999 to 2001 and in the United States from 2001 
to 2006 (GE 1).4 She earned a master’s degree in education in 2006 (Tr. 4, GE 1).   
 
Applicant’s mother was born in France in 1951, and her father was born in 
France in 1955 (GE 1). Her parents are naturalized U.S. citizens (GE 1). She talks to 
them probably every other day, and she sees them on a weekly or every other week 
basis (Tr. 22).  Her grandmother, who was a French citizen and lived in France, passed 
away in 2006 (Tr. 22, SOR ¶ 2.c). Her brother is also a U.S. citizen (GE 1). 
 
 Applicant has five uncles on her father’s side of the family who live in France (Tr. 
23). She has other more distant relatives who live in France such as cousins (Tr. 23). 
She had occasional direct contact, or indirect contact through her parents, with her 
family members living in France. She was not aware of any of her relatives living in 
France working for the French government or serving in the French military (Tr. 23). The 
French embassy in the United States has employed Applicant’s mother for the past 
twenty-five years (Tr. 23-24, SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant’s mother expects to retire in the next 
two or three years (Tr. 24). Her mother does not hold a security clearance (Tr. 24). 
Applicant’s father works for a heating and air conditioning firm in the United States (Tr. 
24).    
 
Applicant has been employed by the U.S. government, or U.S. firms, off and on 
since she was 16 years old (Tr. 26). She has a 401K account with her U.S. company, 
which contains about $3,000 (Tr. 30). She has four uncles on her mother’s side of the 
family who live in the United States (Tr. 23).      
 
 
 
 
 
3Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.   
 
4 During this period, she received some college credit from an internet-based educational 
institution while she lived overseas. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
 
Foreign Preference 
   
Applicant received a French passport shortly after she was born (Tr. 19). It was 
renewed every ten years and most recently in 1999 (Tr. 18-19; SOR ¶ 1.a). It expires in 
2009 (GE 2). She spent her summers in France, when she was in elementary school 
(Tr. 31). She used her French passport when she visited France in 2001 for two weeks, 
in 2005 for two weeks and in 2006 for ten days (Tr. 20, 23, 26-27, GE 2; SOR ¶ 1.b). 
Her last visit to France was in 2006 for her grandmother’s funeral (Tr. 23). Because of 
her French citizenship, she received reduced tuition expenses while attending college in 
Canada from 1999 to 2001 (Tr. 20, SOR ¶ 1.c).  
 
Applicant has not voted in any French elections (Tr. 21). She does not own any 
property or have any investments in France (Tr. 21-22). Her parents do own some land 
in France (Tr. 31); however, Applicant does not believe it is likely she will inherit this 
property (Tr. 21). Her parents have never said anything about her or her 23-year-old 
brother inheriting this land (Tr. 21-22). 
 
Applicant retained her French passport because of her deep sense of French 
heritage (Tr. 16, 25, GE 2). At her hearing, she was unsure about whether she would 
renounce her French citizenship and/or destroy or give up her French passport (Tr. 17, 
25, GE 2). I explained the importance of surrendering or invalidating her French 
passport, if she wanted to have a security clearance (Tr. 28-29, 35-36).  
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that she turned-in her French passport to her 
security officer, destroyed it in the presence of her security officer, or otherwise 
invalidated it. On October 27, 2008, she informed Department Counsel that she did not 
intend to renounce her French citizenship (AJ Ex. I).   
 
French Republic5 
 
France is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council, North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), the G-8, the European Union, the Organization for 
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), the World Trade Organization and various 
multilateral organizations.  “France is also America’s oldest ally; French military 
intervention was instrumental in helping Britain’s American colonies establish 
independence.” (AJ Ex. I at 8).  More American soldiers have been killed on French soil 
(because of World Wars I & II) than on that of any other foreign country. France 
supports the U.S. initiative under Quartet for resolving Middle East problems. Since 
2003, France has supported four U.N. Security Council resolutions in Iraq and provided 
funds as part of the European Union—Iraq contribution. Since 2006, France has joined 
the United States and others in actively discouraging Iran from pursuing nuclear 
weapons. 
 
 
5 AJ Ex. I is the source for the facts in this section. See also Administrative Notice, supra. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
The U.S. State Department describes the international relationship with France 
as “active and friendly” (AJ Ex. I at 10).  “France and the United States share common 
values and have parallel policies on most political, economic, and security issues. 
Differences are discussed frankly and have not generally been allowed to impair the 
pattern of close cooperation that characterizes relations between the two countries.” Id. 
France has significantly increased participation in NATO’s military wing in recent years. 
Id. at 9. France ended conscription in 2002 and is modernizing its military forces. Id. at 
9-10. Although France opposed the U.S. invasion of Iraq, France has 2,200 soldiers 
serving in Afghanistan, and assisted in assembling $21 billion in pledges for economic 
assistance to Afghanistan. France is a close ally of the United States in the war on 
terrorism. In December 2007, France convicted five former Guantanamo detainees on 
terrorism charges.  Id. at 10. 
 
The United States and France have strong economic relationships with each 
other. The United States is France’s sixth-ranked supplier of imports. The United States 
is the top destination for French investments worldwide. The United States is the largest 
foreign investor in France, employing over 619,000 French citizens. France is the 
United States’ eighth trading partner for total goods.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,” 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 6 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).7 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guidelines C (Foreign 
Preference) and B (Foreign Influence).  
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
 
6See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is 
“more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
7“The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his [or her] burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15.” ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
AG ¶ 10(a)(1) describes one condition that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying in Applicant’s case, “(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation 
of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign 
passport.” Applicant renewed her French passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. She 
continues to possess a French passport that will be valid until 2009, establishing AG ¶ 
10(a). 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions apply. She did not invalidate or relinquish her 
French passport. Applicant was advised at her hearing that she could mitigate Foreign 
Preference concerns through AG ¶¶ 11(d) and 11(e), however, she did not take action 
to effectuate these provisions.8    
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
 
8In the decretal paragraph, I find “For Applicant” with respect to SOR ¶ 1.c because her receipt of 
a partial reduction in tuition at a Canadian university is too minor a benefit under all the circumstances to 
establish a foreign preference. It is simply too inconsequential in this case to merit any weight under the 
foreign preference guideline. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant has family members who are citizens and residents of France. When 
she was in elementary school she spent some of her summers in France. She visited 
France in 2001, 2005 and 2006. She has occasional contact with her family members 
living in France either directly or indirectly through her parents. She continues to 
possess a valid French passport. Applicant’s grandmother, who lived in France, passed 
away in 2006. Foreign influence as a security concern is not established with respect to 
Applicant’s grandmother (SOR ¶ 2.c).   
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an Applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. France and the 
United States have been allies since the Revolutionary War. It is very unlikely that 
France would put Applicant into a position where she would be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and her family members living in France. With its 
strong human rights record, and friendly political and military relationship with the United 
States, it is not conceivable that France would coercively target any French citizen or 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
former citizen living in the United States in an attempt to gather valuable information 
from the United States. 
 
Applicant’s connections to her extended family living in France do not create a 
potential conflict of interest because this relationship is not sufficiently close to raise a 
possible security concern about her desire to help her family living in France by 
providing classified information.    
 
As indicated previously, the Government’s burden of “substantial evidence” is 
very low. The Government produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with 
her family living in France, her relationship with them, and her travel to France in 2001, 
2005 and 2006 to raise the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b) and 8(c) apply with respect to Applicant’s relationship with her 
family members living in France because she does not have a sufficiently close 
emotional bond with them. She did not describe regular or frequent communications 
with them. No living relatives, who are citizens and residents of France, are listed in the 
SOR.     
 
There is no evidence that her family members living in France have been political 
activists, challenging the policies of the French Government. There is no evidence that 
terrorists or the French Government have approached or threatened Applicant or her 
family in France because of her work in the United States. There is no evidence that her 
family living in France currently engages in activities which would bring significant 
attention to them or that they or other French elements are even aware that Applicant 
works for a government contractor or might have access in the future to classified 
information. As such, there is a reduced possibility that these relatives would be targets 
for coercion or exploitation. 9 
 
Applicant’s deep relationship with her parents and brother and her strong 
connections to the United States tend to mitigate foreign interest security concerns. 
Applicant has “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [she] 
can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Her 
parents and brother are U.S. citizens, and reside in the United States. Applicant has 
lived in the United States for most of her life. She is fully inculcated with U.S. values. All 
of her investments are in the United States, and she has no property or investments in 
France. She has many friends and colleagues in the United States. She is a loyal, 
dedicated and trustworthy U.S. citizen.  
 
 
9 Contacts with relatives living in a foreign country are presumed to be “not casual.” See ISCR 
Case No. 04-12500 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). In the analysis of countervailing evidence, it is legal 
error to give significant weight to any of the following facts or factors: applicant’s ties to the United States 
(ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 5 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005)); lack of prominence of relatives living in a 
foreign country (Id.); “family members’ low-key and noncontroversial lifestyle, and the fact that the 
[foreign] government has not contacted them about Applicant” (ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 26, 2006); one relative living in a foreign country may be sufficient to negate FIMC 1 (ISCR Case No. 
03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006)); a foreign relative’s fragile health (ISCR Case No. 02-29403 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 14, 2004)), advanced age (ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 7 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003), 
financial independence (ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005), or lack of financial 
dependency upon applicant (ISCR Case No. 03-15205 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan 21, 2005)); foreign relatives 
spend part of each year in the U.S. (ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)); the lack of 
any connection between the foreign relative and the foreign government in question (ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)); the absence of any attempt at exploitation in the past (ISCR Case 
No. 03-15205 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005)); a foreign country’s friendly relationship with the U.S., its 
stable, democratic government, or its extensive foreign military agreements with the United States (ISCR 
Case No. 02-22461 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2005)), an applicant’s “refusal to travel to [the foreign 
country]” and “meticulous work habits and practice of strictly following the rules relating to his work” (ISCR 
Case No. 03-15205 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005)). Notwithstanding the Appeal Board’s position, I 
conclude that many of these attributes are pertinent to the analysis in this case under the whole person 
concept. Moreover, there is persuasive case law urging broad consideration of numerous factors in the 
whole person concept, which overrides these restrictive decisions. 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
Whole Person Concept 
 
 In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount 
concern. The adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in 
considering the “whole person” concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by 
the totality of his or her acts, omissions, and motivations as well as various other 
variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis.  Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at Directive ¶ E2.2.1:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
voluntariness of participation; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E2.2.3, “The ultimate determination of whether the granting or 
continuing of eligibility for a security clearance is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security must be an overall common sense determination based upon careful 
consideration” of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
A Guideline B decision concerning France must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in France, as well as the dangers existing in France.10 France’s 
relationship with the United States has changed over the decades and is likely to 
change again in the future. France is and has been an important U.S. ally; however, on 
some occasions, such as the U.S. invasion of Iraq, has contested U.S. policy. France 
currently has an excellent human rights record. France has weapons of mass 
destruction, is an important trading partner and vigorously suppresses terrorism.  
 
There are significant factors supporting approval of Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant has lived in the United States for most of her adult life. 
She was born in the United States. Her parents are U.S. citizens and residents of the 
United States. Her assets are in the United States and she has no assets in France. 
Applicant is a law-abiding U.S. citizen, and there is no evidence of any performance or 
work-related problems. I found her statements to be honest, candid and credible.    
 
Applicant’s direct contacts with her family in France and her indirect contacts with 
her family in France through her parents, who are dual citizens of France and the United 
                                            
10 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion).  
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
States, as well as her visits to France raise some foreign influence security concerns. 
Theoretically, she might be vulnerable to French coercion and non-coercive measures 
because of her French citizenship, background and family in France. However, there is 
no evidence that France engages in such conduct. There is no reason to believe the 
French government and/or French intelligence personnel would violate French, United 
States or international law, by using improper and/or illegal means to obtain classified 
information from Applicant. The key rationale for denying Applicant’s clearance is her 
retention of a currently valid French passport, and her use of that passport to visit 
France. Of course, if she had “expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship,” 
this would have mitigated some foreign preference concerns under AG ¶ 11(b), supra.  
  
After carefully weighing the evidence of her connections to France and to the 
United States, I conclude Applicant has mitigated foreign influence security concerns; 
however, she failed to carry her burden of mitigating the foreign preference security 
concerns.  
 
           I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”11 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude she is not eligible for access to classified information.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.c: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
11See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
