1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-03276
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on November 26,
2007. On June 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines H and E
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 19, 2008. He requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on July 11,
2008. Applicant was available in September for a hearing. DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on September 3, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on September
23, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1-4, which were received without
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and did not submit any exhibits for the
2
record. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 30, 2008.
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, received June 19, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.c of the SOR. He denied the allegation in ¶ 2.a. He also
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in 1972 and completed college in 1983. He is divorced and has no children.
He held a Q security clearance (equivalent to a top secret) from 1993 until 1999 while
employed in a federal agency. He has worked in a professional capacity in the software
engineering field for his entire career. He has been with his current employer since
August 2007 (GE 1).
Applicant used marijuana when he was in high school and college. He also
smoked with his wife and friends either at parties or when camping as an adult. He
smoked the illegal drug from approximately 1972 until at least January 1993 on average
about 20 times per year (Tr. 30). Applicant maintains that he stopped using marijuana
when he held a Q clearance during his federal employment.
In 1993, Applicant decided that he would no longer use marijuana. He believed
the use of marijuana was “no big deal” but would stop so that he could obtain a security
clearance. He felt he had no real need to use marijuana. He admitted that if it were not
a bar to a security clearance, he would use marijuana (Tr. 23).
Applicant also used cocaine twice in 1984 or 1986. He wanted to experiment with
the illegal drug (Tr. 27). Applicant also recalls that someone left marijuana in his car in
1987 or 1988 when he gave them a ride (Tr. 40-41).
In August and September 2000, Applicant again used marijuana for a short
period of time. He smoked marijuana approximately eight times either by himself or with
his girlfriend (GE 4). He maintains that he found the marijuana while biking on a trail (Tr.
31). The marijuana was in a film cannister in the middle of the road according to
Applicant. He smoked the marijuana when he returned home. He purchased a pipe so
that he could smoke the marijuana (Tr. 33). He smoked the marijuana because he was
“rebelling.” He acknowledged that since he did not smoke marijuana while he had a
security clearance, he would try it again. He did not like the control of the Department of
Defense (DoD) drug policy (Tr. 34-35). He believes marijuana should be legalized. He
believes it is a personal choice (Tr. 22).    
Applicant stated he again found marijuana in 2007. He was driving his car on the
highway and a backpack fell from a bike that was in front of his car. He pulled his car to
3
the side of the road and picked up the pack. He could not catch up with the biker. At that
point Applicant took the pack home. When he opened it, he found that a pipe and some
marijuana were inside the pack. He decided to smoke the marijuana the next night (Tr.
38). 
Applicant experienced a racing of his heart when he smoked the “found”
marijuana in 2007. He felt as though he were having a heart attack. He went to the
emergency room at the hospital. He does not want to use marijuana again because it
made him feel really sick (Tr. 41). He also does not want to smoke it again because it
has caused him so much “grief.”
At the hearing, Applicant explained he still associates with people who use drugs.
He brought a friend to his house in the summer of 2008 because the friend was
stranded. His friend had marijuana with him and smoked it when he was in Applicant’s
home (Tr. 57).
In April 2008, Applicant answered written interrogatories concerning use of any
narcotics. He answered “yes.” He then listed his 2000 and 2007 use of marijuana, the
frequency of use, and the average quantity (GE 3). He declared he had no intention to
use marijuana again because he had a bad experience in 2007. He did not list the use
of marijuana in 1972 until at least 1993.    
At the hearing, Applicant explained that he denied any intent to deceive the
government. He stated the government has no evidence that he intentionally omitted
any information. He assumed that the government had his information concerning the
1972 to 1993 drug use from earlier forms and investigations. He believed the
government would have a paper trail and that his answer to the question on the 2008
interrogatory was answered correctly. He would answer the question the same way if
asked again. He explained the earlier information was freely obtainable by the
government. He believes the government’s question was misleading in its wording. 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
4
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 25(a), Aany drug abuse@ is potentially disqualifying. Under AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug
5
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia” is also potentially disqualifying.
Applicant admitted his use of marijuana from 1972 until at least January 1993. He also
admitted to using it again in 2000 and 2007 for a period of time. He used cocaine once
or twice in 1986. 
Under AG ¶ 25(g) “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance”
is a disqualifying condition. Applicant used marijuana in 2000 and 2007 after he had a
security clearance from an earlier time. Granted, he did not have a clearance in 2000
but he resorted to illegal drug use again after once having an earlier clearance.
examination. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying
conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from drug involvement. Under AG ¶ 26(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
2007 use of marijuana and his explanations that he found the marijuana on two
separate occasions are not credible and casts doubts on his trustworthiness, reliability
and judgment. I do not find that this mitigating condition applies.  
Under AG ¶ 26(b), it may be mitigating where Aa demonstrated intent not to
abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates
and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation.” This is not a factor for consideration in this
case for the reasons discussed above.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
6
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
I have considered all the facts and find Applicant deliberately omitted, concealed,
misled, and falsified information in his April 8, 2008 interrogatories with respect to his
marijuana use from 1972 until 1993. Applicant is not credible in his explanations or
reasoning about the question. He is not credible in his explanations that he found the
marijuana on two different occasions. Nor is he credible in his statement that he does
not intend to use any illegal drug in the future. His only expressed reason for not using
marijuana any more is because it made him sick in 2007. He also made a commitment
in 1993 and did not keep that promise. 
After considering the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17, I find that none of
them apply in this case.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, well-educated
professional. He held a Q clearance for years when employed with a federal agency. He
served in a professional capacity for his entire career. He has a long history of smoking
marijuana. His decision to stop using the illegal drug in 1993 was solely based on
obtaining a security clearance. His expressed resolve to not use an illegal drug again
was broken in 2000 and 2007. His explanation that he found the marijuana is not
credible. His recent decision to stop using marijuana because he became ill and that it
has caused him problems is not sufficient to mitigate the drug involvement guideline. 
Applicant was not credible in his explanation concerning his omission of the 1972
to 1993 marijuana use when answering his 2008 interrogatories. His reasoning that the
government did not have any evidence about his intentional omission and that he knew
the government could obtain this information from his previous forms and investigations
does not mitigate the personal conduct guideline.
7
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility, judgment, and suitability for a security clearance. For all the
reasons discussed above, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns
arising from his drug involvement and personal conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
Noreen A. Lynch
Administrative Judge
