                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-02070
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
October 30, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions, on May 12, 2007.
On June 5, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on June 28, 2008, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. This Administrative Judge was assigned the
case on August 11, 2008.   A notice of hearing on September 12, 2008, scheduling the
hearing on October 8, 2008. The Government offered five exhibits, referred to as
Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received without objection. Applicant
offered seven exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through G without objection,
and testified on his own behalf.  The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on
October 20, 2008. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until October
22, 2008, to submit additional matters.  He submitted one Post-Hearing Exhibit,
consisting of two pages.  The record closed on October 22, 2008.  Based upon a review
2
of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted. 
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 54 years old and has about two years of college.  He is
employed by a defense contractor as a Integrated Systems Technician, and is applying
for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he engaged in criminal conduct.
The Applicant has worked for his current employer for more than 20 years.  He
has held a security clearance since 1990, and has never committed a security violation.
Prior to that, he served in the United States Marines for 8 years, held a security
clearance during that time, and never violated security rules or regulations.  The arrest
described below was isolated, occurred under unusual circumstances and the chances
of reoccurrence are nil.  
The Applicant’s wife is suffering from a serious illness, known as graves disease.
The condition requires that she not get overly excited or nervous which could bring on a
heart attack.  Applicant’s wife is a very giving person, and it is her nature to help people
who are less fortunate than she.  From time to time, she gratuitously provided financial
assistance to a woman and her two children who were on welfare.  The situation got to
the point, where the woman was frequently requesting money from the Applicant’s wife,
and the Applicant felt his wife was being taken advantage of.  On one occasion, the
woman asked for money and the Applicant refused her.  That day, the Applicant had left
$75.00 on the table.  When the woman left his house, the Applicant’s money was gone.
The Applicant called the woman and she admitted to taking the money and said that
she would bring it right back.  She never did.  
Several days later the woman telephoned, and sounded suicidal.  Concerned
about the woman’s well being, the Applicant’s wife went over to the woman’s apartment.
The Applicant, being concerned about his wife’s health condition and the drama that
could result from the situation,  went with his wife.  At the apartment, an altercation
ensued.  The woman began pulling the Applicant’s wife by the head into her apartment
while screaming that she was being robbed.  A lamp shade was broken during the
commotion.  The Applicant, in an effort to defend his wife pushed the woman back, and
he and his wife left.  Once at home, the Applicant called the police and explained the
situation.  On March 30, 2006, the Applicant was arrested and charged with (1)
Aggravated Trespass, (2) Vandalism-Damage $400.00 or more, and (3) Battery.  On or
about September 2006, two additional charges were added: (4) Obstructing Telephone
Line, and (5) Prevent or Dissuade Witness or Victim from giving Testimony.  The
Applicant hired an attorney and was advised to take the plea bargain.  The Applicant
pleaded guilty to Counts (1) and (2) and the remaining charges were dismissed on or
about December 19, 2006.  The Applicant was sentenced to three years probation, to
pay approximately $200.00 in fines/assessments, to complete 160 hours of community
service, attend an anger management program, and was ordered to stay away from the
victim.  The Applicant has completed all of the sentencing requirements except his
3
probationary period.  He is on unsupervised probation until December 2009.
(Applicant’s Exhibit C)
Following the incident, the Applicant reported to work and immediately informed
his security department of the arrest.  The Applicant is extremely remorseful about the
incident, and he and his wife no longer associate with the woman.
For the past thirty years, the Applicant has not been arrested, charged or
convicted of any offense.  Other than the incident in question, he indicated that he was
arrested for Drunk Driving some thirty years ago.
Two letters of recommendation from professional colleagues of the Applicant
attest to the Applicant’s strong technical ability to the aircraft, including testing,
troubleshooting and problem solving.  They maintain that he is a team player and a
great asset to the organization.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit). 
Applicant has received several awards from his employer for excellent
performance on the job.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D).
Applicant has been a regular blood donor for the Red Cross for many years.
(Applicant’s Exhibit F).  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
30.  The Concern.  Criminal activity creates a doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple offenses;
31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
32.(a) So much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
4
32.(d) There is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h.  The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
5
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in criminal conduct that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has  engaged in criminal conduct (Guideline J).  The totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus
or connection with her security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guideline J of the SOR.
The evidence shows that the Applicant’s arrest in March 2006, was an isolated
incident that occurred over two years ago.  His only other encounter with law
enforcement occurred over thirty years ago.  Although he was convicted of Aggravated
Trespass and Vandalism, except for his probationary period, he has satisfied all of the
courts sentencing requirements.  Under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, disqualifying
conditions, 31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple offenses and 31.(c) allegation or
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged,
formally prosecuted or convicted apply.  However, Mitigating Conditions 32.(a) so much
time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, and 32.(d) there is evidence of
successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education,
good employment record, or constructive community involvement also apply. 
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant has worked for the same
defense contractor for over twenty years.  He has never received a security violation.
He is respected and admired by his colleagues.  He made a one time poor decision that
has caused him serious grief.  Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the
conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole person
assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness, reliability, candor, a willingness to
6
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person
may properly safeguard classified information. 
 
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and does meet the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find for the
Applicant under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).  
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has overcome the Government's
case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports
a finding for the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in
Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required
by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For the Applicant.
 
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
