 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-03514 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on July 31, 2007. On May 13, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On June 3, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision based 
on the administrative record. On July 9, 2008, Applicant requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge as opposed to an administrative determination. Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed on July 15, 2008. The case was assigned to me on 
August 1, 2008. On August 13, 2008, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the 
hearing for September 10, 2008. The case was heard on that date. The Government 
offered three exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 3 without 
 
2 
 
 
objection. The Applicant offered ten exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A – J without objection. Applicant testified and called one witness. The record was 
held open until September 24, 2008, to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence.  
Applicant timely submitted a one-page document which was admitted as AE K without 
objection. Department Counsel’s response to AE K is marked as Hearing Exhibit 1. The 
transcript was received on September 19, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits all of the SOR allegations. 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking a security clearance.  She has been employed with the defense contractor 
since May 2007. In August 2008, she was awarded a Masters Degree in Information 
Systems Management. She is single and has a four-year-old daughter. (Tr at 6-7, 24; 
Gov 1.) 
   
On July 31, 2007, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Gov 1.) She disclosed several delinquent debts on 
her questionnaire. A subsequent background investigation confirmed that Applicant had 
the following  delinquent accounts:  a $1,045 account that was placed for collection in 
2003 which was related to the early termination of a lease (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 1 at 40; Gov 
2 at 6; Gov 3 at 1); a $1,538 pay day loan placed for collection in 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 
1 at 42; Gov 2 at 21; Gov 3); a $336 credit card account that was charged off in 2007   
(SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 3 at 2.); a $503 credit card account that was charged off in 2007 (SOR 
¶ 1.d; Gov 3 at 2); a $571 credit card account that was charged off in April 2006 (SOR ¶ 
1.e; Gov 3 at 2); a $50 medical account that was placed for collection in 2004 (SOR ¶ 
1.f: Gov 1 at 38-39; Gov 2 at 14); and a $668 medical account placed for collection in        
2004 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 1 at 39-40; Gov 2 at 20-21; Gov 3 at 1). 
 
Additional delinquent debts include: a $599 phone account that was placed for 
collection in 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 1 at 40-41; Gov 2 at 6); a $116 phone account that 
was placed for collection in 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Gov 1 at 41; Gov 2 at 7); a $50 medical 
account that was placed for collection in 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.j; Gov 1 at 41; Gov 2 at 15-
16,21); a $1,276 credit card account that was placed for collection in 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.k: 
Gov 1 at 42; Gov 2 at 4-5); a $52 medical account that was placed for collection in 2002 
(SOR ¶ 1.l: Gov 1 at 43; Gov 2 at 16; Gov 3 at 1); and a $50 medical account that was 
placed for collection in 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.m: Gov 1 at 43; Gov 2 at 21). 
 
Additional delinquent debts include; a $1,500 computer account placed for 
collection in 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.n: Gov 1 at 44); a $75 medical account that was placed for 
collection in 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.o: Gov 1 at 44; Gov 2 at 22; Gov 3 at 1); a $3,115 
delinquent line of credit opened in 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.p: Gov 1 at 45; Gov 2 at 21); a $2,144 
delinquent account opened in 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.q: Gov 1 at 45; Gov 2 at 21);  a $651 
 
3 
 
 
department store account placed for collection in 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.r: Gov 1 at 46; Gov 2 
at 22); and a $446 department store account that was placed for collection in 2001 
(SOR ¶ 1.s: Gov 1 at 46; Gov 2 at 22.).  
 
Applicant incurred most of her debts when she was in college. Although she 
worked several jobs while attending college, she relied on credit cards for living 
expenses. She became pregnant during her second year in college. After she had the 
baby, she continued to work and go to school full-time. In November 2004, she moved 
back into her father’s house. Her father helped her get back on her feet. She continued 
to attend classes and work. She began to work on her financial obligations in 
September 2007. (Tr at 25-26.)  
 
The current status of the debts alleged in the SOR are as follows: 
 
Applicant disputes the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant leased a townhome 
in 2003 while she was in college. The townhome had several problems including bug 
infestations, and a broken washer and dryer. The landlord did not take action to repair 
the property so Applicant moved out prior to the termination of her lease. The landlord 
kept her security deposit. She formally disputed the debt with the credit reporting 
agency. (Tr at 27-30; Gov 3 at 1.) I find for Applicant pertaining to this debt. She has 
taken sufficient steps to resolve this account and appears to have a legitimate dispute. 
 
Applicant has paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f (AE A); 1.g (AE B; AE C); 1.j, 
AE D); 1.l (AE E); 1.m (AE F); and 1.o (AE G).  Each of these accounts were medical 
bills or medical insurance co-pays incurred when Applicant was away at college. The 
bills were sent to her father’s home and she assumed that her father paid them. (Tr at 
35-38, 60.) 
 
In May 2008, Applicant consulted a credit counselor to establish a plan to resolve 
her debts and to learn how to establish a budget and manage her expenses. The credit 
counselor advised her to enter into repayment plans with five of her creditors at a time 
based on what she could afford to pay. They advised her which creditors to choose first. 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.h, 1.i, and 1.k are included in her repayment 
plan. The first payment was due on September 22, 2008. The monthly payment of $171 
comes directly out of her bank account. (Tr at 24, 34, 38, 41, 56-58; AE J.) 
 
The $1,538 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b was a pay day loan. The original amount 
of the loan was $500. Applicant attempted to set up a payment plan with the company 
but they would not agree to a payment plan. (Tr at 31-32.) The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.e, 1.n, 1.p, 1.q, 1.r and 1.s remain unresolved. Applicant intends to arrange payment 
plans with these creditors after she completes her payment plans with the first five debts 
in her payment plan.  She claims she has never had an account with the creditor  
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q. (Tr at 34-35, 42-49.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant has a total of $60,000 worth of student loans which are currently in 
deferment. She anticipates her monthly student loan payments will be approximately 
$280 per month. (Tr at 52-53.) She has no open credit card accounts. (Tr at 56.)  
 
Applicant’s net monthly income is $1,694. In addition to her full-time job, she 
works part-time as a customer service specialist at a department store. She receives 
$472 in monthly child support. Her total monthly income is $2,166. She lives with her 
father and pays no rent. Day care costs $600 per month. Her car payment is $334. Her 
car insurance is $111. She pays $200 per month in fuel and $100 per month in tolls. 
Health insurance is $336 per month. Food is approximately $100 per month. Personal 
care costs about $39 per month. Her monthly debt counseling payment is $171. Her 
total monthly costs are $1,981. After expenses, she has approximately $185 left over 
each month. (AE K.) 
 
Now that she has her Masters Degree, Applicant hopes to find a better paying 
job. In her spare time, she volunteers in the community and her church. She is also 
taking classes in pursuit of an MBA degree. (Tr at 60-61, 65.) 
  
Applicant’s father testified on her behalf. He states that she has always been 
headstrong and conscientious.  When she went away to college, she was somewhat 
naïve and became overextended in credit cards. Even though she became pregnant 
during her sophomore year in college, she was determined to finish school.  She would 
attend classes and work several jobs to make ends meet. He convinced her to move 
home so she could get a little help with her daughter.  He is proud that his daughter was 
able to achieve her undergraduate and graduate degrees. He is not proud of her 
financial situation but supports her and stands behind her.  She is a very conscientious 
outstanding member of the community. (Tr at 63-66.) 
 
The Senior Staffing Supervisor of Applicant’s company states Applicant is 
efficient, organized, and willing to complete necessary tasks. She receives great 
feedback in the quality and quantity of work that she provides. She recommends her for 
a security clearance. (AE H.) The Operations Manager states Applicant is 
administratively solid and dependable. She is comfortable both working on her own and 
in a team environment. She can handle any challenging career with an opportunity for 
advancement based on her personality, education, and professional attitude. (AE I) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
5 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
6 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case.  Applicant has accumulated a significant 
amount of delinquent debt since 2001. The SOR alleges 19 debts, an approximate total 
balance of $14,785.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005)).  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) potentially apply to Applicant’s case: FC MC ¶ 20(a) (the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. While most of the 
debts were incurred several years ago when Applicant was away at college, the majority 
of the delinquent accounts remain unresolved. While Applicant resolved the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.o, the total amount of the resolved debt is 
$945.  More than $13,000 of unresolved debt remains. Applicant recently established a 
plan to resolve the remaining debt but it is too soon to conclude that her financial 
problems will not recur.  
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies.  Applicant incurred most of her 
debt while a college student and as a single mother. While college students struggle to 
pay expenses while attending classes, it is even more difficult to juggle the 
responsibilities of attending class and supporting a child. Applicant worked several jobs 
in order to support her child and to attain her goal of completing her college education. 
She eventually decided to move home to save on expenses which allowed her to 
complete her undergraduate and Masters Degrees. Most of the debts appear to be 
related to living expenses as opposed to a lavish lifestyle. Currently, Applicant works a 
full-time job and a part-time job in order to meet expenses. While she remains in debt, 
she has acted responsibly under the circumstances.   
 
 
7 
 
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) applies, in part. Applicant attended financial counseling in May 2008. She has 
established a budget and entered into a repayment plan with five of the creditors.  This 
is what she can afford to pay based on her budget. She intends to resolve the remaining 
debts after the first five debts are resolved. Applicant is given credit for having a plan to 
resolve her debts. However, considering the extent of the debt it will take some time for 
the delinquent debts to be resolved.  
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant resolved six of the debts and 
has entered into a repayment agreement with five other creditors though her consumer 
credit counseling plan. While Applicant has six debts that have not been resolved, she 
has taken the maximum action within her means to resolve her delinquent accounts. In 
addition to her full-time job, she has a part-time job. She lives with her father in order to 
reduce expenses. Upon being awarded a Master’s Degree in August 2008, it is likely 
that her income will increase if she finds a new job. Applicant initiated a good-faith effort 
to resolve her delinquent accounts.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the favorable 
comments of Applicant’s superiors and her father. I considered that Applicant’s financial 
struggles as a single mother and full-time student. Applicant reduced her expenses by 
living at home. She works a full-time and a part-time job. Despite the obstacles facing 
her, she achieved her goal of graduating from college. As soon as she was capable, 
she established a plan to pay her delinquent accounts. She resolved six of the debts. 
She is in a repayment plan with five of the debts and intends to resolve the remaining 
debts in the future. While a promise to pay in the future is ordinarily not considered 
sufficient mitigation under financial considerations, the facts of this case are unique. 
Applicant has taken action to resolve the majority of her delinquent accounts. Her 
 
8 
 
 
budget indicates that she does not live a lavish lifestyle. She should be given credit for 
completing her Master’s Degree which may have prevented her from resolving some of 
her delinquent accounts sooner but will likely improve her financial situation in the long 
term future. 
 
All of these factors indicate Applicant does not have poor self control, lacks 
judgment, or is unable to abide by rules and regulations. Her actions do establish that 
she is reliable, trustworthy, and will protect classified information. There is no risk that 
she will have to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. She has mitigated the security 
concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
    Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.p:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:    For Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
