 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01536 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns raised 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. His eligibility 
for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On August 3, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the 
security concerns under the guidelines for Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On June 30, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On July 18, 2008, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy on July 21, 2008. Applicant signed the 
document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM on August 6, 2008, and 
returned it to DOHA. He provided no further response to the FORM within the 30-day 
period he was given to do so, did not request additional time to respond, and made no 
objection to consideration of any evidence submitted by Department Counsel. I received 
the case assignment on September 24, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted all factual allegations contained in the SOR. 
Those admissions are incorporated into the findings herein.   
 
 Applicant is 48 years old, married with two children. In November 2005, he began 
working for a defense contractor. In August 2006, he submitted an e-QIP. (Item 4). 
 
 In response to Section 24(a) on the e-QIP that inquires into illegal drug activity, 
Applicant admitted that he used illegal drugs and estimated that he used marijuana, 
socially, a couple times a month from June 1975 until August 2005. (Item 4 at 30). In 
response to Section 24(c), he denied ever purchasing illegal drugs.  In a September 
2007 interview with a government investigator, he disclosed that he used marijuana until 
June 2006. Later in the interview, he admitted that the last time he used it was in June 
2007 after becoming distressed about his brother’s divorce. (Item 5 at 14). He normally 
used the substance with friends because his wife does not approve of his drug use and 
does no know that he continues to use it. (Id. a 13). He no longer sees one of his 
friends, who provided the marijuana, because the friend moved out of the area. (Id. at 
14). Applicant believes he will use it in the future. (Id.). He has not participated in any 
substance abuse counseling. (Id.). 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶¶ 
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
 
3 
 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”   
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
The security concern pertaining to drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. (a) Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and; (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; (b) drug abuse is the illegal use of 
a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
 
4 
 
 
This guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Based 
on Applicant’s admissions that he used marijuana about twice a month from 
approximately June 1975 until June 2007, the Government raised a disqualifying 
condition under AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse (see above definition).” 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of that disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of 
the resulting security concerns.  Under AG ¶ 26, four conditions are listed that could 
mitigate the security concern arising from illegal drug use: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 (c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged 
illness during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since 
ended; and 
 (d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.   
 Based on an evaluation of the record evidence as a whole, I conclude that AG ¶ 
25(a) does not apply. Applicant used illegal drugs a couple times a month from June 
1975 until June 2007, the last incident being about a year ago. Given his 32-year history 
of marijuana use, his behavior does cast doubt on his trustworthiness and good 
judgment.   
Applicant stated he may use the illegal substance in the future; hence AG ¶ 25(b) 
does not apply. The record does not contain any evidence to support the application of 
AG ¶ 25(c) or AG ¶ 25(d).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The security concern pertaining to the guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in ¶ 2(a) of the SOR that Applicant deliberately falsified 
his response to a government investigator about the length of time that he used 
marijuana.  In ¶ 2(b), the Government alleged that his answer in the e-QIP regarding his 
purchasing marijuana was inconsistent with his answer during the interview. The 
Government alleged in ¶ 2(c) that he used marijuana after submitting his e-QIP. The 
Government contended that those omissions may raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying under AG ¶ 15. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 sets out seven conditions that could raise security concerns and be 
disqualifying. Two of them are applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
Applicant admitted that he intentionally failed to initially disclose to the 
government investigator the last date on which he smoked marijuana, but 
instead, disclosed a date one year earlier (2006) before disclosing 2007. Based 
on that admission, the Government established AG ¶ (16(a). Applicant also 
admitted that he used marijuana for 32 years, which raises a potential for 
exploitation, because such information, if known in his community, could affect 
his reputation, as noted under AG ¶ 16 (e)(1).  
 
 
6 
 
 
Although Applicant admitted that he gave inconsistent answers regarding 
the purchase of marijuana, the evidence does not support the admission. 
Applicant denied that he ever purchased marijuana in his response to Question 
24(c) on the e-QIP and also during his interview. Hence, his answers are not 
inconsistent as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b and this allegation is found in his favor.  
 
Applicant did not provide any evidence that would trigger the application of 
any of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17 as to the allegations 
contained in ¶ 2. a and ¶ 2.c of  the SOR. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 In addition to evaluating the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each 
guideline, the adjudicative process requires thorough consideration and review of all 
available, reliable information about the applicant, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, to arrive at a balanced decision. The essence of scrutinizing all appropriate 
variables in a case is referred to as the “whole person” analysis. In evaluating the 
conduct of the applicant, the administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 48-year-old married 
man, who began using marijuana in 1975 and continued using it until 2007, and after 
completing an e-QIP. While I find his candid admissions of his drug use noteworthy, his 
assertion that he may use marijuana in the future is very concerning and indicative of a 
lack of good judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement and personal conduct. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant  
 Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
