KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline J
DIGEST: The Judge erred in applying the current Adjudicative Guidelines, in light of the fact
that Applicant’s SOR was issued prior to September 1, 2006.  Adverse decision remanded.  
CASENO: 02-26033.a1
DATE: 11/17/2008
DATE: November 17, 2008
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 02-26033
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Virginia M. Gomez, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 31, 2006,  DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline
J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On July 24, 2008, after the hearing, Administrative
Judge Darlene Lokey-Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant  filed
a timely appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30. 
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in admitting post-
“The revised Guidelines apply to all adjudications and other determinations in which a Statement of Reasons1
has not been issued by September 1, 2006.  All adjudications and other determinations in which a Statement of Reasons
has been issued prior to September 1, 2006, will be made under the current Guidelines.”
The Government’s reply brief does not cite provisions of the Adjudicative Guidelines or otherwise discuss this2
issue.
hearing documents submitted by the government; whether the Judge erred in concluding that
Applicant intentionally falsified her security clearance application (SCA); whether the Judge’s
credibility determination is erroneous; and whether the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had failed
to mitigate the security concerns in her case is erroneous.  Finding error, we remand the case to the
Judge.
In addressing whether the Judge properly evaluated the applicable mitigating conditions, we
note that DOHA issued Applicant’s SOR prior to September 1, 2006.  As a consequence, it appears
that the case should have been decided under the Adjudicative Guidelines in effect at that time.  See
USD(I) Memorandum, Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines, dated August 30, 2006.  1
However, the Judge’s decision and Applicant’s brief both improperly cite the Adjudicative
Guidelines which apply to SORs issued on or after September 1, 2006.   Therefore, we conclude that2
the best resolution is to remand the case to the Judge for further proceedings consistent with the
Directive.  The other issues raised by Applicant on appeal are not ripe for consideration. 
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a security clearance is REMANDED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
