 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 03-17291 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jonathan A Gowen, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines M (Use of 
Information Technology Systems) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 19, 2002, and 
he was granted an interim clearance. On March 25, 2008, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security concerns under 
Guidelines M and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. Applicant’s interim 
clearance was withdrawn in November 2007. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 28, 2008; and he requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. After the File of Relevant Material was sent to Applicant, 
he retained an attorney. On September 3, 2008, his attorney requested a hearing. 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 15, 2008, and the case was 
assigned to me on the same day. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 18, 
2008, scheduling the hearing for October 16, 2008. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) 
A through E, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on October 22, 2008.  
 
I granted Department Counsel’s request to keep the record open until October 
27, 2008, to submit a memorandum of law pertaining to the statutes, regulations, 
directives, or rules that may have been violated by the conduct alleged under Guideline 
M. I received Department Counsel’s memorandum on October 27, 2008, and 
Applicant’s response to the memorandum on November 7, 2008. They are attached to 
the record as Hearing Exhibits I and II. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 On my own motion, I amended SOR ¶ 1, without objection of either party, to 
insert the verb that was omitted from the second sentence. As amended, the word 
“include” is added after the third word of the second sentence (Tr. 10). The amendment 
is handwritten on the SOR. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
2.b. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old senior systems engineer employed by a federal 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since November 2002. His duties 
involve installing and maintaining access control systems for government buildings (Tr. 
23). He was married in November 1997, owns his home, and has three children, ages 
seven, three, and two.  
 
 Applicant applied for a job with a federal agency in 2002, and he disclosed his 
illegal file swapping to a security investigator (GX 2 at 2). On October 25, 2007, he 
submitted a signed and sworn statement to another security investigator in which he 
discussed his involvement in illegal file swapping (GX 2). He testified he was 
uncomfortable during this interview, but nothing in his sworn statement was untrue. He 
felt, however that some clarification of his statement was needed. He used his response 
to the SOR and his testimony at the hearing to clarify some parts of his statement (Tr. 
27).  
 
 
3 
 
 
In his sworn statement, Applicant defined illegal file swapping as “downloading 
files or programs without paying for the license.” He admitted illegal file swapping from 
1993, when he was in college, until October 20, 2007, when he downloaded a serial 
number for a multimedia program and used it to unlock the program and view a movie 
trailer. The serial number would have cost $29.99 if purchased, but Applicant was able 
to download it without paying for it.  
 
Applicant told the security investigator the computer sites he used were “too 
numerous to list.” He admitted illegal file swapping about once a month, except for a six-
month period of unemployment from May to November 2002, when he engaged in file 
swapping about twice a week. At the hearing, he testified he looked for files to download 
about once a month, but did not download something every month.  
 
The materials illegally downloaded included anti-virus programs, word processing 
programs, games, movies, and miscellaneous study guides, certifications, “cheat 
sheets” for games, and manuals for products. He eventually purchased some of the 
movies and games he had downloaded. He estimated the total value of programs he 
had illegally downloaded to be between $750 and $1,000. He told the investigator he 
planned “to do less” illegal file downloading and he hoped that “someday” he would stop 
it completely. At the hearing, he testified he had not illegally downloaded anything since 
October 2007 and did not intend to do it again (Tr. 49). 
 
Applicant testified he had never sold or profited from anything he downloaded 
(Tr. 34). He admitted that, even though the law in the early 1990s was “very gray,” he 
knew “from a moral perspective” it was wrong to download programs without paying for 
them (Tr. 46). 
 
 In his statement, Applicant also admitted that in 1999 he and two coworkers stole 
computer equipment from a former employer while moving equipment to a different 
location. He did not know what his coworkers took, but he personally took four memory 
sticks worth $25 to $50 each, a central processing unit chip worth $100 to $120, and a 
video card worth $75 to $100. The equipment was old and not intended for further use 
by his employer (Answer at 2). In his answer to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant 
stated he would not have stolen the equipment if his coworkers had not approached him 
with the idea and if the likelihood of getting caught had not been remote (Answer at 2; 
Tr. 50). 
 
 Applicant submitted performance appraisals from his current employer for his two 
previous rating periods. For the period ending in May 2008 (AX B), he was rated 
“outstanding” in independence; and “excellent” in technical skill, work quality, and 
dependability, on a five-level scale ranging from “outstanding” to “poor.” For the period 
ending in November 2006 (AX A), he was rated “outstanding” in dependability and 
independence; and “excellent” in technical skill, work quality, and productivity. In August 
2007, he was promoted to be an area operations manager (Tr. 36). 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant presented a statement from his director of operations (AX C), who 
described him as “a person of high moral character and judgment.” A physical security 
specialist for the U.S. Secret Service who has worked with Applicant for two years 
considers him “a person worthy of trust and confidence,” whose integrity has never 
been in question (AX D). Another Secret Service employee who has worked with 
Applicant for six years considers him trustworthy and reliable (AX E).  
 
Applicant testified his current employer was aware of his file swapping activities 
but not the theft of computer equipment (Tr. 37). His supervisor’s first reaction when 
informed of the illegal file sharing was “you’ve got to be kidding me,” because his 
supervisor believed none of their employees would have a clearance if illegal file 
sharing were a disqualifying factor (Tr. 54). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
5 
 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 The SOR alleges Applicant “illegally downloaded software, serial numbers, 
games, study guides, manuals, and movies” from 1993 until “at least” October 20, 2007 
(SOR ¶ 1.a); and that he intends to continue his illegal downloading (SOR ¶ 1.b). The 
security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 39 as follows:  
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant. The 
disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 40(a) is raised by “illegal or unauthorized entry into any 
information technology system or component thereof.” AG ¶ 40(c) is raised by “use of 
any information technology system to gain unauthorized access to another system or to 
a compartmented area within the same system.” AG ¶ 40(f) is raised by “introduction, 
removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or media to or from any 
information technology system without authorization, when prohibited by rules, 
procedures, guidelines, or regulations.” The phrase “any information technology system” 
indicates that this guideline applies to privately-owned systems as well as government 
 
6 
 
 
systems. See ISCR Case No. 99-0054, 2000 WL 1247735 (App. Bd. Jul. 24, 2000) 
(Guideline M covers misuse of government computers or private computers). 
 AG ¶¶ 40(a) and (c) both involve “unauthorized” entry or access. There is no 
evidence Applicant entered any system illegally or without authorization. Instead, it 
shows he entered systems available to the public, but was able to bypass the licensing 
requirements and download games, software, music, videos, and publications without 
paying for them. Thus, AG ¶¶ 40(a) and (c) are not raised. 
 
 The issue under AG ¶ 40(f) is whether Applicant downloaded and copied 
software or media “without authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedures, 
guidelines, or regulations.” Department Counsel submitted no evidence of rules, 
procedures, guidelines, or regulations at the hearing, but she submitted a memorandum 
of law after the hearing, arguing that Applicant was guilty of copyright violations as well 
as larceny under state law. In response to Department Counsel’s post-hearing 
submission, Applicant submitted a memorandum arguing that the government failed to 
prove a violation of any rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations. Attached to 
Applicant’s submission was a legal treatise tracing the changes in copyright law 
triggered by the widespread practice of downloading and recording media from the 
internet: Niels B. Schumann, Direct Infringement on Peer-to-Peer Networks, William 
Mitchell College of Law, Legal Studies Research Paper Series, Working Paper No. 9, 
April 2005, available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=703882 (hereinafter referred to as 
“Schumann”). 
 The Copyright Act, 17 U.S.C. § 106, et seq., vests certain exclusive rights in the 
owner of a copyright. The Act also recognizes that fair use of copyrighted material is not 
an infringement of the copyright. Fair use is not statutorily defined, except by illustrative 
examples, “such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple 
copies for classroom work), scholarship, or research.” 17 U.S.C. § 107. The 
development of the law regarding “fair use” is complex and evolving. In A&M Records, 
Inc. v. Napster, Inc., 239 F.3d 1004 (9th Cir.2001), the Ninth Circuit affirmed a trial court 
decision that about 75 million users were infringing copyright by exchanging music files 
via a peer-to-peer network. Napster involved a network in which each user became a 
distributor because the user’s computer became a server accessible to other users. 
Recording music for personal, noncommercial use is statutorily recognized as protected 
from infringement actions by the Audio Home Recording Act of 1992, 17 U.S.C. § 
1008); See Schumann at 5. Similarly, recording movies on a videocassette recorder for 
personal, noncommercial use was recognized by the Supreme Court as fair use in Sony 
Corporation of America v. Universal City Studios, 464 U.S. 417, 442 (1984). See 
Schumann at 8-9.  
 The No Electronic Theft Act, 17 U.S.C. § 506, enacted in 1997, imposed criminal 
penalties for copyright infringement, if the infringement was “for purposes of commercial 
advantage or private financial gain” by the reproduction of one or more copies of 
copyrighted works during a 180 period with a total retail value of more than $1,000, or 
by distribution by making it available on a computer network accessible to the public, 
 
7 
 
 
knowing that it was intended for commercial distribution. Applicant admitted copying for 
“private financial gain,” i.e., avoiding payment for the downloaded materials, but the total 
value of the materials fell short of the $1,000 threshold, and they were not made 
available on a computer network. Thus, his conduct did not violate the No Electronic 
Theft Act.   
 The record is sparse with respect to the circumstances surrounding much of 
Applicant’s copying of materials from the internet, but he arguably was within the 
boundaries of “fair use” on some of his downloading and copying, except for those 
instances when he bypassed the licensing requirements. The Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (DMCA), 17 U.S.C. § 1201, which became effective on November 29, 
1999, provides, “No person shall circumvent a technological measure that effectively 
controls access to a work protected under this title.” Applicant admitted that he 
circumvented the measures that required payment for many of the materials he 
downloaded. Thus, each time he circumvented the payment requirement between 
November 29, 1999 and October 20, 2007, his last admitted download, he violated the 
DMCA. 
 Department Counsel also argued that Applicant committed larceny under the law 
of the state in which he now resides. The statute cited, however, refers to “goods or 
merchandise of any store or other mercantile establishment.” It also applies to only one 
of several states in which Applicant resided while downloading materials without paying 
for them. The state’s computer crimes statute, not cited by Department Counsel, is 
devoted primarily to crimes in which a computer is used as a tool for committing other 
criminal offenses. In light of my conclusion that Applicant violated the DMCA, I find it 
unnecessary to determine whether he violated state law. Based on his violations of the 
DMCA, I conclude AG ¶ 40(f) is raised. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
condition in AG ¶ 40(f), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 Among the enumerated mitigating conditions under this guideline, the only 
relevant mitigating condition is set out in AG ¶ 41(a): “[S]o much time has elapsed since 
the behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment.” This mitigating condition requires an assessment of the likelihood of 
recurrence based on either the passage of time or the unusual circumstances 
surrounding the behavior. Even if recurrence is unlikely, this mitigating condition is not 
established unless the conduct does not cast doubt on the Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 The first prong of AG ¶ 41(a) (“so much time”) is not established, because 
Applicant’s last act of downloading material without paying for it was only a year before 
 
8 
 
 
his hearing, ending a span of about 15 years of downloading copyrighted material one 
or more times a month. The second prong (“unusual circumstances”) is not established 
by the evidence. Regarding the likelihood of recurrence, Applicant told a security 
investigator in October 2007 that he intended to do less unauthorized downloading and 
“someday” would stop completely. At the hearing he declared he would not do it again. 
Based on his demeanor and all the evidence, I believe Applicant’s declaration of intent 
at the hearing was honest and sincere, but it was motivated by his belated realization 
that continuing his unauthorized downloading could cost him his clearance. I am not 
convinced that he will not revert to old behavior when the pressure of obtaining a 
clearance is removed. 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant used a contractor-owned or government 
computer for his activities. All the downloading appears to have been off duty. The 
market value of the materials he downloaded is less than $1,000, spread over a 15-year 
period. The security significance of his conduct arises from its repetitive nature over a 
long period, and his awareness that each act was illegal. His conduct demonstrates an 
inability or unwillingness to follow rules; and it casts doubt about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 41(a) is not established. 
 
 The SOR ¶ 1.b alleges Applicant intends to continue his illegal downloading. This 
allegation does not plead an independent basis for concern, but merely alleges intent to 
continue the disqualifying conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. As such, it pleads the absence 
of mitigation instead of an independent basis for concern. It also is rebutted by the 
evidence because, as noted above, Applicant honestly and sincerely intended as of the 
date of the hearing to discontinue his illegal downloading. Whether he will change his 
mind when he is relieved of the pressure of obtaining a clearance is a separate issue. I 
resolve SOR ¶ 1.b in Applicant’s favor. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR cross-alleges the Guideline M conduct under this guideline (SOR ¶ 
2.a). In addition, it alleges that in 1999 he stole four memory sticks, a central processing 
unit chip, and a video card (SOR ¶ 2.b). The concern under this guideline is set out in 
AG ¶ 15 as follows: “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.” 
Two potentially disqualifying conditions are relevant. The disqualifying condition 
in AG ¶ 16(c) is raised by “credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating 
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.” AG ¶ 16(e) is raised 
by “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, that creates a 
 
9 
 
 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . engaging in activities 
which, if known, may affect the person's personal, professional, or community standing.” 
Applicant’s 15-year record of intentionally circumventing the requirement to pay for 
downloaded materials, his 9-year record of violating the DMCA, and his theft of 
computer equipment in 1999 demonstrate an unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, and are sufficient to raise AG ¶ 16(c). His theft of computer equipment and 
his concealment of that conduct from his current employer raise AG ¶ 16(e). 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Each 
copyright violation, and arguably even the theft of computer equipment, might be 
considered “minor” standing alone, but the repetitive nature of Applicant’s conduct over 
a 15-year period negates a finding that it was infrequent. His conduct was recent and 
not the product of unusual circumstances. His repeated illegal conduct, knowing that it 
was illegal, casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. For these 
reasons as well as the reasons set out above pertaining to AG ¶ 41(a) under Guideline 
M, I conclude AG 17(c) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual has taken positive 
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 
17(e). Applicant has disclosed his unauthorized downloading to his supervisors, but he 
did not disclose his theft of computer equipment in 1999. I conclude this mitigating 
condition is established only for his unauthorized downloading. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines M and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
 
10 
 
 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant began his unauthorized downloading while in college, at a time when 
the law was unclear and file sharing was widespread and socially acceptable. He knew, 
or should have known, that his unauthorized downloading was an issue after he was 
interviewed about it by a security investigator in 2002. He continued it after receiving an 
interim clearance and did not stop until he was interviewed by a security investigator in 
October 2007. Even during that interview, he was noncommittal about changing his 
behavior. His comment to the investigator about hoping to stop illegal downloading 
completely suggests something akin to addiction.  
 
 Applicant is now 35 years old, married, a homeowner, a father of three children, 
gainfully employed, and highly respected by his peers, colleagues and supervisors. He 
is not an expert in copyright law. He held an interim clearance for almost six years, 
apparently without incident. There is no evidence he misused information systems 
owned by the government or his employer. There is no evidence of damage to 
information systems or harm to others, except for depriving some copyright owners of 
their royalties. 
 
 On the other hand, Applicant admitted knowing his conduct was wrong. He 
persisted in his conduct even though he knew after a security interview in 2002 that it 
raised security issues. He continued his illegal downloading while holding an interim 
clearance. His area of expertise is in access control systems. His lengthy history of 
knowingly and intentionally breaking the rules by misusing his expertise to bypass 
technological protection for copyrighted materials raises doubt about his ability and 
willingness to follow rules.  
 
 Applicant knowingly and intentionally violated the law every time he illegally 
bypassed a licensing agreement or otherwise failed to pay for software. He made a 
conscious choice not to obey the law, knowing that it was unlikely he would be found 
out, sued, prosecuted, or otherwise held accountable. His theft of computer parts from 
his employer suggests his vulnerability to peer pressure and willingness to act in self 
interest when detection is unlikely. He may have matured past his earlier susceptibility 
to peer pressure, but he continued his illegal downloading until recently, when he finally 
realized he would be held accountable for it. The high degree of trust and confidence 
implicit in a security clearance requires that an applicant be willing to follow the rules 
even when unsupervised and unlikely to be caught or sanctioned for violations.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines M and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on use of information systems 
and personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M (Information Technology): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
