                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 06-13149 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate criminal conduct, personal conduct, and sexual 
behavior security concerns. Moreover, he falsified his security clearance application. 
Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised.1 The SOR alleges security concerns under 
 
1  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and Guideline D 
(Sexual Behavior). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether his clearance should be denied 
or revoked. 
 
On June 2, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations (Answer), and 
elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 4). A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated August 21, 2008, was 
provided to him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on 
August 27, 2008. He failed to provide an answer to the FORM within the 30-day period 
provided, filed no objections, and provided no additional information. The case was 
assigned to me on October 24, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a, and denied SOR ¶ 1.b. 
He failed to specifically admit or deny SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 3.a and 3.b. Based on his Answer’s 
explanations, I considered SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 3.a, and 3.b to be contested. His admissions 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old quality assurance manager working for a government 
contractor.2 He served in the U.S. Air Force on active duty from 1978 to 1998. He 
retired with the rank of Technical Sergeant, pay grade E-6. His service was 
characterized as honorable (Answer). In 1995, Applicant received access to classified 
information at the secret level. Apparently, he has continued to have that same access 
to classified information until 2008. 
 
He married his wife in 1980. He disclosed no children in his SF 86; however, in 
his answer to the SOR Applicant indicated he has a teenage son. In 2000, he was hired 
by his current employer, a defense contractor, and apparently has been working for that 
same employer since. In 2002, Applicant received a Master’s degree. 
 
On April 11, 2001, Applicant was observed by three police officers with his pants 
down while he was being masturbated by another man in a port-a-potty located in a 
public park. Applicant was arrested and charged with Engaging in Lewd Act in a Public 
Place (Item 8). Applicant pled Nolo Contendere to the charge, was convicted, and paid 
a $1,200 fine (Item 6, Answer). 
 
 
 
2  Item 5 is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless stated otherwise. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 
  On April 13, 2005, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 
86).3 Question 26 asked whether in the last seven years Applicant had been arrested 
for, charged with, or convicted of any offenses not listed in response to other questions 
in the security clearance application. Applicant answered “No” to question 26, and 
deliberately failed to disclose his May 2001 arrest, charge, and conviction for Engaging 
in Lewd Act in a Public Place. Instead of disclosing the May 2001 incident, he disclosed 
he received a municipal ticket in 2000.  
 
During a follow up background interview in January 2006, Applicant was 
confronted by a government investigator about his failure to disclose his May 2001 
arrest, charge, and conviction. In his statement to the government investigator, 
Applicant denied ever exposing his genitals or engaging in a lewd act (Item 6).4 
Applicant explained he went to the park and staged the situation because he wanted to 
be arrested and placed in jail. Applicant claimed he wanted to be placed in jail so that 
he could take revenge against a teenager who was in jail for stabbing and assaulting 
Applicant’s son. Applicant is ashamed of his arrest for Engaging in a Lewd Act, and he 
has told no one of this incident. 
 
In his June 2008 answer to the SOR, Applicant reaffirmed his January 2006 
statement to a government investigator. Applicant specifically admitted he did not fully 
disclose all the material facts in his response to question 26. He listed the municipal 
ticket instead of the correct charge because he was embarrassed and did not want his 
peers or his employer’s administrative personnel to find out he was charged with 
Engaging in Lewd Act in a Public Place in May 2001. He denied ever exposing his 
genitals or engaging on a lewd act. 
 
The government alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b that Applicant was a suspect in a 
September 2003 assault and battery incident. Police crime reports show that in 
September 17, 2003, two teenagers reported that an unknown man pushed one of the 
teenagers into the teenager’s car and threatened to “kick his ass” (Item 7). The 
teenagers reported the incident to the police and provided enough information to track 
down the assailant’s car. The car was later identified as belonging to Applicant. One of 
the teenagers identified Applicant as the perpetrator in a photographic lineup conducted 
by a police officer. According to the police report, the teenager victim filed a complaint 
against Applicant, which was to be forwarded to the city attorneys. There is no further 
information about the disposition of the alleged complaint or possible charge. In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegation and stated he had no knowledge of 
any assault charge ever filed against him.  
 
 
3  Item 5.  
 
4  Item 6 is the source for the facts in this paragraph unless otherwise stated. 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.5 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”6 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
 
5  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
6  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).7 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the security concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt 
about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
Applicant’s arrest, charge, and subsequent conviction for Engaging in Lewd 
Act/Public Place triggers the applicability of AG ¶ 31(c): “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted, or convicted.” 
 
I also find that Applicant falsified his security clearance application (See 
discussion under Guideline E, infra). The Government did not allege the falsification 
under Guideline J. Thus, the falsification of the security clearance cannot be used as 
grounds to deny Applicant’s application under Guideline J. However, I am required to 
consider Applicant’s overall questionable behavior when evaluating the seriousness of 
the conduct alleged in the SOR to determine factors such as the extent to which his 
behavior is recent; the likelihood of recurrence; Applicant’s explanations concerning the 
circumstances of the incidents alleged; and his rehabilitation.8 
 
7  “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
8  ISCR Case No. 04-09959 at 3 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006). 
 
6 
 
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 1.b (assault in September 2003), I find the government 
produced substantial evidence to support this allegation. AG ¶ 31(c): “allegation or 
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted, or convicted,” applies. However, the security concern is mitigated 
under AG ¶ 32(c): “evidence that the person did not commit the offense.” No other 
mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
Under Guideline E, conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers 
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process. AG ¶ 15. 
 
Applicant omitted relevant, material information in his answer to Question 26 of 
his security clearance application. Considering the record as a whole, I am convinced 
Applicant deliberately omitted the information. Numerous factors weighed in my analysis 
to reach that conclusion, including: Applicant’s age, his level of education, and his years 
of military service and in his current job. More importantly, Applicant admitted he was so 
embarrassed about his May 2001 sexual behavior, that he falsified his SF 86 to prevent 
his peers and employer’s administrative assistant from finding out about his behavior. 
 
I also find Applicant made a false statement to the government investigator in 
January 2006. Applicant denied ever exposing his genitals or engaging in a lewd act. 
The April 2001 police report indicates three police officers observed Applicant while he 
was being masturbated. He pled Nolo Contendere to the charge of Engaging in a Lewd 
Act/Public Place. Applicant’s explanation -- that he staged the situation because he 
wanted to be arrested and placed in jail to take revenge against a teenager who 
attacked his son – is not credible. Applicant falsified his SF 86 to cover his 
embarrassment for the May 2001 charge. It is difficult to believe someone of his age, 
level of education, and military service experience would have chosen such an 
embarrassing charge (to him) to get arrested.  
 
Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire;” AG ¶ 16(b): 
“deliberately providing false of misleading information concerning relevant facts to an . . 
. investigator;” and AG ¶ 16(e): “personal conduct, or concealment of information about 
one’s conduct, that creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing,” apply. 
 
I considered all seven mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17, and find that none 
applies. Applicant’s sparse favorable information fails to justify the applicability of any of 
the mitigating conditions. 
 
7 
 
 
 
Sexual Behavior 
 
  Under AG ¶ 12 the government concern is that: 
 
Sexual behaviour that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality 
or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
 Applicant engaged in a lewd act in a public place. He was prosecuted and pled 
Nolo Contendere to Engaging in a Lewd Act/Public Place. He is so embarrassed about 
the charge that he has told no one about it. Moreover, he falsified his SF 86 to prevent 
his peers and others from finding out about the charge. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior triggers the applicability of three sexual behavior 
disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 13(a): “sexual behavior of a criminal nature;” AG ¶ 13(c): 
“sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, of 
duress;” and AG ¶ 13(d): “sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of 
discretion or judgment.” 
 
 I considered all four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 14, and find that none 
applies. Applicant’s sparse favorable information fails to fully justify the applicability of 
any of the mitigating conditions. I specifically considered AG ¶ 14(b): “the sexual 
behavior happened so long ago, so infrequent, or under such unusual circumstances, 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment,” and AG ¶ 14(c): “the behavior no longer serves as 
a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress,” and I find they do not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s questionable sexual behavior occurred seven years ago, and could 
be considered temporally remote. However, his falsification of the SF 86 brings to the 
forefront the security concerns raised under the sexual behavior guideline. It shows 
Applicant is still vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress because of his 
embarrassment. Moreover, considering Applicant’s behavior as a whole, it casts doubts 
on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 Concerning SOR ¶ 3.b, I find for Applicant in the decretal paragraph of this 
decision because SOR ¶ 3.b duplicates the allegation in SOR ¶ 3.a. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
8 
 
 
                                           
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
Applicant receives favorable credit for his 20-years of honorable service to his 
country, his educational achievements, and his years of employment by a government 
contractor. Applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor seven years ago, and his 
behavior, if among consenting, discrete adults would not have been considered as a 
security concern.9 
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. His 
sexual behaviour was of a public nature and reflects lack of discretion and judgment. He 
aggravated his situation by omitting information from his SF 86 and his statement to the 
government investigator. Applicant’s falsification is directly related to his desire to hide 
his embarrassing 2001 sexual behaviour. Because he is embarrassed and afraid that 
any of his peers or co-workers find out about his past behaviour, the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress exists and it is likely it would continue to 
exist. His statement about why he staged his arrest is not credible and this failure to be 
candid raises additional security concerns. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct, personal conduct, and sexual 
behavior.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
9  See Executive Order 12968, Access to Classified Information, dated August 2, 1995, 
Subsections 3.1(c) (The U.S. Government does not discriminate on the basis of . . . sexual orientation), 
and 3.1(d) (No inference . . . may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual orientation of the employee). 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a & 2.b: Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline D:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Juan J. Rivera 
Administrative Judge 
