 As defined in Appendix 10 of DoD Regulation 5220.2-R, as amended.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )
SSN: ----------------- )       ADP Case No. 07-09114
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
request for eligibility for a public trust position is denied.
On August 20, 2004, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust
Positions (SF 85P) to request eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  involving access to1
sensitive information as part of her employment with a defense contractor. After
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary
affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant2
Applicant’s request. On February 11, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the Revised
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
 I excluded Gx. 4 because they it not meet the authentication requirements of Directive Enclosure 3, ¶4
E3.1.20. (Tr. 23 - 30)
2
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E3
(personal conduct).
On April 7, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on July 9, 2008, and I convened a hearing on September 4,
2008. The parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented nine exhibits
(Gx. 1 - 9).  Applicant testified in her own behalf and offered one exhibit admitted4
without objection as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on
September 18, 2008. I left the record open after the hearing to allow Applicant time to
submit additional relevant information. The record closed on October 1, 2008, when I
received Applicant’s post-hearing submission via Department Counsel. It has been
admitted without objection as Ax. B.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the government alleged Applicant owed approximately
$24,564 for 37 delinquent debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.kk. Applicant admitted without
explanation the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.p, 1.r, 1.w - 1.y, and 1.ee - 1.ii. She denied
without explanation the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.q, 1.s - 1.v, 1.z - 1.dd, 1.jj and 1.kk. The
government further alleged in SOR ¶ 1.ll that Applicant was charged and convicted in
1996 of embezzlement, for which she received five years supervised probation,
including three months home confinement. Applicant also denied this allegation without
explanation. In addition to the facts admitted through her response to the SOR, I make
the following findings of fact based on my review of the pleadings, transcript, and
exhibits.
Applicant is 37 years old and employed by a health care and medical insurance
company contracted to manage medical insurance claims and information for
TRICARE, the Department of Defense (DoD) medical insurance system for military
personnel and their families. She has held her current position for about 12 years, and
has performed well in all her assigned duties. Friends and co-workers hold Applicant in
high regard for her trustworthiness, hard work and reliability, and her most recent
performance appraisal shows she is a good worker. (Ax. B) Applicant has two children,
ages 19 and 3, by two different fathers. Her older child still lives with her and attended
college for a time. But she now has a child and is working to help support herself.
Applicant received child support for her older child until the child turned 18. She has yet
to receive child support from the father of her younger child.
From about March 1993 until about August 2002, Applicant lived with her
boyfriend, the father of her older child, in a trailer they financed together. Applicant’s
 Assuming the conduct occurred twice weekly for 50 weeks.5
3
boyfriend developed a gambling problem, which caused her to eventually move out in
2002. His gambling also caused Applicant to incur delinquent debts because the
boyfriend spent money that should otherwise have gone to supporting them both. When
she moved out in 2002, Applicant expected her boyfriend to continue paying on the note
for their mobile home, but he failed to do so and she is now at least jointly liable for a
$10,000 debt. (SOR ¶ 1.q) Applicant denied this SOR allegation because she feels the
balance owed is actually about $6,800, but could not corroborate her claim. She does
not contest the fact that she owes a debt to that creditor. (Tr. 44 - 45, 60)
Before she began working for her current employer in 1996, Applicant worked as
a bank teller. For about one year around 1995, she stole between $100 and $300 about
twice weekly from the automated teller machine at her branch. She was charged and
convicted of embezzlement and sentenced to five years probation. She also was
ordered to complete financial management and budget training. Applicant admitted at
her hearing that this happened and that she stole because of her financial problems at
the time. However, she denied the corresponding SOR allegation (SOR ¶ 1.ll) only
because she claimed she did not spend a day in jail as alleged. There is no indication in
the record that Applicant was ever ordered to make restitution to the bank for stealing
between $10,000 and $30,000.  (Tr. 75)5
Applicant has owed the debt on her mobile home since about 2002, and she still
owes numerous debts from the time she and her boyfriend were together. However,
Applicant has continued to incur new delinquencies through poor decision making. For
example, the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.ee is for cable service she was unable to pay for.
The debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.ff is for cable service under her name for a friend in the
friend’s home. The friend was unable to pay for the cable service either. (Tr. 73 - 74)
Many of the debts Applicant owes are for unpaid medical bills incurred totaling
about $2,475 for her younger child. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.c, 1.f - n) Those debts are in
collection and most are for less than $100 each. Applicant has implied that they should
have been covered by her health benefits at work. Applicant contacted the collection
agency and was offered a repayment plan of about $336 each month. (Gx. 2) However,
she has been unable to make such payments. (Tr. 52 - 53)
In November 2007, Applicant had a negative cash flow each month. Her
expenses were approximately $370 more than her income. (Gx. 2) She took on a
second job in May 2008, which gives her about $600 more income each month. Since
about August 2008, Applicant has worked with a financial advisor to organize her
finances and to repay her debts systematically. According to the information provided,
Applicant has been making modest payments to some of her creditors, and her advisor
has been helping her correct some of the errors in her credit history. Applicant has also
established a monthly budget that accounts for all of her expenses and payments. From
the information she provided, it appears her monthly income and her expenses are
even. The average payment to her creditors is $30 each month. (Ax. A)
 Directive. 6.3.6
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
4
Applicant is trying to reduce her costs by looking for a place to rent for less and
reducing her discretionary spending overall. She will have to pay for day care for her
younger child for at least another year, but also will have her truck paid off in early 2009,
resulting in an extra $300 available each month.
Policies
Each trustworthiness decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors6
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factor are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to sensitive
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
Guideline F (financial considerations), at AG ¶ 18.
A trustworthiness determination is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to7
have access to automated sensitive information. The government bears the initial
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to
deny or revoke a position of trust for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be
able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden,
it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. 
A person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
5
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Notwithstanding the exclusion of Gx. 4, the record evidence (the government’s
exhibits, Applicant’s various SOR admissions and her testimony at the hearing) is
sufficient to support the allegations in the SOR. Applicant’s denials to several SOR
allegations were entered, not to contest the fact she owes those debts, but to take issue
with details about amounts owed and whether she had been able to contact the
creditors. Available information shows Applicant has owed numerous debts for several
years, that she has only recently taken tangible steps to pay or otherwise resolve her
debts, and that she has resorted to illegal conduct to get money to pay her expenses.
The foregoing requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19(a)
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations), and 19(d) (deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing
deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of trust).
In response to the government’s information, Applicant has shown she is
attacking her debts and financial problems systematically through her work with a
financial counselor. This requires consideration of the mitigating condition in AG ¶ 20(c)
(the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control); however, she
has not presented information that shows her problem is under control. Applicant also
presented information showing some of her debt was caused by unforeseen
circumstances, which requires consideration of AG ¶ 20 (b) (the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances). While the
mobile home debt and the medical debts in collection may not have been of her own
doing, the record also shows she has not acted in a reasonable and responsible way
over the past several years to address these debts. I credit Applicant with working with
 See footnote 6, supra.9
 See footnote 8, supra. 10
6
a financial counselor for the past few months, but I have also considered that she has
taken little or no action to address her debts or improve her financial management since
at least 2002. Despite her improved awareness of the need for prudent personal money
management, it is too soon to conclude Applicant’s finances will not be a security
concern in the future. I conclude she has failed to overcome the adverse information
about her finances on which DOHA adjudicators relied when they issued the SOR. 
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 37 years old and is
presumed to be a mature responsible adult. She is a reliable worker for her company
and a devoted mother and grandmother. While she is sincere in her desire to resolve
her financial problems, the steps she has taken are insufficient when compared to
several years of unpaid debts and financial mismanagement. The fact remains, as well,
that as Applicant tries to repay her debts, she does not have a positive cash flow.
Finally, her poor financial management continued even after her conviction for
embezzlement and the requirement she complete budget and financial management
counseling. In short, the favorable information in her background is insufficient to
overcome the security concerns about her lengthy history of bad debt. The facts and
circumstances of Applicant’s finances present an unacceptable risk were she to be
granted access to sensitive information. 
A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available information bearing on9
Applicant’s finances shows there are still doubts about her ability or willingness to
protect the government’s interests as her own. Because protection of the national
interest is paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be resolved for the
government.10
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.ll: Against Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a position of trust. Eligibility for access to sensitive
information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
