KEYWORD: Guideline G
DIGEST: Applicant demonstrates that the Judge erred in several of his findings of fact. 
Nonetheless, the Judge’s errors did not lead him to treat Applicant as having committed more
alcohol-related conduct than the record would sustain.  The Judge’s analysis focused on several
matters which are supported by substantial record evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-10106.a1
DATE: 11/18/2008
DATE: November 18, 2008
In Re:
--------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-10106
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
This appears to have been a competition among maintenance squadrons which tested their professional skills,1
rather than a golf tournament.  See Tr. at 56.  
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On February 12, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On August 26, 2008, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Roger C. Wesley
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant filed a timely appeal pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s findings of
fact were supported by substantial record evidence and whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no error, we affirm.  
The Judge made the following findings of fact: Applicant is a 50-year-old production
manager for a defense contractor who  served in the U.S. Air Force from 1975 until 1985.  Following
his discharge, he went to work for the Air Force in a civilian capacity for the next 12 years, after
which he became employed in the private sector.  In 1977 he was cited and charged with illegal
possession of alcohol.  “He had consumed a can of beer on the base in 1977 and was still holding
the beer can in the driver’s seat when he was stopped by local . . . police.”  Decision at 2.  In 1984,
Applicant was detained by base police for driving under the influence of alcohol following a golf
competition, for which he received nonjudicial punishment.  The punishment consisted of a fine.
Applicant’s installation commander ordered him not to operate a vehicle on base for a year.
Applicant’s commander also vacated a previously imposed suspended reduction in grade.  As a
consequence of this misconduct, Applicant was found ineligible to reenlist.  
Applicant was charged with and convicted of two more incidents of driving under the
influence of alcohol, once in 1998 and again in 2006.  Applicant attends Alcoholics Anonymous
(AA) meetings regularly but did not provide evidence of his progress, such as “attendance reports,
chips commemorating his sustained abstinence, and endorsements from a sponsor and friends . . .”
Decision at 5.  Applicant has never sought a professional evaluation from a physician or therapist
for any alcohol problems.
We have examined the Judge’s decision in light of the record as a whole.  Applicant
challenges certain findings of the Judge.  For example, Applicant argues that the Judge erred in his
treatment of the nonjudicial punishment action taken against him.  He states that he never attended
a golf competition in 1984 and that there was no alcohol involved in the facts underlying the
vacation of his suspended reduction in grade.  Applicant’s argument has merit.  The Board notes the
following record evidence:  In 1984, Applicant attended a party following an Air Force maintenance
squadron competition.    The party took place on base.  Applicant drank beer at this party and, as he1
See 10 U.S.C. ¶ 911, which prohibits any person subject to the Uniform Code of Military Justice from operating2
a vehicle “while drunk.”   “Drunk” means “any intoxication which is sufficient sensibly to impair the rational and full
exercise of the mental and physical faculties[.]”   United States v. Bull, 14 C.M.R. 53 at 56 (Court of Military Appeals
1954).  
The Board notes that the only documentary reference to the Article 15 for drunk driving is found on the3
vacation of suspended punishment form for the later offense of violating an order.  This may have contributed to the
Judge’s apparent assumption that the two adverse actions addressed the same underlying misconduct.   
Applicant also claims that he had held a security clearance since 1976 rather than 1977, as the Judge found;4
that he attended a 1998 NCAA basketball game with a friend rather than with his wife; and that his 2006 arrest was for
driving under the influence of alcohol rather than for driving while intoxicated.  Any error in these findings is de minimis.
3
was driving home, Air Force Security Police detained him on suspicion of drunk driving.   Tr. at 57.2
As a result, Applicant received nonjudicial punishment under Article 15 of the Uniform Code of
Military Justice in May 1984.  The punishment consisted of a reduction to the grade of Sergeant and
forfeiture of $250.00 pay per month for two months.  However, the reduction in grade was suspended
for six months.  Government Exhibit (GE) 6, Record of Vacation of Suspended Nonjudicial
Punishment, September 10, 1984.  In addition to the nonjudicial punishment, Applicant’s installation
commander ordered him not to operate his car on base for a period of one year.  Tr. at 57.  During
the period of suspension, Applicant violated the installation commander’s order not to operate his
car on base.  The record evidence does not support the Judge’s apparent finding that alcohol was
involved in this event.  As a consequence of violating the installation commander’s order,
Applicant’s squadron commander vacated the suspended reduction in grade, reducing him from Staff
Sergeant to Sergeant in September 1984.  As a further consequence of the original nonjudicial
punishment action, Applicant was denied eligibility for reenlistment in the Air Force.  GE 5,
Reenlistment Ineligibility, May 31, 1984.  Examined in light of the record, the Judge’s decision
appears to treat the Article 15 and the subsequent vacation proceeding as having arisen from the
same set of facts, which is error.   Applicant also points to other findings which he believes to be3
erroneous.  For example, the Judge stated that Applicant was introduced to alcohol while in high
school, although the Board has not found record evidence in support of this assertion.  He also
persuasively argues that there is no record evidence for the Judge’s finding that he was in the driver’s
seat of a car when he was cited for illegal possession of alcohol in 1977.   4
  
Having concluded that the Judge’s findings contain errors, the Board must now consider
whether they are harmful. The Board notes that, despite his errors concerning the 1984 drunk driving
incident and subsequent disciplinary action, the Judge correctly interpreted the record as establishing
four incidents of alcohol-related misconduct between 1977 and 2006.   That is, these errors did not
lead him to treat Applicant as having committed more misconduct than the record would sustain.
In examining the Analysis portion of the Judge’s decision, the Board notes that the Judge focused
his attention on (1) the recurrent nature of Applicant’s alcohol-related offenses; (2) Applicant’s
relapses following periods of light to moderate alcohol consumption; (3) a paucity of record evidence
corroborating the extent of his participation in AA; (4) and what the Judge concluded was a
relatively short period of sustained abstinence following the most recent DUI.   These matters are
See  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept5
as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”)  
4
based upon substantial record evidence or are reasonable conclusions from such evidence.   The5
record evidence and the Judge’s decision provide no basis to conclude that, had the Judge not made
the errors about the 1984 incident, or the other errors described above, he would have evaluated
Applicant’s case in a different way or reached a different final decision.  Therefore, we conclude that
the errors in the Judge’s findings are harmless.  See ISCR Case No. 06-07247 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb.
13, 2008).   
Turning to the second issue which Applicant has raised, the Judge has drawn a rational
connection between the facts found and his ultimate adverse security clearance decision.  See ISCR
Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).  See also Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s decision that “it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance” is
sustainable on this record.  Decision at 8.  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988).  Accordingly, the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is not arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law. 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffery D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple          
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
5
Member, Appeal Board
