 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-10830 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for investigations processing (e-
QIP) on February 27, 2006. On March 25, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline C, Foreign Preference, for 
Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On May 8, 2008, and June 24, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a determination be made on the written record. Department Counsel 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 11, 2008. The FORM was 
forwarded to Applicant on July 11, 2008. He received it on July 17, 2008.  Applicant had 
30 days from the receipt of the FORM to submit additional matters. He did not submit 
additional matters. The case was assigned to me on September 24, 2008. Based upon 
 
2 
 
 
a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel requested that administrative notice be taken 
of certain factual information pertaining to the country of Taiwan referenced in 14 
documents. (Item 8) The following is a summary of the facts which administrative notice 
is taken. 
  
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy. Taiwan maintains a strong diplomatic and 
commercial relationship with the U.S. The U.S. and Taiwan have conducted joint 
military exercises. Taiwan’s national security remains under constant threat from the 
People’s Republic of China. Taiwan is known to be an active collector of U.S. economic 
intelligence.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated January 14, 2008, Applicant admitted to all the 
SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old senior developer employed with a Department of 
Defense contractor. He has worked for his current employer since February 2001. He 
has a bachelor’s degree in computer science and a master of science in information 
systems, both from U.S. universities. He is married and has two children, a five-year-old 
daughter and a three-year-old son. This is his first time applying for a security 
clearance. (Item 4.)   
 
Applicant was born and raised in Taiwan. He immigrated to the U.S. He became 
a U.S. citizen on October 20, 2005. (Item 4; Item 5) His wife is a citizen of Taiwan and 
has U.S. permanent resident status. She resides with Applicant in the U.S. She intends 
to apply for U.S. citizenship when she is eligible. His two children were born in the U.S. 
(Answer to SOR.)   
 
One of Applicant’s brothers is a permanent resident of the U.S. and a Taiwanese 
citizen. He intends to become a U.S. citizen when he is eligible. (Answer to SOR; Item 
4; Item 5.)  
 
Applicant’s parents, another brother, and parents-in-law are citizens of and 
reside in Taiwan. His parents and in-laws are retired. His brother is employed with a 
private company. The record evidence is not clear what he specifically does. Applicant 
claims none of his family members, including his in-laws, have any contact with 
government officials. (Item 5.) 
 
Applicant maintains a valid passport from Taiwan. His most recent passport was 
issued on November 20, 2003, and does not expire until November 20, 2013.  Applicant 
 
3 
 
 
maintains the passport because it is easier to travel to Taiwan using his Taiwanese 
passport.  He uses the passport for the sole purpose of visiting family members. He 
continues to use his Taiwanese passport after obtaining a U.S. passport in 2005 
because when he travels on the U.S. passport, he can only stay in Taiwan for 29 days. 
If he wants to stay longer than 29 days he has to obtain a visa. He is not willing to 
surrender his Taiwanese passport or renounce his Taiwanese citizenship. (Item 4; Item 
5.)  
 
When Applicant is in Taiwan, he is eligible for national health insurance. (Item 5.) 
In November 2006, Applicant’s wife began experiencing serious medical problems. In 
April 2007, Applicant took his wife back to Taiwan for medical treatment for breast 
cancer. On May 21, 2007, he returned to the U.S. in order to work. Applicant’s wife and 
two children remained in Taiwan with family members for the duration of her medical 
treatment which was approximately nine months. His wife’s treatment was also covered 
under Taiwan’s national health insurance. (Item 2; Item 6.)  
 
Applicant, his wife and two children traveled to Taiwan from January 2006 to 
February 2006.  They traveled to Taiwan from January 31, 2007, to March 22, 2007. 
When they travel to Taiwan, they stay and visit with family members. (Item 5; Item 6.)  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant points out that Taiwan is a democratic 
country which has had favorable relations with the U.S. for over a century.  He does not 
feel compelled to apologize for his decision to maintain his Taiwanese citizenship but he 
is equally proud of his decision to become a naturalized citizen. He had no malicious 
intent when he decided to keep and use his Taiwanese passport for entry and exit from 
Taiwan. He uses his Taiwanese passport as a matter of convenience.  He maintains his 
status as a Taiwanese citizen primarily to be eligible for health benefits for himself and 
his family during travel to Taiwan.  He states this proved invaluable when his wife was 
diagnosed with breast cancer. He traveled to Taiwan on several occasions to visit his 
wife during her medical treatment. Applicant considers the fact that this is being used 
against him a cruel irony and an injustice. (Item 2.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
 
4 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG &6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
5 
 
 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. Of the Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions (FI DC), the following 
potentially apply to Applicant’s case. 
 
FI DC ¶ 7(a) (contact with a family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion) applies with respect to Applicant’s relatives who are citizens of and reside in 
Taiwan. His parents, parents-in-law, and brother are citizens of and reside in Taiwan. 
He and his family have traveled on numerous occasions to visit family members in  
Taiwan. Applicant’s numerous visits to Taiwan to visit family members create a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, manipulation and inducement. 
 
FI DC ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, 
group or country by providing that information) applies for the same reason.  The record 
is not clear how often Applicant has contact with his relatives in Taiwan while he is in 
the U.S. (i.e., telephonic, e-mail). Applicant and his family’s close ties to his relatives in 
Taiwan is evident based on their numerous visits to Taiwan. With regard to his parents-
in-law, there is a rebuttable presumption that an applicant has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, his spouse’s immediate family members. (ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 
(Appeal Board, February 20, 2002))  
 
FI DC & 7(d) (sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion) potentially applies with respect to Applicant’s wife 
because she is not a U.S. citizen. However, she is a permanent U.S. resident. 
Applicant’s relationship with his wife does not create a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. FI DC ¶ 7(d) does not apply.   
 
Applicant has a brother who is a citizen of Taiwan who resides in the U.S. He is a 
permanent resident and intends to apply for U.S. citizenship when he is eligible. I find 
no foreign influence concerns with respect to Applicant’s brother who resides in the U.S.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Foreign Influence.  The following Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions 
(FI MC) have the potential to apply in Applicant’s case. 
 
FI MC ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the position or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government 
 
6 
 
 
and the interests of the U.S.) does not apply. Family contacts and ties with persons in a 
foreign country are not automatically disqualifying but require the applicant to present 
evidence in mitigation and extenuation that he qualifies for a security clearance.   
Although Applicant stated that his parents and parents-in-law are retired, no information 
was provided about their employment prior to retiring. He indicated that his brother in 
Taiwan works for a private company but did not state what the company does or his 
brother’s position in the company.  Applicant did not provide sufficient information which 
would support application of this mitigating condition. 
 
FI MC ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, or government, or country is so 
minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest) does not apply. Applicant clearly has a sense of loyalty and obligation 
to his family members in Taiwan. While Applicant has attended college and lived in the 
U.S. a number of years, I cannot conclude that he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of U.S. interests. He still has emotional ties to his home 
country which is indicated by his unwillingness to renounce his Taiwanese citizenship. 
Although Applicant has longstanding ties to the U.S., concerns remain because of his 
significant ties to his relatives in Taiwan. FI MC ¶ 8(b) cannot be applied.      
 
FI MC ¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation) is not applicable.  Applicant’s relationship with his family members who live 
and reside in Taiwan cannot be considered casual and infrequent.  
 
Security concerns remain due to Applicant’s relatives who are citizens of and 
reside in Taiwan. Foreign Influence concerns are not mitigated. Guideline B is found 
against Applicant. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG &9:       
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.    
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise 
security concerns. Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition (FP DC) 10(a) (exercise 
of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or 
through foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) 
possession of a current foreign passport; and (3) accepting educational, medical, 
retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country) applies. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant possesses a valid Taiwanese passport which does not expire until 2013. He 
uses the passport for convenience when he travels to Taiwan. He also maintains his 
Taiwanese citizenship in order to remain eligible for health care benefits in Taiwan.    
Applicant’s possession and use of a Taiwanese passport after becoming a U.S. citizen 
is considered an exercise of his rights of foreign citizenship and raises a security 
concern under foreign preference.    
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Foreign Preference. The following Foreign Preference Mitigating Conditions 
(FP MC) have the potential to apply in Applicant’s case. 
 
FP MC ¶ 11(a) (dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in 
a foreign country) does not apply. While Applicant obtained his dual citizenship based 
on his birth in Taiwan, he exercised his dual citizenship by using his Taiwanese 
passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. He made a conscious decision to maintain his 
Taiwanese citizenship, primarily for more convenient travel to Taiwan and in order to 
maintain he and his family’s eligibility for health care benefits.    
 
FP MC ¶ 11(b) (the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship) does not apply. Applicant is not willing to renounce his Taiwanese 
citizenship. While Applicant has valid reasons for not renouncing his Taiwanese 
citizenship, it does not mitigate the security concerns under foreign preference.  
 
FP MC ¶ 11(c) (exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign 
citizenship occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual 
was a minor) does not apply. Applicant continues to exercise his rights and privileges of 
Taiwanese citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen in October 2005.  
 
FP MC ¶ 11(d) (use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority) is not applicable to the facts of this case.  
  
FP MC ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated) does not apply. Applicant has no intention of 
surrendering his Taiwanese passport.    
 
FP MC ¶ 11(f) (the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United 
States Government) is not applicable because there is nothing in the record evidence 
suggesting Applicant voted in a foreign election.  
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign Preference concerns because he intends 
to maintain and use his Taiwanese passport, and intends to exercise his rights as a 
Taiwanese citizen in order to be eligible for health care benefits in Taiwan. Applicant 
has the burden to mitigate the security concerns raised under foreign preference. He 
has not met his burden. Guideline C is found against Applicant. 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Guideline B is a security concern 
that affects applicants through no fault of their own.  The government need not prove an 
applicant is a bad person before it can deny or revoke access to classified information. 
Even good people can pose a security risk because of facts and circumstances not 
under their control. An applicant with good character and personal integrity can pose a 
security risk because the applicant has close relatives in a country that is hostile to the 
United States. (ISCR 01-26893, at 9-10 (Appeal Board, October 16, 2002)) While the 
government of Taiwan is not hostile to the U.S, it has been known to commit espionage 
against U.S. companies. Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
concerns raised based on his family members’ status as citizens and residents of a 
foreign country. Applicant’s decision to maintain his Taiwanese passport as well as his 
Taiwanese citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen raised security concerns under 
foreign preference. Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under foreign 
influence and foreign preference.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
