                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-15434 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Edmunds, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Syria, came to the United States in July 1991, and became 
a U.S. citizen in 2001. Applicant has six children who were born in Syria or Saudi 
Arabia, are citizens of Syria or dual citizens of Syria and France, and live in Syria or 
Saudi Arabia. Applicant has not rebutted or mitigated the government’s security 
concerns under foreign influence. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 1, 2008, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B, foreign influence. On June 2, 2008, the SOR was amended to add 
Guideline E, personal conduct concerns. (Item 4) 
  
 On May 7, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated June 20, 2008. The FORM contained nine 
attachments (Items) and 17 additional items for which Department Counsel request 
administrative notice be taken. On June 30, 2008, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Applicant's response to the FORM was due on July 30, 2008. As of August 14, 
2008, no response from Applicant had been received. On August 5, 2008 letter from 
Applicant’s employer was received. Department Counsel did not object to the material 
and the letter was admitted into the record. On August 15, 2008, the case was assigned 
to an administrative judge. On November 5, 2008, it was reassigned to me.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Syria and Saudi Arabia. The request and the attached 
documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HEx) I─XVII. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of 
Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the foreign influence factual 
allegations of the SOR with explanations and denies the personal conduct allegations. 
 
 Applicant is a 72-year-old translator and cultural advisor who has worked for a 
defense contractor since September 2003. He is seeking a security clearance. His 
employer states Applicant’s work performance has been impeccable. Applicant is a 
valuable employee, a humble person, loyal citizen, and good friend. His quality of work 
is admirable. His employer would like to keep Applicant as an employee. In his job, he 
assists the U.S. Army. Applicant speaks and writes Arabic, Circassia, English, and 
French.  
 
 Applicant was born in Syria in 1936. Following high school graduation, Applicant 
became an air traffic controller at a Syrian airport. (Item 8) He was a Syrian government 
worker because civil aviation is part of the Syrian government. In October 1970, 
Applicant received a bachelors of arts degree in English from a Syrian university. He 
then went to work as a translator with the fire department. With time, he was 
 
 
 
3
recommended for promotion to fire chief.  
 
In October 1971, Applicant went to Saudi Arabia and was employed as an 
English language teacher, at a three fold increase in salary. From 1971 to 1991, 
Applicant worked in Saudi Arabia. During that time he worked five years as a teacher of 
English language at a school. Saudi schools are run by the Ministry of Education. He 
worked nine years with the Saudi Port Authority as a fire and safety chief, and six 
additional years as a translator for private companies.  
 
In July 1991, Applicant – then age 55 – came to the U.S. and lived with his 
cousins and brother, a U.S. citizen. (Item 8) Applicant worked for two years as a 
translator for a weekly English–Arabic newspaper. In February 2001, Applicant became 
a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Items 7 and 8) Applicant has a U.S. passport issued in 
August 2001 and valid until August 2011.  
 
Applicant has five sons and a daughter. Two of his sons and a daughter are 
citizens and residents of Syria. Applicant has three sons living in Saudi Arabia. His 
oldest two sons were born in Syria, were Syrian and French citizens, and live in Syria. 
His oldest son was, at one time, a computer specialist, with whom Applicant has no 
contact. His second son was a car salesman in the UAE, but now lives in Syria. His 
current occupation is unknown as is the amount of contact Applicant has with this son.  
 
Applicant’s next three sons are Syrian citizens living in Saudi Arabia. Once every 
three months, Applicant calls his son who works for an agriculture company. Three 
times a year, Applicant calls his son who works as a window decorator. Applicant’s 
contact with his other son is unknown. In 2002, Applicant traveled to Syria to attend the 
marriage of one of his sons who lives in Saudi Arabia. His children’s occupations and 
the frequency of contact with him were provided as of January 2007. (Item 8) 
 
Applicant’s daughter was born in Syria, and is a citizen and resident of Syria. She 
is married and is a homemaker in Syria. Once a month, Applicant talks with is daughter 
on the telephone. Her husband’s occupation is unknown. In 2004, Applicant visited 
Syria to see his daughter. He stayed with his ex-wife and also saw his son who resided 
with his ex-wife. In 2005, Applicant traveled to Turkey where his ex-wife joined him. 
 
 In 1970, Applicant’s brother, born in and a citizen of Syria, deserted from the 
Syrian Army. Fearing arrest, this brother has no intention of returning to Syria. In 1982, 
this brother wanted to visit his mother. Their mother was too old to travel to the U.S. so 
Applicant accompanied his mother to Turkey where his mother and brother visited. 
Applicant liked Turkey so much he contemplated purchasing a farm as a second home. 
Nothing ever came of his desire to purchase land in Turkey. (Item 8) 
 
 Applicant married and divorced four women, two foreign citizens and two U.S 
citizens. He was married: July 1967 to June 1970; August 1971 to February 1992; 
February 1993 to March 1994; and, February 1999 to August 2000. His first wife was 
born in Lebanon and is now a Syrian citizen. His second wife was born in and is a 
 
 
 
4
                                                          
citizen of Syria. His last two wives were native born U.S. citizens. In February 2001, 
Applicant took his father’s last name. In 2003, Applicant’s lawyer appealed to a Syrian 
court to change Applicant’s first name and family name. His appeal was rejected.  
 
In September 2003, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions, Standard Form (SF) 86. (Item 7) In response to question 13, which asked 
about having been employed by a foreign government, firm, or agency, Applicant 
answered “no.” When Applicant taught school as a middle school English teacher, all 
schools are run by the Saudi Ministry of Education. Applicant answered as he did 
because he was not in a high level, advisory, or influential position.  
 
Question 15 asked if during the previous seven years Applicant had an active 
passport from a foreign country. Applicant possessed a Syrian passport issued in 
January 1993, which expired in January 1999. He surrendered his Syrian passport to 
his company security officer in June 2008. He states he simply made a mistake when 
he answered “no” to the question.  
 
Applicant asserts he is loyal and owes allegiance to the U.S. He is proud to be an 
American. He states he has no affection for Syria, has no financial interest in any 
foreign country, owns no foreign property, and has no foreign business interests.  
 
SYRIA 
 
 Since 1963, the Syrian Arab Republic has been in a state of emergency and 
ruled by an authoritarian regime.2 Syria is included on the Department of State’s List of 
State Sponsors of Terrorism due to the presence of several terrorist groups operating in 
Syria.3 The Syrian Government provides political and material support to Hezbollah and 
Palestinian terrorist groups.4 Several terrorist groups’ leadership and offices are in 
Damascus, Syria. In addition, Syria permits Iran to transfer weapons and supplies 
through Syria to Hezbollah in Lebanon.5 Syria is one of the primary transit points for 
foreign fighters entering Iraq.6 
 
 A Travel Warning is in effect for Syria following the September 2006 attacks on 
the U.S. Embassy in Damascus.7 In 1998, mobs in Damascus attacked the U.S. 
2 U.S. Department of State, Country Specific Information: Syria, November 20, 2007 at 1. (HEx II) 
  
3 U.S. Department of State, State Sponsors of Terrorism, undated (HEx III); U.S. Department of State, 
Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 3: State Sponsors of Terror Overview, April 30, 2007 at 3.( HEx 
IV) 
 
4Id. at 3. (HEx IV)  
 
5Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, Syria: Background and U.S. Relations, updated 
February 26, 2008, at CRS-8. (HEx V) 
  
6U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Syria, May 2007 at 9. (HEx I) 
  
7U.S. Department of State, Travel Warning Syria, September 15, 2008. (HEx VI)  
 
 
 
5
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Ambassador’s Residence and in 2000, mobs attacked the U.S. Embassy. In May 2004, 
sanctions were implemented by executive order due to Syria’s active and passive 
support of terrorism in the Middle East.8 Exports of U.S. goods to Syria are prohibited 
except for food and medicine.  
 
 The Department of State’s Report on Human Rights Practices for 2007 indicates 
the Syrian Government’s human rights record has “worsened.”9 The following human 
rights abuses exist: absence of right to change government, arbitrary and/or unlawful 
deprivation of life, torture in prison, poor prison conditions, arbitrary arrests and 
detentions, absence of rule of law, severely restricted civil liberties, limited freedom of 
religion, government corruption, lack of transparency, and violence against women.10 
Security forces frequently use torture against foreign citizens.  
 
 The four major branches of the security forces devote resources to monitoring 
internal dissent and individual citizens, and operate outside the control of the legal 
system.11 Security personnel have placed foreign visitors under surveillance, monitored 
telephones, and search the hotel rooms and possession of foreign visitors.12  
 
 Dual citizens and U.S. citizens whose fathers are of Syrian descent are required 
to complete military service or pay to be exempted.13  
 
Saudi Arabia 
 
Saudi Arabia is a monarchy ruled by the Al Saud family. The central institution of 
the Saudi Arabian government is the monarchy.14 There are no political parties or 
national elections.15 There is no right to peaceful change of the government. The 
following human rights problems exist: significant restriction of civil liberties ─ freedoms 
of speech, press, assembly, association, and movement; arbitrary arrest and detention, 
sometimes incommunicado; infliction of severe pain by judicially sanctioned corporal 
 
 
8White House, Executive Order: Blocking Property of Certain Persons and Prohibiting the Export of 
Certain Goods to Syria, May 11, 2004. (HEx VIII) 
  
9U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 2007: Syria, dated March 11, 
2008 at 1. (HEx VII) 
  
10 Id. at 2 - 3.  
 
11 Id. 
 
12 U.S. Department of State, Country Specific Information: Syria, November 20, 2007 at 2. (HEx II) 
 
13 Id. at 1. 
 
14 U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 2007: Saudi Arabia, March 11, 
2008. (HEx  XI) 
 
15 U.S. Department of State, Background Notes: Saudi Arabia, February, 2008. (HEx XII) 
 
 
 
 
6
                                                          
punishment; beatings and other abuses; inadequate conditions at prison and detention 
centers; and arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, and correspondence.16 
 
There is a widespread perception of serious corruption and a lack of government 
transparency, as well as legal and societal discrimination and violence against 
women.17 Discrimination is faced by other religious, ethnic, and minority groups. There 
are strict limitations on workers rights, especially for foreign workers. 
 
The religious police (Mutawwa’in) (MOI) harass, abuse, and detain citizens and 
foreigners.18 The government sentences criminals to punishments according to its 
interpretation of Shari’a (Islamic religious law). Corporal punishments provided by law 
include public executions by beheading, amputations, lashings, and other measures 
deemed appropriate by the judicial authorities. The Basic Law guarantees the 
inviolability of homes and the privacy of correspondence.19 Custom officials routinely 
open mail searching for contraband.  
 
The U.S. and Saudi Arabia share a common concern about regional security, oil 
exports, and sustainable development. Following September 11, 2001, relations 
between Saudi Arabia and the U.S. have been strained. Fifteen of the suicide bombers 
in the terrorist attacks were Saudi citizens. In May 2003, suicide bombers killed 35 
people, including nine Americans, in attacks in the capital. In November 2003, a terrorist 
attack on a housing compound left 18 dead and more than 100 injured. In June 2004, 
terrorists killed three Americans. In December 2004, terrorist attacks on the U.S. 
Consulate killed five.  
 
The Department of State has issued a travel warning for Saudi Arabia due to 
concerns about possible terrorist activity directed at American citizens and U.S. 
interests.20 Terrorists continue to target housing compounds and other establishments 
where westerners may be located.  
 
Saudi Arabia has been unwilling to publically disseminate statistics regarding 
money laundering prosecutions, but has moved to monitor and enforce its anti-money 
laundering and terrorist finance laws, regulations, and guidelines.21 The Saudi 
government has permitted or encouraged fund-raising in Saudi Arabia by charitable 
16 U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Human Rights Practices 2008: Saudi Arabia, March 11, 
2008. (HEx XI) 
 
17 Id. 
 
18 Id. 
 
19 Id. 
 
20 U.S. Department of State, Travel Warning: Saudi Arabia, December 19, 2007. (HEx XIII) 
 
21 Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2007, Chapter 2 – Country Reports: Middle East 
and North Africa Overview, April 30, 2008. (HEx XVI) 
 
 
 
 
7
                                                          
Islamic groups and foundations linked to Al-Qaeda.22 Saudi Arabia recognizes the 
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) as the legitimate representative of the 
Palestine people.23 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
22 Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, Saudi Arabia: Current Issues and U.S. 
Relations, August 2, 2006. (HEx XIV) 
 
23 Id. 
 
 
 
8
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG & 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual=s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
*  *  * 
 
 Applicant has two sons and a daughter who are Syrian citizens living in Syria. He 
has three additional sons who are Syrian citizens living in Saudi Arabia. As of 2005, 
Applicant was on friendly terms with his ex-wife who was a citizen and resident of Syria. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a 
matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a 
foreign country and an Applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
 
 
 
9
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
 The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, the 
presence of terrorist organizations and its human rights record are relevant in assessing 
the likelihood that an Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government 
coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign 
country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or 
dependent upon the government or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States.  
 
 The human rights records of Syria and Saudi Arabia places a significant, but not 
insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationship 
with those family members living in Syria and Saudi Arabia does not pose a security risk 
and he is not in a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States 
and his family members. With their mixed human rights records, Syria support of 
terrorist organizations, and possible terrorist activity directed at American citizens and 
U.S. interests in Saudi Arabia, it is conceivable that Syria and Saudi Arabia would target 
citizens in an attempt to gather valuable information from the United States. 
 
 Applicant’s connections to his children and ex-wife create a potential conflict of 
interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern 
about his desire to help his relatives living in Syria and Saudi Arabia by providing 
sensitive or classified information. The Government produced substantial evidence of 
Applicant’s contacts with his daughter and some of his sons, and his travels to Syria in 
2002 and 2004 to raise the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply.  
 
AG & 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of 
loyalty or obligations to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
 
 
 
10
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority.  
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; [and] 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) apply with respect to some of Applicant’s relatives because 
of his limited contacts with them. He has no contact with one son and talks to two of his 
sons three or four times a year. His infrequent contacts and not close relationship with 
these sons have a low potential of forcing him to choose between the United States and 
Syria. He met his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with 
these relatives] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” His contacts and 
communications with these sons are so casual and infrequent as to not create a risk of 
foreign influence or exploitation. However, the same cannot be said for his daughter and 
other sons.  
 
From the record it is not possible to find his children have not been political 
activists, challenging the policies of the Syrian or Saudi Government. There is limited 
evidence as to his children’s current jobs and their spouses’ jobs, if any. Without 
knowledge of their current jobs, it is not possible to find his children do not currently 
work for or have ever worked for the Syrian or Saudi Government or military or any 
news media. The record is silent as to his children’s current involvement in activities 
which would bring attention to them or that they or other Syrian or Saudi elements are 
even aware of Applicant’s work. As such, I cannot find there is a reduced possibility that 
these relatives would be targets for coercion or exploitation.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States weighs against a security concern 
for these relationships. However, based on the record provided I can not find Applicant 
has “such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [he] can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” He worked for 
government contractors for some years and his duty performance is greatly appreciated 
by his current employer.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) cannot be applied with respect to his daughter and other 
sons. Applicant’s close relationship with these children is an important positive reflection 
of his character; the same close relationships raise security concerns for possible 
foreign influence.  
 
 
 
 
11
                                                          
There is insufficient mitigation of the security concerns because of his close 
relationship with them, his frequent contacts with them, and because of the nature of the 
Syrian and Saudi Government and the complicated, and sometimes contentious 
relationship to the United States. See ADP Case No. 05-17812 at 2, 3 n.2 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 11, 2007) (finding contacts with siblings “once every two or three months” not to be 
casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 2, 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) 
(finding contacts with applicant’s parents and sisters a total of about 20 times per year 
not casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) 
(finding contacts with applicant’s siblings once every four or five months not casual and 
infrequent).24  
 The record is insufficient to find AG & 8(f) fully applies. He has no interest in 
property in foreign countries but there is no showing as to U.S. property and assets.  
 There is nothing in and of itself which makes Applicant’s hiring of a Syrian 
attorney to file a name change appeal in Syria to be of security concern. I find for 
Applicant as to SOR & 1.h. 
 
 The mitigating conditions taken together are insufficient to overcome the foreign 
influence security concerns. 
 
  
24In ISCR Case No. 06-17838 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 28, 2008), the Appeal Board discussed the 
precedential value of the decisions predating the revision of the Adjudicative Guidelines indicated in n. 3, 
supra, and determined where the language of the Directive is unchanged or not substantively altered, the 
precedent remains valid. AG ¶ 8(c) apparently adopted the Appeal Board’s interpretation of Foreign 
Influence Mitigating Condition 1 (FIMC 1) under the previous guidelines. The Appeal Board had 
determined that contacts with relatives living in a foreign country must be both casual and infrequent to 
apply FIMC 1. See ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). Moreover, contacts with such 
family members are presumed to be “not casual.” Id. In the analysis of countervailing evidence, it is legal 
error to give significant weight to any of the following facts or factors: applicant’s ties to the United States 
(ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 5 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005)); lack of prominence of relatives living in a 
foreign country (Id.); “family members’ low-key and noncontroversial lifestyle, and the fact that the Iranian 
government has not contacted them about Applicant” (ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006); one relative living in a foreign country may be sufficient to negate FIMC 1 (ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006)); a foreign relative’s fragile health (ISCR Case No. 02-29403 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 14, 2004)), advanced age (ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 7 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003), 
financial independence (ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005), or lack of financial 
dependency upon applicant (ISCR Case No. 03-15205 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan 21, 2005)); foreign relatives 
spend part of each year in the U.S. (ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)); the lack of 
any connection between the foreign relative and the foreign government in question (ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)); the absence of any attempt at exploitation in the past (ISCR Case 
No. 03-15205 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005)); a foreign country’s friendly relationship with the U.S., its 
stable, democratic government, or its extensive foreign military agreements with the United States (ISCR 
Case No. 02-22461 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2005))  and an applicant’s “refusal to travel to Iran” and 
“meticulous work habits and practice of strictly following the rules relating to his work” (ISCR Case No. 03-
15205 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005)). Notwithstanding the Appeal Board’s position, I conclude that many 
of these attributes are pertinent to the analysis in this case under the whole person concept. 
 
 
 
 
12
Personal Conduct  
 
The Directive sets out various factors relevant to an applicant=s personal conduct 
that may be potentially disqualifying. Paragraph 15 of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
states a concern where there is conduct “involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers 
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process.” 
 
Under AG & 16(a) “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities” and & 16(b) “deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative” 
 
Applicant=s false answer on his SF 86 and his response during his OPM interview 
concerning his history of working for a foreign government and possession of a foreign 
passport tends to show questionable judgment, unreliability, and a lack of 
trustworthiness. I find && 16(a) and 16(b) apply. 
 
In September 2003 Applicant failed to report his employment as a middle school 
teacher who was employed by the Saudi Ministry of Education. He also failed to report 
possession of his Syrian passport that expired in 2002 in response to the question 
which asked if in the last seven years he had an active passport issued by a foreign 
government. Applicant stated he did not list the first because he was not a high level 
advisor or employee of the Ministry of Education and simply made a mistake in his 
response to the passport question. He has since delivered the expired passport to his 
company security officer. He asserts he was not being deceptive. 
 
Applicant’s credibility is key to determining if Applicant falsified his SF 86. 
Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled administratively, I am unable to 
evaluate his demeanor, appearance, or form a positive determination as to his 
truthfulness. From the record, I am unable to find Applicant was sincere, open, and 
honest. Being unable to evaluate Applicant’s credibility I cannot find Applicant’s answer 
was not deliberately false on the security clearance application.  
 
Under the Directive, an applicant may mitigate the security concerns arising from 
questionable personal conduct under certain circumstances. AG ¶17 provides 
conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security concerns, including AG ¶ 17(a): 
“if a person “provides the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.” I find this 
mitigating factor does not apply. Applicant has not met his burden of proving that he 
 
 
 
13
made good-faith efforts to correct the omissions in his security clearance application.  
 
AG ¶ 17(c) provides mitigation where “the offense is so minor, or so much time 
has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The security clearance application was 
executed in January 2003. I am unable to conclude it happened under unusual 
circumstances or does not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. This potentially mitigating condition does not apply. I also considered 
carefully the other potentially mitigating conditions and conclude they do not apply.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. As previously stated, 
because Applicant chose to have this matter handled administratively, I am unable to 
evaluate his demeanor, appearance, or form a positive determination as to his 
truthfulness. From the record, I am unable to find Applicant was sincere, open, and 
honest. I am unable to find for Applicant as to personal conduct. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in Syria, 
completed high school and college there, and in 1991, moved to the U.S. An important 
element in the foreign influence analysis is that he lived in Syria and Saudi Arabia from 
1936 until 1991, which is approximately three quarters of his life. He did not become a 
U.S. citizen until relatively recently in 2001.  
 
Guideline B decision concerning Syria and Saudi Arabia must take into 
consideration the geopolitical situation in those countries, as well as the dangers 
 
 
 
14
                                                          
existing there.25 Syria supports terrorist organizations and terrorists operate in Saudi 
Arabia.  
  
There are factors supporting approval of his access to classified information. 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 1991. He became a U.S. citizen in 2001. 
He is well liked by his current employer. What is lacking is a compellingly explanation as 
to his loyalty is to the United States, rather than to Syria. There is limited evidence 
showing his connections to the United States and to Syria.  
 
 Applicant has significant ties to his daughter and two sons who live in Syria. He 
has close ties of affection to them. There is a possibility Applicant could be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the United States.  
 
After weighing the evidence of his connections to Syria and Saudi Arabia, and to 
the United States, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden of fully mitigating the 
foreign influence security concern.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”26 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
However, I conclude the government should not revoke his access to sensitive 
information. It is extremely unlikely that individuals in Syria or Saudi Arabia would target 
Applicant’s relatives to gain access to sensitive, but unclassified information.  
 
The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a life time occurrence, but 
is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence 
presented. Under the Applicant=s current circumstances a clearance is not 
recommended, but should the Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a 
security clearance in the future he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his 
security worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, foreign influence: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.g: Against Applicant 
25 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
 
26See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
 
 
15
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a – 2.b: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
