                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-17247 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark Zaid, Esq. and Bradley Moss, Esq.  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On June 20, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines E and J.1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 1, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 
1 The SOR has a mark striking “ISCR” and replacing it with “ADP.” Department Counsel 
confirmed the case is an ISCR. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
23, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 29, 2008, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on October 28, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4. Applicant did not object and they were admitted. The government also 
offered GE 5, which was marked for identification and was used to refresh Applicant’s 
recollection, but was not admitted. An additional exhibit was marked as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. Applicant and three witnesses testified. Applicant submitted Exhibits (AE) A-B. 
Department Counsel did not object and they were admitted. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 6, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old and works as an information technology 
technician/project manager for a defense contractor. He graduated from high school in 
1994. He served in the Marines for six years and was honorably discharged at the rank 
of sergeant. He earned an associate’s degree and has approximately 16 credits 
remaining to complete a bachelor’s degree. He is engaged to be married.  
 
On December 21, 1996, Applicant was charged with Driving Under the Influence 
of Alcohol.2 On about September 17, 1997, the court granted Applicant Probation 
Before Judgment, and he was required to pay a fine of approximately $255, 
successfully complete an alcohol counseling session and was placed on probation for 
18 months.  
 
 On July 12, 1997, Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) DUI with a Blood 
Alcohol Content of .10% or above, and (2) Violation of Provisional License Restriction. 
On about November 13, 1997, Applicant was found guilty of DUI, fined approximately 
$1,000, with $800 suspended, plus $20 court cost, his driver’s license was suspended, 
and he was placed on supervised probation for three years. Count (2) was nolle 
prossed. Applicant was ordered to attend a 26-week Problem Drinkers Program and 
Alcohol Anonymous Meetings for about six months. On September 29, 1998, the state 
medical advisory board imposed an alcohol restriction on Applicant’s driver’s license, 
and it was still in effect in 2003.  
 
 On December 13, 2002, Applicant was charged with 4th Degree Burglary. He was 
intoxicated at the time he was arrested. The charge was subsequently nolle prossed.  
 
2 The actual charge was “Driving While Intoxicated.” Both “Driving While Intoxicated” and “Driving 
Under the Influence” are essentially the same offense, but are referred to differently depending on the 
jurisdiction. To eliminate confusion they both will be referred to as DUI. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant testified he has been arrested three times, twice for DUI and once for 
burglary.3 He claimed that when he was interviewed for his first security clearance he 
revealed his three arrests.4 
 
In a sworn statement provided to a special agent of the Defense Security Agency 
on September 15, 2003, Applicant stated he had been arrested in December 2002 for 
4th Degree Burglary and had twice been arrested for DUI sometime in 1995 or 1996. In 
this statement Applicant stated:  
 
When I completed my security forms, I neglected to list both of my 
offenses. I thought that the DUI offense for which I received Probation 
Before Judgment had been expunged from my record, and I therefore was 
not required to list i[t] on my security forms. I made no attempt to 
intentionally withhold information or to falsify my forms. I thought that I had 
truthfully and accurately answered all questions.5  
 
Applicant was asked “why didn’t you disclose the other offense on your security 
form in 2003” He responded, “I don’t recall any information regarding that. I mean, I 
don’t know.”6 Applicant claimed he listed his other two offenses on his 2003 SCA.7  
 
Applicant testified that after he completed the SCA in 2003 he received a Top 
Secret clearance through the Department of State. In 2005, he was given interim 
access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI). Later he was working as a 
contractor for an agency that required a polygraph and an updated background check. 
He was required to complete another SCA for access to SCI. He stated he was given 
very little time to complete the forms.8 
 
 Applicant completed another SCA and signed it on November 21, 2006. In that 
SCA Question 23 asked him about his police record and if he had “ever been charged 
with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs,” to which he answered 
3 Tr. 98. 
 
4 Tr. 99. 
 
5 GE2 at 5. I have not considered for disqualifying purposes the fact that Applicant failed to 
divulge his criminal conduct on his 2003 security application, but will consider it in the whole person 
analysis and to analyze a pattern, credibility, honest mistake, and a course of conduct. Conduct not 
alleged in the SOR may be considered: “(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an 
applicant’s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an 
applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the 
Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person analysis.” ISCR Case 
No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted). 
 
6 Tr. 121. 
 
7 The 2003 Security Application was not provided by either party. 
 
8 Tr. 95-98. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
“no.” Question 26 asked him if he had “ever had a clearance or access authorization 
denied, suspended, or revoked,” to which he answered “no.”  
 
Applicant was interviewed twice by an OPM investigator in 2007, but could not 
recall the specifics of the interview.9 He could not recall if he told the investigator that 
his security manager had told him that his SCI had been revoked.  
 
 Applicant completed a signed, sworn statement dated February 11, 2008. In that 
statement Applicant stated he had been arrested on two occasions in his life, one arrest 
in 1996 for DUI, and one arrest in 2001 for 4th Degree Burglary. This statement is not 
true. Applicant was arrested twice for DUI and once for Burglary. 
 
 In a sworn affidavit of February 11, 2008, provided to a Special Agent for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM), Applicant stated:10  
 
As I have always fully divulged during prior background investigations, I 
have been arrested on two occasions over the course of my life. The first 
arrest came in 1996 (exact date unrecalled). I was arrested in City B by 
City B police for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI).11  
 
* * * 
 
My other arrest occurred in 2001 (exact date unrecalled), and also 
occurred in City B.12  
 
* * * 
 
Aside from my aforementioned 1996 DUI arrest and 2001 arrest for 
burglary, I have never been questioned, detained, or arrested by any law 
enforcement body. Aside from my 1996 DUI arrest, I have never been 
charged or convicted of any offenses related to alcohol, regardless of 
whether they have been expunged, sealed, or stricken from court records. 
There will be no arrest or court records found that will allude to me being 
involved in any other criminal-related acts other than the two I have 
already discussed.13 
 
* * * 
9 Tr. 125. 
 
10 GE 3. 
 
11 Id. at 3. 
 
12 This was the 4th degree burglary arrest. 
 
13 GE 3. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Aside from my 1996 court-mandated alcohol counseling, I have never 
been counseled or medically treated for alcohol abuse or misuse.14  
 
* * * 
 
Despite my affirmation immediately above about full disclosure of my 
criminal past, it was brought to my attention during my interview with the 
OPM Investigator that I did not admit to any arrests on my most recently 
submitted Standard Form 86 (SF86). I was unable to offer a response as 
to why I failed to list these arrests on my SF86. However, as I explained to 
the OPM Investigator, there is no way I would attempt to conceal my 
arrest information because I fully divulged it to the Defense Security 
Service (DSS) Investigator during my last background investigation which 
occurred in 2003. Additionally, I could not offer reasons why I failed to list 
the fact that I had my TS/SCI security clearance revoked on my SF86. 
Despite not being able to provide said reasoning, I affirmed during my 
interview that I was not attempting to withhold or conceal a material fact.15 
 
 Throughout his statement of February 11, 2008, Applicant refers to his TS/SCI 
clearance as being “revoked.” He stated:  
 
Upon being read-off the contract, I was allowed to stay employed with …. 
However, since my TS/SCI clearance was revoked, which limited my 
capabilities and usefulness at work, I began to seek employment 
elsewhere.16  
 
• * * 
•  
 [T]o present day, I have never been told why my clearance was revoked.  
 
* * * 
 
The …representatives informed me that there were inconsistencies in my 
polygraph examination responses which specifically pertained to my past 
criminal history. I have no idea why this was the case. I have been 
previously arrested on two occasions, and I fully divulged that to the … 
during the polygraph examination.17  
 
Applicant refers to only two arrests that he divulged.  
14 Id. 
 
15 Id. 
 
16 Id. 
 
17 Id. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant testified that he was interviewed twice in 2007. After the last interview 
the investigator prepared a written statement and he met with the investigator to go over 
the statement in February 2008. Applicant confirmed that he was provided the written 
statement that was prepared by the investigator; he had an opportunity to read it and 
make corrections. Applicant testified: 
 
I did notice that the ’97 arrest was missing, but I figured, you now, the 
investigator, you know, had that information, you know, in the two-week 
time period would have brought it up and certainly asked questions about 
it. I asked the investigator, ‘is this, you know, the last time we’re going to 
have to talk about this?’ He said, ‘Yes, you’ll probably never see me again, 
and you probably won’t have to worry about this for five years.” So, I 
signed the paperwork and I have not seen him again.18  
 
I explained everything, you know, to the investigator. You know, we looked 
over everything. You know, I’ve already explained everything in the past 
before, so, why–why it isn’t on there, you know, I don’t know.19  
 
Applicant stated he did not intentionally omit the pertinent information and he did 
not fail to discuss all of his arrests to the investigator. He further stated: “I thought it was 
an update and I didn’t need to.”20 Applicant was asked if he knew when he read the 
statement that it was not “totally correct” and he admitted he was aware it was not. He 
admitted that when he signed it he knew there were mistakes in the statement.21 He 
was asked why he did not correct them. He stated:  
 
Well, the investigator had it for two years—I mean, I mean two months—or 
two weeks. I figured if he had any problems with it he would have 
addressed it at the time. And this is all information that was already 
revealed in 2003.22  
 
He stated: “I know it isn’t in there, and I didn’t read it thoroughly enough and I wish that I 
had.”23 He confirmed that he initialed grammatical changes made by the investigator but 
not substantive matters.  
 
18 Tr. 103. 
 
19 Tr. 105-106. 
 
20 Tr. 99. 
 
21 Tr. 135-136. 
 
22 Id. 
 
23 Tr. 153-155. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
Regarding Applicant’s failure to divulge the revocation of TS/SCI access, he 
stated he had not received a “formal letter or reasoning” for being read-off the 
government contract. He stated: 
 
You know, when I met with the investigator, you know, he and I spoke 
about that and the investigator brought up the term, you know, ‘revoked.’ 
So I don’t know if it’s been revoked. I don’t know if it was downgrade[d].24  
 
He stated that it was never explained to him what “revoked” meant. When asked what 
his understanding of the word “revoked” was, he stated “taken away… or to tell you the 
truth, I really don’t have a full understanding of that word.”25 After further questioning he 
stated he did not know a “Webster’s version, you know of the…not a Webster’s 
Dictionary version,”26 but then stated it meant “to be taken away.”27  
 
Applicant admitted that when he worked for a different defense contractor he was 
told by his facilities security officer that he was being read-off the contract because he 
did not pass the polygraph. He understood that he did not have access to SCI. He 
understood that a decision was made that he was not going to have access to SCI. 
Applicant was concerned because “I never received any reasons for that.”28 
 
 I find Applicant’s testimony throughout the proceeding was not credible or 
believable. I find he was evasive and lacked candor. His explanations regarding his 
omissions on his SCA were not believable. His testimony as to why he failed to list his 
revocation of his TS/SCI security clearance was not believable. He was aware his 
TS/SCI security clearance had been revoked and deliberately omitted it on his SCA. 
Even if he were to be believed that he was in a hurry when he completed his SCA in 
2006, when he was interviewed later he failed to ensure the investigator had all of his 
correct information. In his written statement of February 11, 2008, he had an opportunity 
to correct the omissions and mistakes and he intentionally and deliberately chose not 
too. He repeatedly provided conflicting statements that contradicted sworn statements 
previously made. 
 
 Three witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf and a character letter was 
provided. One a former coworkers/friend considers Applicant an excellent worker, who 
is reliable and dependable. He and Applicant lived together for a period of time and 
socialized. He did not notice any alcohol-related issues during this time. He believes 
24 Tr. 109, 150-151. Apparently Applicant was interviewed twice by the OPM investigator, once 
regarding his criminal activity and another time regarding his SCI revocation. 
 
25 Tr. 111. 
 
26 Id. 
 
27 Id. 
 
28 Tr. 132-133, 144. 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant is thorough and not forgetful.29 The other considers Applicant an honorable 
person that he trusts and respects. Both recommend he be granted a security 
clearance.30 
 
 Applicant’s fiancé testified that she believes Applicant is truthful and he made a 
mistake. She believed he forgot to divulge the omitted information and did not 
understand the questions and thought he only had to go back five years. She 
recommends Applicant for a position of trust.31 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor testified on his behalf. The supervisor received positive 
feedback from customers about Applicant. He trusts Applicant and recommended that 
he be given a security clearance.32  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
29 Tr. 29-51. 
 
30 AE B. 
 
31 Tr. 55-74. 
 
32 Tr.78-90. 
 
9 
 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct. “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.”  
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered (a) (“deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities”); and (b) (“deliberately providing 
false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative”) under this guideline. I have considered all of the facts and find 
Applicant deliberately omitted, concealed, misled, and falsified information on his 
September 2006 SCA, on his signed sworn statement of February 11, 2008, and at this 
hearing. I find he deliberately failed to divulge all of his criminal conduct and the 
revocation of his TS/SCI security clearance by another government agency. I find in his 
signed sworn statement of February 11, 2008, he deliberately failed to disclose he had 
been arrested twice for DUI. I find both disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
10 
 
 
                                                          
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions and especially considered AG ¶ 17(a) (“the individual made prompt, good-
faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being 
confronted with the facts”); (b) (“the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or 
the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment”); and (e) (“the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress”). Applicant did not make 
an effort to correct the omissions and falsifications on his SCA or in his February 11, 
2008, sworn statement. To the contrary, he was aware of mistakes in his sworn 
statement, had an opportunity to correct them and did not act to do so. Applicant did not 
divulge all of his criminal conduct in his first SCA.33 When he was interviewed in 2003, 
he provided an explanation for why he failed to divulge all of his criminal conduct. Later 
he stated he relied on previous admissions of his conduct to supplement his 2006 SCA. 
However, he provided different reasons why he did not fully divulge all of the information 
when he completed his 2006 SCA, and, when he was later interviewed and signed and 
swore to his statement. His explanations were: He believed it was an update and the 
information was already available; he was in a hurry; he did not understand what 
“revoked” meant; he forgot; he assumed the investigator chose not to address one of 
his DUI convictions when he transcribed the statement. Based on his numerous 
explanations, I find Applicant’s actions were not the result of an honest mistake, but 
were deliberate. He perpetrated a falsification and continued his affirmation of it 
throughout his hearing. Applicant’s actions can not be considered minor because he 
failed to divulge information that was pertinent to his security clearance investigation at 
various stages throughout the process, thereby casting doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. Applicant’s testimony was unreliable and untruthful. 
I find insufficient evidence was presented to confirm he has taken steps to reduce his 
vulnerability. I find none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: ACriminal 
activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.@ 
 
The SOR cross-alleges Applicant’s falsifications regarding his failure to fully 
divulge his criminal conduct, his security clearance revocation and statements in his 
February 11, 2008, signed sworn statement. I previously found his falsifications and 
omissions were deliberate and intentional. I have considered the disqualifying 
conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 (a) (“a single serious crime or multiple 
33 I have not considered for disqualifying purposes any possible omissions made in his 2003 SCA 
or statement. However, I have considered them, as stated above, when analyzing the whole person or as 
a course of conduct, including analysis of a deliberate falsification or a mistake.  
 
11 
 
 
                                                          
lesser offenses”), and (c) (“allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted”). 
 
It is a felony, punishable by a fine or imprisonment for not more than five years or 
both, to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch 
of the government of the United States.34 Security clearances are matters within the 
jurisdiction of the executive branch of the government of the United States. A 
deliberately false answer on a security clearance application is a serious crime within 
the meaning of Guideline J. Applicant’s false answers on his security clearance 
application and signed sworn statement raise disqualifying conditions (a) and (c). 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct and 
especially considered AG ¶ 32 (a) (“so much time has elapsed since the criminal 
behavior happened, or it happened under unusual circumstances that is it unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness or good 
judgment”), and (d) (“there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement”). Appellant provided incomplete and false information 
throughout the course of the security investigation and at his hearing. For example, 
when confronted with the inconsistencies regarding why he did not list the revocation of 
his security clearance and access to SCI, he elaborated that he never received formal 
notification; he did not know what the word “revoked” meant; and he did not know the 
Webster’s definition of it. When directly confronted, he admitted it meant “taken away.” 
His actions did not happen under unusual circumstances, and consequently they do 
cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. Due to Applicant’s 
continuing conduct and lack of credibility during his testimony, I find there is insufficient 
evidence of successful rehabilitation. I find none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
34 18 U.S.C. § 1001.  
 
12 
 
 
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon 
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 32-year-old man who 
is a valued dependable worker. He has served his country for six years as a Marine. He 
failed to be completely honest and provide a complete picture of his criminal history and 
that he previously had his security clearance and access to SCI revoked. He had 
opportunities to correct the omissions, but did not. Even if he were to believed that he 
had listed everything on his 2003 SCA regarding his criminal conduct, his statement of 
February 11, 2008, clearly asserts he was arrested only twice, which was false. He 
failed to provide a credible explanation why he did not list his security clearance 
revocation. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from personal 
conduct and criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraphs 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is not clearly consistent with national security 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
