                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-10437
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
November 24, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On February 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 25, 2008, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on April 29, 2008. Applicant did not file a
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on July 21, 2008. Based upon a
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
For example, the November 2004 credit report (Exhibit 7) lists two numbers for each account and one of
1
the two numbers is the same for each account. 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47 year old employee of a defense contractor.
SOR Allegations 1a and 1b: Applicant is alleged to be indebted to Unifund in
the amounts of $14,730.00 and $14,618.00. Exhibit 7 indicates these are most likely the
same debt. Applicant claims this debt was one of many his former wife secretly incurred
while he was deployed overseas with the U.S. Navy, which he has disputed as not
being his debt. The most recent Equifax report in the file (Exhibit 9) identifies applicant
as an “extended fraud victim,” and unlike the previous Equifax report (Exhibit 8), does
not list  this alleged debt.
SOR Allegation 1c: There is conflicting evidence regarding this alleged
$2,255.00 debt. Some evidence indicates applicant owed two debts to Wells Fargo in
the amounts of $2,255.00 and $3,017.00, and other evidence indicates the alleged
$2,255.00 debt may be the same as the $3,017.00 debt.  In Exhibit 5 there is a letter1
from a collection agency acknowledging applicant settled a debt to Wells Fargo “in full”
by paying $2,500.00 to the collection agency in 2006. Adding to the confusion is the fact
that on the most recent credit report in the file (Exhibit 9), there are two Wells Fargo
debts listed, and neither of the two listings indicates there is any past-due amount
owing. The credit report does indicate applicant has disputed the debts.
SOR Allegations 1d, 1e and 1f: Applicant is alleged to be indebted in the
amounts of $57.00, $97.00, and $82.00 “for medical services as reflected in a January
31, 2008, credit report.” Applicant denies the allegations, and there is no January 31,
2008 credit report in the record. These allegations are found for applicant.
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
3
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to Financial Considerations is set forth in
Paragraph 18 of the new AG, and is as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one*s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual*s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The AG note several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
Paragraph 19.a., an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 19.c., “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may
raise security concerns. The evidence shows applicant did have a few debts go
delinquent.  Accordingly, these disqualifying conditions are applicable.
The guidelines also set out mitigating conditions. Paragraph 20.a. may apply
where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual*s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant has successfully
disputed the alleged Unifund debt(s), either satisfied or disputed the Wells Fargo debt,
and the Government failed to prove he is indebted on the three alleged medical bill
debts totaling $236.00. The little derogatory financial evidence the Government offered
does not cast doubt on applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
Accordingly, this mitigation condition is applicable.
4
Under Paragraph 20.b., it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person*s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by conditions largely beyond his control;
namely his wife opening up numerous credit accounts without his knowledge while he
was deployed overseas. He acted responsibly by disputing some of the debts and
paying off others. Accordingly, this mitigating condition is applicable.
Evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control”
is potentially mitigating under Paragraph 20.c. It is clear the problem is under control.
This mitigating condition is applicable.
Paragraph d. applies where the evidence shows “the individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” Applicant has either
satisfied or successfully disputed his debts. This mitigating condition is applicable.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2c, the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature man who,
while honorably serving his country, had his finances destroyed by a dishonest spouse.
As a result, some of his financial obligations went delinquent. During the years since
their divorce, applicant has satisfied some of these debts and has successfully disputed
the validity of the others. Based on the evidence presented, I conclude applicant
mitigated the security concerns arising from Guideline F.
5
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
