 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 07-14937 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement), E (Personal Conduct), and J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on May 7, 2005, and 
was granted a secret clearance in January 2006 and an interim top secret clearance in 
March 2006. He submitted an electronic application (e-QIP) on March 3, 2006, seeking 
a final top secret clearance. On July 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security concerns under Guidelines 
H, E, and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 29, 2008; answered it on 
August 15, 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on August 22, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
September 17, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on September 22, 2008. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on September 29, 2008, scheduling the hearing for October 
21, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which were admitted without objection. 
Each of Applicant’s exhibits consists of multiple documents which are numbered. Thus, 
for example, AX A consists of AX A(1) through AX A(8). The record closed upon 
adjournment of the hearing on October 21, 2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
October 30, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of 
fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old electrical design engineer employed by a government 
contractor. In high school, he was an accomplished varsity wrestler (AX C(15)-(18)) and 
an Eagle Scout (AX C(11)-(14)). He graduated from college in May 2005 (AX C(4)) and 
has worked for his current employer since June 2005. He received a master’s degree in 
electrical engineering in May 2008 (AX C(2)-(3)). 
 
 After graduating from college, Applicant returned to his hometown to accept his 
current job. He testified his first days of work were “a bit of a shock,” in that he was 
expected to get up early and work regular hours every day (Tr. 35). His first mentor for 
about three months was an older man who was physically and verbally abusive (Tr. 35). 
After Applicant complained to his supervisor, his mentor was replaced (Tr. 36). 
 
 Applicant was required to take a drug test as a condition of employment, and he 
was aware that his employer had a drug-free workplace policy (Tr. 66). In August 2005, 
he began smoking marijuana about once a week with hometown friends who had not 
attended college, whose career expectations were lower than his, and who used 
marijuana on a regular basis (Tr. 37). His first use occurred when a pipe was passed 
around at a party. He was a non-smoker and his first use was unpleasant, but he 
continued using because he enjoyed its effects (Tr. 64-65). Once or twice a month, he 
would purchase small quantities ($20 to $40 worth) of marijuana from known dealers, 
for group use (Tr. 56-57).  
 
 On March 3, 2006, Applicant filed out the e-QIP after he was told he needed a 
top secret clearance (Tr. 38). He answered “no” to question 24a asking, “Since the age 
of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled 
substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics . . . .?” 
He did not disclose that he used marijuana beginning in August 2005 and was still using 
 
3 
 
 
it at the time he submitted the e-QIP. He also answered “no” to question 24b asking, 
“Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance while employed as a law 
enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while possessing a security 
clearance; or while in a position directly and immediately affecting the public safety?” He 
did not disclose that he used marijuana after receiving a security clearance in January 
2006.  
 
Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana and drug 
paraphernalia in December 2006 (GX 3 at 3-4). He was granted a conditional discharge, 
fined, and placed on probation for six months (GX 3 at 10). He has not used marijuana 
since his arrest. 
 
In February 2007, Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator about his 
e-QIP. When the investigator asked him if there were any changes in his police record, 
Applicant disclosed his marijuana use (Tr. 41).  
 
In response to DOHA interrogatories on February 20, 2008, Applicant admitted 
his answers to questions 24a and 24b on his e-QIP were false. He explained that he 
feared losing his job if he truthfully answered the questions (GX 4 at 3). 
 
After his arrest, Applicant stopped associating with his marijuana-smoking friends 
(Tr. 42). He testified he will never use illegal drugs again (Tr. 50). He has made new 
friends among his coworkers, and he is engaged to a young woman he has known 
since May 2006 (Tr. 43-44; (AX A(8)).  
 
Applicant disclosed his marijuana use and falsification of his e-QIP to his 
supervisors, several coworkers, friends, family members, and his fiancée. Several have 
written letters supporting his efforts to keep his clearance.  
 
A senior supervisor who hired Applicant recognizes he had made “two serious 
mistakes,” but supports Applicant’s efforts to retain his clearance (AX A(7)). His 
immediate supervisor, who has daily contact with him, describes him as hardworking, 
motivated, dedicated, honest, reliable, and trustworthy (AX A(4)). Two coworkers, one 
of whom is also a personal friend, describe him as honest, reliable, and trustworthy (AX 
A(3) and A(5)).  
 
A long-time friend and former college classmate considers Applicant reliable, 
responsible, and a person with good judgment (AX A(1)). Two high school classmates 
describe him as honest, reliable, and trustworthy (AX A(2) and A(6)). His fiancée, a 
registered nurse who has known him since May 2006, considers him responsible, 
dedicated, hard working, a great role model, and a prudent, careful financial manager 
(AX A(8)). 
 
Applicant participated in fielding a new demonstration payload for a modernized 
global positioning system, and has received numerous certificates of achievement for 
enhancing his technical skills (AX C(5)-(9)). He has received four merit pay increases 
 
4 
 
 
(AX B(1)-(4)), has an excellent credit score (AX B(5), and contributes regularly to his 
retirement account (AX B(5)-(7)).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
5 
 
 
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from August 
2005 to “at least” December 29, 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.a); he used marijuana after submitting a 
security clearance application in May 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.b); he continued to use marijuana 
after receiving a security clearance (SOR ¶ 1.c); and he was arrested on December 29, 
2006 for possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
 
The concern under this guideline is as follows: AUse of an illegal drug or misuse 
of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ AG ¶ 
24. This guideline encompasses use or misuse of Adrugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens). AG 
¶ 24(a)(1). Drug abuse is Athe illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.@ AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
Disqualifying conditions under this guideline include Aany drug abuse@ (AG ¶ 
25(a); “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution” (AG ¶ 25(c)); and “any illegal drug use after being 
granted a security clearance” (AG ¶ 25(g)). Applicant’s admissions raise these three 
disqualifying conditions, shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns raised by drug involvement may be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 26(a). The first prong of ¶ 
26(a) (Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on the recentness of drug involvement. There 
are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination 
must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. ISCR Case No. 
02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge 
 
6 
 
 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
Almost two years have passed since Applicant’s last drug involvement. Since 
that time, he has stopped associating with his marijuana-smoking friends, become 
engaged, and continued to perform well at work. There is no evidence of physical or 
psychological addiction. On the other hand, his marijuana use began within two months 
of being hired, having taken a drug test as a condition of employment. His marijuana 
use continued after he was granted a clearance, and he compounded his problems by 
falsifying his e-QIP. His conduct reflects immaturity, susceptibility to peer pressure, and 
willingness to lie to protect his job. He used marijuana weekly for more than a year, from 
August 2005 until the end of December 2006. He did not terminate his marijuana use 
voluntarily and would likely have continued it for a while had he not been arrested. 
Since his arrest, he has been under pressure to retain his clearance. I am not convinced 
that sufficient time has elapsed for him to demonstrate rehabilitation. Thus, I conclude 
that his drug abuse is not “so long ago” within the meaning of AG 46(a). See ISCR Case 
No. 06-18270, 2007 WL 4379282 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007) (drug use after pre-
employment drug test and applying for a clearance “undercuts” a finding of 
rehabilitation). 
 
The second prong of AG ¶ 26(a) (“so infrequent”) also is not established in light 
of Applicant’s weekly use of marijuana from August 2005 until the end of December 
2006. The third prong (“under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur”) is not 
established because his marijuana use occurred in ordinary social situations, not 
unusual circumstances. Finally, the fourth prong (“does not cast doubt”) is not 
established because his multiple breaches of trust, by regularly using marijuana while 
holding a clearance and attempting to conceal his marijuana use to protect himself, cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 
26(a) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns arising from drug involvement also may be mitigated by 
evidence of Aa demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the 
environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a 
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.@ AG 
¶ 26(b)(1)-(4). Applicant has stopped associating with marijuana-using associates and 
has changed his recreational environment, but he has not established an appropriate 
period of abstinence or submitted a signed statement of intent. Furthermore, his 
declared statement to refrain from future drug use is undercut by his breaches of trust 
discussed above under AG ¶ 26(a). I conclude AG ¶ 26(b) is not established. 
 
 Finally, security concerns also may be mitigated by Asatisfactory completion of a 
prescribed drug treatment program, including but not limited to rehabilitation and 
aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional.@ AG ¶ 26(d). This mitigating condition is not 
established because Applicant has not sought any counseling or treatment.  
 
7 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR cross-alleged Applicant’s drug abuse under this guideline (SOR ¶ 2.a) 
and alleges he falsified his e-QIP by answering “no” to questions 24a and 24b and 
intentionally failing to disclose his marijuana use (SOR ¶¶ 2,b-2,c).  
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying conditions arising under this guideline for Applicant’s 
drug involvement are “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, professional, or 
community standing” (AG ¶ 16(d)); “violation of a written or recorded commitment made 
by the individual to the employer as a condition of employment” (AG ¶ 16(f)); and 
“association with persons involved in criminal activity” (AG ¶ 16(g)). Applicant’s 
repeated use of marijuana, association with marijuana users and marijuana dealers, 
violation of his company’s drug policy, and illegal conduct that could affect his personal, 
professional, and community standing raise AG ¶¶ 16(d), (f), and (g). 
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition for SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c is “deliberate 
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). This disqualifying condition is raised by Applicant’s 
admission that he deliberately omitted information about his marijuana use because he 
was afraid he would lose his job if he disclosed it.  
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). Applicant admitted his drug involvement to a security investigator 
in February 2007, about 11 months after submitting his falsified application. There is no 
evidence contradicting Applicant’s testimony that he disclosed his drug involvement in 
response to any open-ended question whether he had anything to add to his 
application. The record does not reflect whether he was confronted with evidence of his 
arrest. Applicant receives some credit for disclosing his drug involvement to the 
investigator, but his efforts to correct the omission were not prompt. I conclude AG ¶ 
17(b) is not fully established. 
 
8 
 
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct may be mitigated by showing “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). 
Applicant’s falsifications were recent and not “minor,” as discussed below under 
Guideline J. His two false answers on his e-QIP arguably are infrequent, but they 
occurred in the context of Applicant “living a lie” by seeking to upgrade his clearance 
while regularly using marijuana. His falsifications did not occur under unique 
circumstances, and they cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct also may be mitigated if “the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant has not sought counseling, but he 
has acknowledged his behavior, stopped associating with his fellow marijuana users, 
and concentrated on using his off-duty time more productively. As noted under 
Guideline H, it is too soon to determine whether his behavior is unlikely to recur. Thus, I 
conclude this mitigating condition is not fully established. 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated “if the individual has taken positive 
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 
17(e). This mitigating condition is established because Applicant has fully disclosed his 
behavior to his supervisors, coworkers, friends, and his fiancée. 
 
 Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “association 
with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased.” AG ¶ 17(g). This condition is 
established because Applicant no longer associates with his marijuana-smoking 
companions. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges Applicant’s falsification of his e-QIP and arrest for 
possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia under this guideline. The concern 
raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30 as follows: “Criminal conduct creates 
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it 
calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations.” AG ¶ 30. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation 
or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally 
charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). 
 
 It is a felony, punishable by a fine or imprisonment for not more than five years, 
or both, to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch 
 
9 
 
 
of the government of the United States. 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Security clearances are 
matters within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the government of the United 
States. A deliberately false answer on a security clearance application is a serious 
crime within the meaning of Guideline J.  Applicant’s false answers on his e-QIP and his 
arrest for possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶ 31(a) and (c). 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). They also may be 
mitigated if, “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job 
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.” AG ¶ 32(d). For the reasons set out above concerning AG ¶ 26(a) under 
Guideline H, I conclude neither of these mitigating conditions is established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H, E, and J in my whole person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
 Applicant grew up as a clean-cut, conscientious young man—an Eagle Scout 
and a varsity athlete. He was a good student in college. He presented himself at the 
hearing as articulate, intelligent, sincere, and contrite. He started his current job 
immediately after he graduated from college, and he received a clearance six months 
later. He had some problems transitioning from college life to the demands of the 
workplace. Two months after being hired, he began smoking marijuana regularly and 
 
10 
 
 
frequently, even though he knew drug use violated his company’s policy. While he is a 
talented engineer, he appears to have lacked maturity and appreciation for the 
responsibilities of adulthood and a security clearance. He enjoyed and actively 
participated in the camaraderie of his marijuana-smoking friends, demonstrating a lack 
of appreciation for the trust and confidence implicit in the granting of a security 
clearance. He further demonstrated his immaturity when he lied on his application for a 
higher level of clearance. He needs to establish a track record of maturity, reliability, 
and good judgment to overcome the doubts his marijuana use and lack of candor have 
raised.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H, E, 
and J, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on drug involvement, personal 
conduct, and criminal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
