1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 07-14916
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA, Item 4), on
November 29, 2006. On June 3, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under
foreign preference (Guideline C). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
made effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after
September 1, 2006. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Applicant submitted his answer to the SOR on June 22, 2008, and notarized on
June 23, 2008. He requested a decision be made on the record in lieu of a hearing. A
copy of the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM, the government’s evidence
in support of the allegations of the SOR) was sent to Applicant on August 8, 2008.
Applicant received the FORM on August 13, 2008. His response was due September
2
12, 2008. No response was received by DOHA. The case file was assigned to me on
October 10, 2008. 
Findings of Fact
The SOR contains two allegations under the foreign preference guideline.
Applicant denied SOR 1.a. and admitted SOR 1.b. Applicant explained his denial of the
first allegation is based on his belief he has no preference, and the government’s claim
he has a preference is sheer speculation. In his explanation for his admission to SOR
1.b., Applicant preferred not to destroy his Swedish passport because it facilitated travel
to Sweden and throughout the European continent. Applicant mentioned several estate
properties he owns in the United States (U.S.). In his closing statements within the
attachment to his answer to the SOR, Applicant noted that the security investigation
should include an evaluation of the country involved. He also opined that Sweden does
not hold any animus toward the U.S. 
Applicant is 37 years old and married. He has been employed as a systems
engineer since February 2001. This is the first time Applicant has applied for a security
clearance. 
Applicant was born in Sweden in August 1970. In August 1991, he began his
college education in the U.S., and received his Bachelor’s degree in May 1994. He
married a U.S. citizen in March 1995 and divorced her in May 2005. He married his
second wife, a citizen of France, in April 2006. 
In November 2006, Applicant admitted having a Swedish passport (Item 4,
Section 17.d.) In March 2007 (Item 6), Applicant told an investigator for the government
that he was willing to relinquish his Swedish passport if it was a requirement to hold a
security clearance. In his answers to interrogatories dated December 12, 2007,
Applicant stated, “I would greatly appreciate not having to surrender my Swedish
passport, and given the country in question as well as the circumstances.” As noted at
the beginning of this section, on June 22, 2008, Applicant told the government in his
answer that he wanted to keep his Swedish passport for convenience purposes. Since
March 2003, Applicant has traveled to Sweden or France nine times. (Item 4)
SOR 1.a. Applicant obtained a Swedish passport on November 29, 2000, and the
passport expires on November 29, 2010, after becoming a U.S. citizen on March 31,
2003. Item 4 shows that Applicant received his U.S. citizenship on March 26, 2003. 
SOR 1.b. Applicant exercised his dual citizenship (which he wants to retain at
least conditionally) by using his Swedish passport in place of his U.S. passport for ease
of travel in Europe, and as proof of identification in Sweden. See Answer to SOR. 
Applicant provided no independent evidence regarding his job performance or his
contention that retention and use of his Swedish passport does not constitute evidence
of foreign preference. 
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Reasonable doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 FC MC 11.f. (the vote in a foreign election was encourage by the U.S. Government) is inapplicable to this1
case. 
4
Analysis
Foreign Preference (FP)
The Concern. “When a person demonstrates by his actions that he prefers a foreign
country over the U.S., then he may be prone to provide information or make decisions
that are harmful the U.S.” ¶ 9
Foreign preference (Guideline C) is based on an individual’s actions that show a
preference for one country over the U.S. Applicant’s possession and/or use of a
Swedish passport after receiving his U.S. citizenship in March 2003 establishes a
foreign preference and invokes FP disqualifying condition (DC) 10.a. (exercise of any
right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or
through the foreign citizenship of a family member) and 10.a.(1) (possession of a
current passport). Possession, renewal and/or use of the foreign passport after being
naturalized as a U.S. citizen constitutes the exercise of a privilege of Applicant’s
Swedish citizenship he is no longer entitled to, particularly after expressing his sole
allegiance to the U.S. during his naturalization ceremony in March 2003.
Applicant’s dual citizenship is based on more than his birth in a foreign country.
Hence, FP MC 11.a. (dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a
foreign country) is not applicable. FP MC 11.b. (the individual has expressed a
willingness to renounce dual citizenship) is not applicable as Applicant has stated
several times he does not want to relinquish his dual citizenship. 
FP MC 11.c. (exercise of rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a
minor) does not apply because Applicant has chosen to maintain his Swedish
citizenship after being naturalized a U.S. citizen. Applicant’s retention and use of his
foreign passport has not been approved by any authorized security organization. FP MC
11.d. (use of the passport is approved by the cognizant security authority) is
inapplicable.
The only mitigating condition that may apply but does not is FP MC 11.e. (the
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or
otherwise invalidated)  Applicant has not complied with FP MC 11.e. Hence, he has not1
mitigated the security concerns associated with his current possession of a foreign
passport. Applicant should have realized during his security investigation his Swedish
passport could hinder his chances of obtaining a security clearance. The combination of
the security investigation and receiving DoD Directive 5220.6 at same time he received
his SOR in August 2008, containing the adjudicative guidelines and disqualifying and
mitigating conditions, should have alerted Applicant to the adverse consequences of
retaining his Swedish passport. The FC guideline is resolved against Applicant.
5
Whole Person Concept (WPC)
My finding against Applicant under the FP guideline must still be considered in
the context of nine variables known as the whole person concept. In evaluating the
relevance of an individual’s conduct, the administrative judge should consider the
following WPC factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence
or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9)
the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Applicant was born in Sweden and is 37 years old. Item 4 reflects that he has
traveled back to Sweden several times since he received his U.S. citizenship. His
statements during the 18-month security investigation indicate he wants to keep his
Swedish passport (and Swedish citizenship) to facilitate his travel in and out of Sweden
and other locations in Europe. However, by keeping his Swedish passport, an indicator
of Swedish citizenship, Applicant is demonstrating his loyalties are divided between the
U.S. and Sweden. When Applicant took his oath for U.S. citizenship during the
naturalization ceremony in March 2003, he swore his allegiance to the U.S. and no
other country. The combination of the security investigation and his receipt of the
Directive placed him on adequate notice that he should surrender his Swedish passport.
He decided not to relinquish the document. His decision exposes him to coercion and
pressure by other governments seeking information from U.S. citizens. The FP
guideline is found against him. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Foreign Preference, Guideline C): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph b. Against Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
