 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-14984 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Michael L. Copes, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his financial issues 
and personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On April 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 29, 2008, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. It is unclear when Applicant’s 
response was received by DOHA. On June 18, 2008, Department Counsel requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. Paragraph (¶) E3.1.7 of the Directive provides 
 
2 
 
that Department Counsel has 20 days from receipt of Applicant’s answer to the SOR to 
request a hearing. Applicant was informed at the hearing that Department Counsel may 
have requested a hearing more than 20 days after receipt of his answer. He 
affirmatively waived the issue and did not object to his case being handled at a 
hearing.1  
 
The case was assigned to me on August 22, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on August 27, 2008, scheduling the hearing for September 15, 2008. On 
September 11, 2008, the hearing was cancelled because of the threat of severe 
weather. Another notice of hearing was issued on September 22, 2008. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on October 9, 2008. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4, which were received without objection. The Government also offered an SOR 
Debt Summary chart as a form of demonstrative evidence. The chart is marked Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I and it was accepted for that limited purpose. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf but did not submit any documentary evidence. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on October 16, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since about May 2005. He is a high school graduate. He served in 
the U.S. Army from 1989 to 1992. He is married with three children, ages seven, four, 
and two.2  
 
 The SOR lists 15 debts. Applicant admitted to owing the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.e, 1.f, and 1.i. He admitted to SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.n, but indicated the debts were 
duplicates of the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f. He admitted to SOR ¶ 1.m, but provided 
information to dispute the debt. He denied the remaining allegations. Individual debts 
are addressed below. 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the medical debt of $802, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. In 
his answer to the SOR, he stated that he contacted the creditor more than a year before 
the answer to work out a payment plan and was told they could not find his file. He 
stated that he would immediately re-contact the creditor and settle the debt. He has not 
made any payments on the debt. The debt in SOR ¶ 1.n is a duplicate of the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.a.3 
 
 Applicant denied owing the medical debts of $5,633 and $944, as alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. He stated that he did not know what the debts were for, but he thought 
the $5,633 debt may have been for the birth of one of his children. The credit reports 
that list these debts do not identify a creditor. They simply list them as “medical.” In the 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6. 
 
2 Tr. at 24-25; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 30, 34; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
 
3 
 
absence of additional information, there is insufficient evidence to find that Applicant is 
responsible for these debts.4 
 
 Applicant denied owing the debt of $370 to a collection company on behalf of a 
cellular telephone services company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. He stated that he called 
the telephone company in about August 2008, to dispute the account. He did not 
provide any documentation in support of the dispute. The debt is listed on all the credit 
reports in evidence.5 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the $4,853 debt to a collection company, on behalf of a 
financial institution, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that he 
made attempts to settle the debt and was continuing to work with the creditor to resolve 
the issue. He has not made any payments on the debt. At the hearing he stated that he 
never had any dealings with the financial institution named in the SOR.6 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g allege delinquent debts of $1,371 and $2,501 to the same 
bank. Applicant admitted owing both debts, but stated that he believed they were 
duplicates and represented the same debt. He stated that he had one account with the 
bank about eight to ten years ago and that the debt resulted from when he was laid off 
work. He further stated that when he tried to work out a payment plan, the creditor was 
“rude and threatening toward [him],” and called a former employer and told the 
employer that he was a “crappy human being.” At the hearing Applicant identified the 
former employer that was contacted. He listed on his Questionnaire for Sensitive 
Positions (SF 86), that he worked for this employer between September 1999 and July 
2001, and again between October 2002 and May 2005. Both debts, with different 
account numbers, are listed on all the credit reports in evidence. The date of last action 
for the debts is listed on the reports as between November 2001 and May 2002.7 I find 
that Applicant is responsible for both debts. 
 
 Applicant denied owing the debt of $1,978 to a collection company on behalf of a 
financial institution, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. He stated that he did not know what the 
debt was, but that he would look into it and if it was legitimately his, then he would settle 
the debt. He did not provide any documentation in support of the dispute. The debt is 
listed on all the credit reports in evidence.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i alleges a delinquent debt of $604 to a collection company. Applicant 
admitted owing this debt. The same debt is also listed in SOR ¶ 1.o as a debt of $358 to 
a different collection company. The difference in amounts is apparently due to accrued 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 30; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
5 Tr. at 28; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
6 Tr. at 30-31, 36, 37, 51-52; Applicant’s response to SOR. 
 
7 Tr. at 31-33, 52-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4. 
 
8 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
 
4 
 
interest or penalties. The debt was apparently transferred or sold to the company 
named in SOR ¶ 1.i, as the company in SOR ¶ 1.o does not appear on the later two 
reports, but the company named in SOR ¶ 1.i appears on all the reports. Applicant 
denied owing the debt. He stated that he called the collection company named in SOR ¶ 
1.o, in about August 2008, to dispute the account, but was given the “runaround.” They 
finally told him that they would investigate the debt and send him a response via e-mail. 
He has not received a response. I find that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.o is a duplicate of the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.i. Applicant has not made any payments on the debt which he admitted 
was his responsibility.9 
 
 Applicant denied owing the debt of $179 to a collection company on behalf of a 
telephone services company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. A debt of $28 to the same 
collection company on behalf of the same telephone services company is alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.k. Applicant stated that he never had any dealings with this telephone 
company. He called the telephone company in about August 2008, and they told him 
they had no record of his account. He also stated that he disputed the account on-line 
with the credit reporting agencies. The debts are listed on the March 14, 2007 credit 
report indicating the last action on the debts was in 2000. The debts are not listed on 
the later two reports.10 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l alleges a delinquent debt of $1,096 to a collection company for a 
medical debt. Applicant denied owing this debt. The debt is not listed on the two most 
recent credit reports.11 
 
 Applicant admitted to the debt of $8,421, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m, but provided 
additional information to suggest that he was not responsible for the debt. He stated that 
he bought a truck in about 2001, and the next day the engine blew. The dealer replaced 
the engine but it stopped working about a week later. After further attempts to resolve 
the issue, he returned the truck. He stated that he never heard back from them. The 
debt is not listed on the two most recent credit reports.12 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a series of low-paying jobs between 
1998 and 2000, and that he did not get back on his feet until 2005. He stated that the 
debts were accrued eight or more years ago. He has not made payments on any of the 
debts in the SOR. When asked why, he responded “I have no excuse for it.” He stated 
that he has been traveling for work for large periods of time since he received the SOR. 
He has never received financial counseling. Applicant earns about $65,500 annually 
and his wife earns about $6,000 a year working part-time. He has a surplus of about 
$400 to $500 per month, after paying his monthly expenses. He stated that he will pay 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 29, 33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
10 Tr. at 26-29; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
11 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
12 Tr. at 33-34; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4. 
 
 
5 
 
the debts that he acknowledges are his responsibility or are proven to be his 
responsibility.13 
 
 Applicant submitted an SF 86, certified as true on February 9, 2007. Question 
28A asked, “Last 7 yrs, over 180 days delinquent on any debts?” Question 28B asked, 
“Currently over 90 days delinquent on any debts?” He answered “No” to both questions. 
He was questioned by an investigator for his background investigation on two occasions 
sometime after he submitted his SF 86. He testified that he did not remember if they 
discussed his delinquent debts.14  
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86. He stated that he “was 
unaware or had forgotten about these debts.” He stated that he was given a very short 
time to complete that application and he was under the impression that he had no 
outstanding debts that were under seven years old.15 I find that Applicant had 
delinquent debts that were less than seven years old when he submitted the SF 86. I 
further find that Applicant knew this fact when he certified the SF 86 as true. After 
considering all the evidence, observing Applicant’s demeanor, and gauging his 
credibility, I find that he intentionally falsified his responses to Questions 28A and 28B of 
the SF 86 by failing to list his delinquent debts. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 38-49. 
 
14 Tr. at 49-50; GE 1. 
 
15 Tr. at 45-46, 53-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
 
6 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has not made payments on any of the debts alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 
20(a) is not applicable. He attributed his financial problems to low-paying jobs in about 
1998 to 2000. These are conditions that were largely beyond his control. To be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant started working for his current employer in 2005, and that is 
when he indicated that he was back on his feet financially. He has not made an effort to 
pay his delinquent debts since then. There is insufficient information for a finding that he 
has acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.   
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. There are not clear indications 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable. He 
has not made a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
Applicant disputed owing several debts. He did not provide documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. However, several of the debts he disputed are not 
listed on the most recent credit reports. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to those debts.  
 
 
8 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86 in 2007. The above disqualifying 
condition has been established.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
 
9 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
I have considered all the potential mitigating conditions. Applicant submitted his 
SF 86 in 2007. He denied falsifying his SF 86, but I did not find his testimony credible. 
Applicant has not provided sufficient credible information to establish any of the 
mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s military 
service to our country. However, he has allowed debts to go unpaid for years without 
any effort at addressing them and he intentionally provided false information about his 
finances on his SF 86.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
issues and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
 
10 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
