KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Individual statements by a Judge must be viewed in the context of the entire decision,
not in isolation.  Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising from ties to Iran.  Adverse
decision affirmed.  
CASENO: 07-13739.a1
DATE: 11/12/2008
DATE: November 12, 2008
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-13739
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On January 10, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On June 25, 2008, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Darlene Lokey-
Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.     
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant
The Judge’s statement about validation apparently refers to confusion in Applicant’s testimony.  “Q:  And when1
did you validate it to go back?  A: Prior to my trips. . . .”  However, Applicant then stated that his passport was still valid
when he traveled again and did not need to be renewed.  Transcript at 43.    
is vulnerable to foreign influence due to his close relationships with family members in Iran renders
her decision arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no harmful error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following relevant findings of fact:  Applicant, who is 51 years of age,
emigrated to the United States from Iran as a young man.  Applicant is now an American citizen.
Applicant’s wife, who is from another country, has applied for American citizenship, and their
children are native-born U.S. citizens.  Applicant has an Iranian passport, which he has used to visit
Iran for family reasons.  The passport is currently invalid.
Applicant has family members in Iran and contacts them about once a month.  He contacts
an uncle about once every two months and corresponds with a nephew by e-mail.  Applicant has sent
money to his family in Iran when there has been need.  He believes the total he has given does not
exceed $10,000.  
Applicant’s supervisor testified as to Applicant’s expertise in his field and his excellent job
performance, and a neighbor wrote a letter as to Applicant’s honesty and trustworthiness.  
Iran does not have diplomatic relations with the United States.  Iran supports and is involved
in international terrorism; it supports violent opposition to the Middle East peace process.  Iran is
attempting to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction.  Iran has a dismal
human rights record, and corruption is rampant at all levels of the Iranian government.
In his appeal, Applicant lists nine items in the Judge’s decision which he considers to be
factual errors.  He argues that the Judge placed too much weight on his relationship with family
members in Iran and not enough on his ties to the United States, and that the Judge’s decision is
therefore arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of facts is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence–“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”
Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility
of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative
agency’s finding from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give
deference to the Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1. 
Only one of the nine items listed by Applicant is an error of fact.  The Judge stated that
Applicant validated his Iranian passport before each of his trips to Iran, when in reality he did so for
only one of the trips.   Applicant used his Iranian passport for his trips, but he only needed to renew1
it once, since it was current when he next traveled to Iran.  Accordingly, the error is harmless, since
it is unlikely, considering the decision as a whole, that Judge would have reached a different result
Government Exhibit 1.2
Transcript at 42-43.3
in the absence of the error. 
Applicant objects to the conclusion on page 7 of the Judge’s decision that Applicant is a dual
citizen of Iran and the United States.  He states that there is no evidence that he is a citizen of any
other country.  Applicant’s assertion on this point has mixed merit.   Resolution of this claim of error
is complicated by the fact that the Judge concluded, “The Applicant is a dual citizen of Iran and the
United States” but did so without explanation.  The record evidence establishes that Applicant
exercised Iranian citizenship through the use of an Iranian passport after he obtained U.S. citizenship
in 1990, and there is record evidence that Iran currently considers Applicant a citizen of Iran by
operation of Iranian law.  However, there is no record evidence that Applicant, either through
statements or deeds, currently holds himself out as a dual citizen of the United States and Iran.  
In support of her argument that there is sufficient evidence to support the Judge’s conclusion
that Applicant is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Iran, Department Counsel points to Applicant’s
affirmative answer to Section 8, Item d of his December 4, 2006 security clearance application.2
However, that portion of the application asks if Applicant is or was a dual citizen of the United
States and another country.  There is no additional evidence that sheds light on what Applicant was
indicating when he answered the question.  Therefore, the answer does not provide clear evidence
to support a conclusion that Applicant considered himself a dual citizen at the time he completed the
application.  Department Counsel also points to Applicant’s hearing testimony, wherein he discusses
dual citizenship solely in the context of maintaining an Iranian passport.  Applicant stated only that
it was his belief that Iran considered him a dual citizen because he held an Iranian passport and
validated it for use to make trips to Iran.   Applicant last used his Iranian passport in 2005 and it has3
since expired.  Applicant’s testimony established only that he used his Iranian passport in the past,
and that it was his belief that his continuing status as an Iranian citizen in the eyes of the Iranians was
based upon his holding of an Iranian passport, albeit an expired one.  Applicant also testified that
he had no intention of revalidating his Iranian passport, and at no point in the record did he indicate
that he considers himself an Iranian citizen independent of his understanding of the viewpoint of the
Iranian government.
The fact that the Iranian government considers Applicant an Iranian citizen has some security
significance in the context of this case.  However, that factor is different from a situation where
Applicant continues to use a valid Iranian passport or otherwise voluntarily holds himself out as a
dual citizen of the U.S. and Iran.  The Judge’s declaration of Applicant as a dual citizen is therefore
problematic inasmuch as she does not inform as to what “dual citizen” means with reference to this
Applicant or how the concept of dual citizenship shapes the Judge’s analysis in the overall context
of the case under Guideline B.  While remanding the case to the Judge would remedy these
deficiencies, the Board concludes that remand is unnecessary inasmuch as there is other record
evidence that supports the Judge’s ultimate decision.           
Applicant also complains on appeal that the Judge employed the wrong standard when
Decision at 7.4
assessing the security significance of his family ties to Iran.  Applicant points out that Guideline B
speaks in terms of foreign contacts creating a “heightened risk”of foreign exploitation or coercion.
Applicant then focuses on the following passage from the Judge’s decision: “It does not go
unrecognized that for the past thirty years he has worked hard to establish himself as a responsible,
educated, American citizen.  However, he has not cut all ties from Iran.”   Applicant asserts the4
possibility that a person may well not cut all ties from his former country without the remaining ties
resulting in heightened risk.
Applicant’s argument is not a frivolous one.  To the extent that the Judge’s statement about
ties to the former country implies or asserts that any such ties automatically create a situation of
heightened risk, that statement is error.  Obviously, the nature and strength of those ties is  important
in an accurate assessment of the overall risk, and there is no requirement under the Directive that an
applicant sever all ties with a foreign country before he or she can be granted access to classified
information.  Individual statements or portions of a Judge’s decision are not reviewed in isolation,
however.  The entire decision must be considered when making a determination of the harmfulness
of the error.  After reviewing the Judge’s decision, the Board concludes that the statement about
cutting all ties was not a critical component in the Judge’s overall assessment of the government’s
security concerns under Guideline B.  Likewise, the Board is convinced, after reviewing pertinent
parts of the Judge’s analysis, that she employed the correct standard when evaluating Applicant’s
connections to Iran.  
Applicant’s other allegations of error pertain to the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant is
vulnerable to foreign influence due to his close relationships with family members in Iran.  Applicant
argues that the Judge placed too much weight on those relationships.  After reviewing the record,
the Board concludes that the Judge’s findings are based on substantial evidence or are reasonable
characterizations or inferences that could be drawn from the record.  Applicant has not identified any
harmful error likely to change the outcome of the case.  Considering the record as a whole, the
Judge’s findings as to Applicant’s close ties with family in Iran are central to her overall analysis of
the case and, with the exception of the harmless errors discussed above, are sustainable.          
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to mitigate those concerns.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  Applicant argues that he presented
enough mitigating evidence in terms of his ties to the United States that the Judge should have
granted him a clearance.  The Judge found some evidence of mitigation.  However, that alone did
not compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge
has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the
unfavorable, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence,
or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate
the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-05809 at 2 (App. Bd. May 27, 2008).   
After reviewing the record as a whole, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the
relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for her decision, “including a ‘rational
connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 158 (1962)).   “The general standard is that a clearance may be
granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Accordingly, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security
clearance decision  is sustainable.             
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett          
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin             
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields          
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
