 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-15558 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that while Applicant rebuted security concerns under the Personal Conduct 
adjudicative guideline, he failed to mitigate security concerns under the Foreign 
Preference and Foreign Influence adjudicative guidelines. His eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
On July 5, 2006, Applicant signed and certified an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference, Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 On May 24, 2008, June 14, 2008, and July 3, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR 
in writing and elected to have a decision without a hearing. With his answer, he 
provided additional explanatory material, including several photocopied pages from his 
U.S. and Sudanese passports.  By memorandum dated July 10, 2008, Department 
Counsel requested a hearing under ¶ E3.1.7 of Enclosure 3, Additional Procedural 
Guidance, of the Directive. On August 21, 2008, the case was assigned to me. I 
convened a hearing on October 1, 2008, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
Government called no witnesses, introduced four exhibits (Ex. 1 through 4), and offered 
facts in twelve official documents of the U.S. Government for administrative notice. (HE 
I.) The Government’s exhibits were admitted without objection. Applicant did not 
introduce exhibits. He testified on his own behalf and called no other witnesses. Sua 
sponte, I corrected a typographical error in the delineation of the allegations under SOR 
¶ 2.  The corrected delineation of allegations under SOR ¶ 2 reads: 2(a), 2(b), 2(c), 2(d), 
and 2(e). I also, on my own motion, revised SOR ¶ 2.(c) to read: “Your six brothers are 
residents and citizens of Sudan.” I made this change pursuant to ¶ E3.1.17 of Enclosure 
3 to render the allegation in conformity with the evidence adduced at the hearing.1 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on October 10, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains three allegations that raise security concerns under AG C, 
Foreign Preference (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.), five allegations that raise security 
concerns under AG B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.e.), and one allegation 
that raised a security concern under AG E, Personal Conduct. In his Answer dated May 
23, 2008, Applicant denied all allegations under Guidelines C, B, and E. In his answers 
dated June 14, 2008 and July 3, 2008, Applicant admitted the five allegations under AG 
B, Foreign Influence. Applicant’s admissions are admitted herein as findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including witness testimony, 
exhibits, relevant policies, and applicable adjudicative guidelines, I make the following 
findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 47 years old.  He was born and raised in Sudan.  He began to study 
English when he was 15 years old. He learned to speak English from Sudanese 
speakers of English. During the hearing, I sometimes found it difficult to understand 
what Applicant was saying. He is employed as a security officer by a government 
contractor and seeks a security clearance (Ex. 1; Tr. 32-34, 37.)  
 
 Applicant is the youngest of eight children. He has six living brothers and one 
sister, who is deceased. He is the only member of his family to immigrate to the United 
States. His mother and his six brothers are citizens and residents of Sudan. None of 
 
1 Applicant’s e-QIP lists no sisters and seven brothers, one of whom is deceased. The deceased sibling 
listed on the e-QIP appears to have a feminine first name. At his hearing, Applicant testified that he has 
six living brothers and that his only sister is deceased. (Ex. 1, 28-32; Tr. 70-71.) 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
Applicant’s brothers works for the government of Sudan.  They all earn their livings as 
small businessmen and commercial traders.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR; Tr. 52, 61-62, 
71-72.) 
 
 From 1981 to 1986, Applicant attended a university in a Middle Eastern country 
and received a bachelor’s degree in agriculture. In 1996 and 1997, he pursued a 
master’s degree in industrial science at a university in Sudan. He discontinued his 
studies when he was selected in a lottery to immigrate to the United States.  (Tr. 34-35.) 
 
 When Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1998, he possessed a 
Sudanese passport issued in February 1998.  Applicant’s Sudanese passport expired in 
2000. He did not renew his Sudanese passport after it expired. From January 2001 
through May 2005, he studied for a master’s degree in computer science at a U.S. 
university.  He became a U.S. citizen in August 2004. (Documents attached to 
Applicant’s Answer to SOR; Ex. 1; Tr. 36, 38, 44.) 
 
 Applicant was married for the first time in Sudan in February 1996.  He divorced 
his wife in 2001.  In 2004, he acquired a U.S. passport and obtained a Sudanese travel 
visa. He traveled first to Saudi Arabia for religious observances. He then used his U.S. 
passport to enter and exit Sudan.  In December 2004, while in Sudan, Applicant married 
for the second time. His second wife is the daughter of Applicant’s uncle. His wife 
remained behind when he returned to the United States. (Ex. 1; Tr. 38-41, 57.) 
 
 In August 2005, Applicant acquired a Sudanese travel visa and traveled again to 
Sudan to visit his wife and other family members. He used his U.S. passport to enter 
and exit Sudan.  He did not remember if he also carried his expired Sudanese passport 
with him on this trip.2 Applicant and his wife also traveled to Egypt. In October 2005, 
Applicant returned to the United States and his wife remained in Sudan. In July 2006, 
Applicant’s wife received permission from the U.S. immigration service to enter the 
United States. She resides with Applicant in the United States and is a citizen of Sudan. 
She holds resident alien status. Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens 
and residents of Sudan. (Tr. 38-40, 52-53.) 
 
 On October 1, 2008, the day of Applicant’s hearing, his wife was in Sudan visiting 
her family. In December 2008, Applicant plans to travel to Saudi Arabia for religious 
observances.  He then intends to travel to Sudan to visit his family members.  (Tr.  42-
43, 53.) 
 
 Applicant provides some support to his mother and brothers in Sudan, but not on 
a regular basis. If they tell him they need money, he tries to send them whatever he 
can. Applicant also stays in touch with his mother and communicates with her by 
telephone. He estimated that he called her once or twice a month.  Applicant’s mother 
lives with one of his brothers, and so when Applicant calls his mother, he also speaks 
 
2 In response to interrogatories from DOHA, Applicant stated that he had surrendered his expired 
Sudanese passport to his employer’s security officer on February 14, 2008.  (Ex. 3 at 4; Tr. 44-45.) 
 
4 
 
 
with that brother.  His telephone contacts with his other brothers are not as frequent as 
those with the brother with whom his mother lives. Even so, Applicant considers his   
relationships with his brothers to be close. Applicant also has telephone contact with his 
wife’s parents. When his wife calls her parents, Applicant also speaks with them.  (Tr. 
53-61.)  
 
 When he was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management, Applicant told the interviewer that he had maintained dual 
citizenship with Sudan because dual citizen status made it easier for him to travel to 
Sudan to visit his relatives. He also said he would relinquish his Sudanese citizenship if 
that were necessary. At his hearing, Applicant stated he believed himself to be an 
American. He noted, however, that he had come to the United States at the age of 37, 
after living in Sudan all of his life. Thus he could not deny he was Sudanese, “because 
my family is there.” He also stated in his Answer to the SOR that he felt a loyalty to the 
United States because his future and his family’s future were in the United States.  (Ex. 
2, at 4; Tr. 64; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 Applicant completed and signed his e-QIP on July 5, 2006.  Question 17(d) on 
the e-QIP reads as follows: “In the last 7 years, have you had an active passport that 
was issued by a foreign government?”  Applicant answered ”no” to Question 17(d).  (Ex. 
1 at 33.) 
 
 Applicant denied he had deliberately failed to disclose he had an active passport 
in the last seven years. He said he had answered the e-QIP on his own and without 
consulting anyone else.  He stated he thought the relevant date for marking the seven 
year time frame was February 1998, when his Sudanese passport was issued and not 
February 2000, when the Sudanese passport expired. Thus, when he answered 
Question 17(d), on or about July 5, 2006, he concluded that more than seven years had 
passed since the passport had been issued.  (Tr. 65-68.)   
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts offered by the Government and 
derived from official U.S. publications: 
 
In February 1953, the United Kingdom and Egypt concluded an 
agreement that provided for Sudanese self-government, with a transitional 
period toward independence.  Sudan achieved independence on January 
1, 1956, under a provisional constitution.  A mutiny of army officers led to 
seventeen years of civil war (1955-1972). A peace agreement was 
reached in 1972, but civil war began again in January 1983 when soldiers 
mutinied.  Through the 1990s, there were a series of regional efforts to 
bring the Sudanese civil war to an end.  By mid-2001, prospects for peace 
in Sudan appeared to be remote.  On January 9, 2005, a Comprehensive 
Peace Agreement was signed, establishing a new Government of National 
Unity and the interim Government of Southern Sudan, and stipulating a 
six-year interim period to allow for implementation of the Comprehensive 
Peace Agreement and elections at all levels.  Although some progress 
 
5 
 
 
was achieved, meaningful implementation of key provisions of the 
Comprehensive Peace Agreement has faltered.  (HE 1: U.S. Department 
of State, Background Note: Sudan, dated July 2008, at 3-5.) 
 
A rebellion in Darfur has resulted in the deaths of tens of thousands of 
persons in Darfur, and has led to an estimated two million internally 
displaced persons in Sudan and close to 250,000 refugees in neighboring 
Chad. The Sudanese Government ‘is complicit in the bombing, murder, 
and rape of innocent civilians’ in Darfur, and the Sudanese President has 
demonstrated a ‘continued refusal to honor his commitments to end the 
violence in Darfur.’  The United States government continues to be ‘deeply 
concerned about the violence in Darfur, which includes unconscionable 
attacks against innocent civilians, humanitarian workers, and 
peacekeepers.’  (HE 1: U.S. Department of State, The U.S. Response to 
the Darfur Crisis, dated October 1, 2007, at 1; U.S. Department of State: 
The U.S. Response to the Situation in Darfur, dated April 23, 2008, at 1. 
 
In August 1993, Sudan was designated by the Secretary of State as a 
state sponsor of terrorism. Although Sudan has ‘pursu[ed] terrorist 
operations directly involving threats to U.S. interests and personnel in 
Sudan, the terrorist threat level has ‘remained high in Khartoum and 
Darfur,’ and Sudan remains on the State Department list of State 
Sponsors of Terrorism. (HE 1: U.S. Department of State, State Sponsors 
of Terrorism; U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism, 
Chapter 3 – State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview, dated April 30, 2008, 
at 2.) 
 
Sudan is under a broad U.S. embargo, with extensive trade restrictions on 
exports and reexports to Sudan.  In 1997, President Clinton issued 
Executive Order 13067, which declared that the policies and actions of the 
Government of Sudan ‘constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to 
the national security and foreign policy of the United States.’ In 2006, 
President Bush issued Executive Order 13412, which cited ‘the 
continuation of the threat to the national security and foreign policy of the 
United States created by certain policies and actions of the Government of 
Sudan,’ and reaffirmed and supplemented Executive Order 13067. (HE 1: 
U.S. Department of State, Overview of Treasury and Commerce 
Regulations Affecting U.S. Exports to Sudan, dated March 23, 2007, at 1. 
See also U.S. Department of State, U.S. Sanctions on Sudan, dated April 
23, 2008; Executive Order 13067, Blocking Sudanese Government 
Property and Prohibiting Transactions with Sudan, published in 62 Federal 
Register 59989-59990 (November 5, 1997); Executive Order 13412, 
Blocking Property of and Prohibiting Transactions With the Government of 
Sudan, signed October 13, 2006, published in 71 Federal Register 61369-
61371 (October 17, 2006.) 
 
 
6 
 
 
The U.S. Department of State ‘continues to warn against all travel to 
Sudan.’  The travel warning states: ‘Travelers are reminded that the U.S. 
Government has received indications of terrorist threats aimed at 
American and western interests in Sudan.  Terrorist actions may include 
suicide operations, bombings, or kidnappings.’  Two U.S. Embassy 
employees were killed by unknown assailants on January 1, 2008, and the 
U.S. State Department has indicated that ‘[t]errorists are known to operate 
in Sudan, and continue to seek opportunities to carry out attacks against 
U.S. interests,’ and ‘[a]nti-American sentiment is prevalent and Americans 
should exercise caution at all times.’ (HE 1: U.S. Department of State, 
Travel Warning, Sudan, dated March 14, 2008, at 1; U.S. Department of 
State, Country Specific Information, Sudan, dated March 12, 2008, at 2.) 
    
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
7 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States.”  Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying.  These disqualifying conditions are as follows: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social 
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship 
requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
8 
 
 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and  
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant exercised dual citizenship with Sudan by 
maintaining a Sudanese passport after becoming a United States citizen on August 13, 
2004 (SOR ¶ 1.a.) and exercising dual citizenship with Sudan by using his Sudanese 
passport instead of his U.S. passport to travel to Sudan (SOR ¶ 1.b.). The SOR also 
alleged, ungrammatically and inartfully, that “you ultimate loyalty is to Sudan because it 
is the country of his birth.” (SOR ¶ 1.c.)  
 
Applicant provided documentation to show that he possessed an active 
Sudanese passport from February 1998 to February 2000. He provided documentation 
to show that he had not renewed the Sudanese passport when it expired in February 
2000 and that he used his U.S. passport when he traveled to Sudan in 2004 and 2005. 
Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant rebutted SOR allegations 1.a. and 1.b. 
 
Applicant has deep affection for and loyalty to his family members in Sudan. For 
him, family is paramount. In his testimony and demeanor, he credibly distinguished 
between his loyalty to his family in Sudan and the allegation that he valued his 
Sudanese citizenship above his adopted U.S. citizenship. I conclude that the 
Government failed to establish by substantial evidence that Applicant demonstrated a 
preference for the government of Sudan over the government of the United States.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶6. 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                           
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline.  The following facts raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions AG 
¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d):3  
 
 The Government of Sudan allows violence, murder, rape, and mayhem to 
continue unabated in Darfur. Sudan is also a state sponsor of terrorism. Terrorists 
operating in Sudan continue to seek opportunities to carry out attacks against U.S. 
interests. The U.S. Department of State has warned U.S. citizens to avoid all travel to 
Sudan. In this environment hostile to U.S. interests, American citizens with immediate 
family members who are citizens or residents of Sudan could be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or pressure. 
 
 Applicant’s mother, six brothers, mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and 
residents of Sudan. He traveled to Sudan to visit his Sudanese relatives in 2004 and 
2005. His wife was in Sudan visiting her family in October 2008.  Applicant plans to 
travel to Sudan to visit family in December 2008. 
 
Applicant shares his home with his wife, who is a citizen of Sudan. He feels a 
special loyalty and obligation to his family members in Sudan. He communicates 
frequently by telephone with his mother and at least one of his brothers. He also 
communicates less frequently by telephone with his wife’s parents and his other five 
brothers. When he can afford to, he sends his family members money when they ask 
him.  While none of Applicant’s relatives are employed by the government of Sudan, 
they live in an environment that is chaotic, violent, and opposed to U.S. security 
interests.  Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests raise security concerns under the 
foreign influence adjudicative guideline. 
 
Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
 
3 AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or 
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a 
foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.”  AG ¶ 7(d) reads: “sharing living quarters 
with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” 
 
10 
 
 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply.   
 
 Applicant’s relationships with his Sudanese family members are not casual or 
infrequent.  To the contrary, they are strong and charged with emotion. He feels a filial 
obligation to his mother, and he tries to respond to his brothers’ needs and concerns. 
When he can, he provides them with monetary support. His relationships with his family 
members who are Sudanese citizens and residents are based on long-standing family 
ties of affection and obligation.  Applicant is a dutiful husband, son, brother, and son-in-
law who looks after the welfare of his many family members in Sudan, a country that 
poses special dangers to U.S. citizens. Applicant’s relatives’ citizenship and residency 
in Sudan create a heightened risk that he could be targeted for exploitation, pressure, or 
coercion by government sponsored terrorist groups. These groups might also threaten 
U.S. security interests. Applicant failed to provide sufficient information to rebut or 
mitigate these security concerns. I conclude that the mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 
8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) are inapplicable. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
  
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Appellant answered “no” to Question 17(d) on his e-QIP. When he signed his e-
QIP in July 2006, he had, in fact, been issued an active passport by a foreign 
government. The passport had expired six years previously, in February 2000. This 
information raises a security concern under AG ¶ 16(a), which reads as follows: 
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities.” 
 
Applicant denied his answer was a deliberate falsification, and he explained that 
when he answered the question, he focused on the date of issue as the time marking 
 
11 
 
 
the effective life of the passport.  If the passport was issued in 1998, he reasoned, it had 
been issued more than seven years before July 2006.  Applicant explained he had not 
consulted anyone before answering the question.  I also note that Applicant’s English 
language skills, both written and spoken, reflected usages not common in the United 
States.  I conclude that under these circumstances, Applicant’s response to Question 
17(d) was credible and his falsification was not deliberate.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant is an adult of 47 years of age. He cares deeply for his mother and brothers, 
who are citizens and residents of Sudan. He feels additional bonds of affection for his 
wife, who is a citizen of Sudan and who resides with him in United States, and his 
mother-in-law and father-in-law, who are residents and citizens of Sudan. As the only 
family member who has emigrated, he feels obligated to use the resources he has 
acquired as a United States citizen to help his family members in Sudan. His deep 
sense of obligation suggests he may also be vulnerable to exploitation or manipulation. 
 
 Sudan is a country split by ethnic and religious division, violence, and 
lawlessness. Its leaders sponsor terrorism and target U.S. security interests. Because 
they may be targeted by terrorists, U.S. citizens are warned not to travel to Sudan. 
Under these circumstances, Applicant’s current plan to travel to Sudan, while motivated 
by family loyalty and concern, might also expose him to the possibility of exploitation, 
pressure and inducement. His sense of obligation and desire to help his Sudanese 
relatives could make him vulnerable to exploitation and create a conflict of interest with 
his obligation to protect classified information.  
 
 
12 
 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude that while Applicant mitigated security concerns arising under the foreign 
preference and personal conduct adjudicative guidelines, he failed to mitigate security 
concerns arising under the foreign interest adjudicative guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.d:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
