KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The board does not review cases de novo.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-11103.a1
DATE: 11/13/2008
DATE: November 13, 2008
In Re:
--------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-11103
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On February 12, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense
The Judge found in favor of Applicant as to SOR paragraph 1(q).  That favorable finding is not at issue on1
appeal.
Applicant’s appeal brief does not address the Guideline E and J allegations.2
2
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested the case be decided
on the written record.  On August 20, 2008, after considering the record, Administrative Judge Shari
Dam denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.1
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge.
Rather, it contains new evidence, in the form of an explanatory statement, which indicates that she
is keeping current on her bills and trying to budget in a way that would allow her to start paying on
her back debts.2
The Board cannot consider Applicant’s new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the appealing party has
alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  It does not review cases de novo. Applicant has not
made an allegation of harmful error.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge denying Applicant a
security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan    
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields       
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed; James E. Moody      
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
