 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 07-13466 
                                                            )                                          
                                                                      ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns 
under Guideline D, Sexual Behavior, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline M, 
Use of Technology Systems.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF-86) on February 27, 
2007. On June 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline M, Use of 
Technology Systems. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 On August 11, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and, at a later time, 
after reviewing the investigative record compiled in his case, elected to have a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 2, 2008. I 
convened a hearing on October 29, 2008, to consider whether it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  The 
Government called no witnesses and introduced two exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 
and Ex. 2 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant testified on his own 
behalf, called one witness, and introduced one exhibit, which was marked Ex. A.  
Applicant’s Ex. A was admitted to the record without objection.     
 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on November 6, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG D, Sexual 
Behavior (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.h.), two allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG E, 
Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.), and one allegation under AG M, Use of 
Information Technology Systems (SOR ¶ 3.a.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted three allegations under AG D and one allegation under AG E. He denied six 
allegations under AG D, one allegation under AG E, and one allegation under AG M. 
Applicant’s admissions are admitted herein as findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 45 years old and employed by a government contractor. He 
graduated from a military college with a bachelor’s degree in civil engineering, and he 
served on active duty in the military from 1985 to 1992.  From 1992 to 1999, Applicant 
served as an inactive military reservist at the rank of captain. He was first granted a 
security clearance in 1986. In 1988, he was granted eligibility for access to Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI).  Since returning to civilian life in 1992, Applicant has 
been employed by six government contractors.1 (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 27-29, 33-35.) 
 
 Applicant was married in 1985.  He and his wife are the parents of four daughters 
and three sons. Applicant’s oldest child is 21 years old; his youngest child is four years 
old. Applicant’s wife filed for divorce in July 2008. (Ex. 1; Tr. 63-64, 68.)  
 
 Since adolescence, Applicant has battled a strong and repetitive desire to access 
and view pornography. While he denies he is addicted, Applicant has regularly 
accessed pornography at home and in his workplaces for over 20 years. He considers 
viewing pornography to be sinful and morally wrong. He has stated: “I realize I will 
always be tempted to view pornography as it has been an ongoing battle my entire life.” 
(Tr. 65-66; Ex. 2 at 14.) 
 
 
1Applicant was employed by federal contractor X from October 2001 to August 2004.  He returned to 
work for federal contractor X in July 2007. Federal contractor X is the sponsor of his current request for a 
security clearance. 
 
3 
 
 
 Since becoming committed to his faith in 1986, he has sought support and 
counsel from fellow members of his church and from his pastors in addressing his 
attraction to and use of pornography. In an affidavit he signed in January 2008, he 
stated he had never gone outside of his faith community for help with his pornography 
problem.  He told an authorized investigator in January 2008 that he would be open to 
seeking professional psychological counseling for his problem with the repetitive use of 
pornography. As of the date of his ISCR hearing, he had not taken any action to seek 
outside professional help. While at his hearing he repeated his openness to seeking 
treatment, he also stated that, on his own, he had successfully changed the behavior 
which led him to seek pornography.  (Ex. 2; Tr. 45-52.) 
 
 Applicant searched for and viewed pornographic images on his official work 
computers when employed by four separate government contractors during the periods 
from 1992 to 1996, 1996 to 1999, 2001 to 2004, and 2005 to 2007.  Applicant knew his 
employers had policies prohibiting the use of office computers to access pornography. 
He also knew that by using his workplace computers to access and view pornography, 
he was violating his employers’ policies and his agreements to abide by those policies.  
He preferred to access and view pornography at work because he feared discovery by 
his wife or children if he used pornography at home. When he elected to access and 
view pornographic images and movies in the workplace, he took steps to hide his 
behavior from his employers. If he had a private office, he stayed late and viewed 
pornography after regular work hours. He also stated that after viewing pornography, he 
involved himself with masturbation in his office or in a workplace bathroom. Applicant 
did not tell his employers about his use of pornography in the workplace because he 
feared losing his job and other possible adverse consequences. (Ex. 2 at 5, 8; Tr. 54-
58.)  
 
 In August 2004, Applicant accepted a position with a government contractor.  
The position required that he hold a security clearance and be granted eligibility for 
access to SCI. As a part of his background investigation, Applicant underwent a 
polygraph examination conducted by another federal agency. From the facts that 
Applicant provided on the polygraph, the other agency denied his request for a security 
clearance and access to SCI because it concluded that his use of pornography included 
searching for and viewing pornographic images of underage females. Applicant denied 
actively seeking or using child pornography. He stated he sought and used only adult 
heterosexual pornography. He acknowledged that he had no way of knowing or 
verifying the ages of the females whose pornographic images he had viewed over the 
course of many years.  He also stated that he was attracted to and considered 
pornography involving teen-aged girls to be legal pornography.  (Ex. 2 at 6; Tr. 61-63.) 
 
 In May 2005, after being denied the security status requested by the employer, 
Applicant moved to another job with a different government contractor. He stated he 
informed his supervisor at his new job that he had been denied a security clearance 
because he had misused his former employers’ information technology systems. He 
also stated he told his new employer’s security officer that he had lost his clearance 
because he had viewed pornography. During this employment, Applicant accessed and 
 
4 
 
 
viewed pornography on his employer’s information technology systems. Applicant was 
laid off by this employer in May 2007. He stated that he had last accessed and viewed 
pornography on an employer’s workplace computer in February 2007. (Ex. 2 at 1-2, 4-8; 
Tr. 20, 52-59.)     
 
 Sometime after being laid off, Applicant accepted a position with a government 
contractor he had worked for previously. In January 2008, after providing an affidavit to 
an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), 
Applicant asked his employer’s security officer to monitor his compliance with the 
company’s computer security requirements. The employer’s manager for security and 
safety monitored Applicant’s compliance from January 10, 2008 to October 22, 2008 
and found Applicant to be in compliance with company security requirements. Applicant 
denies ever using his employers’ classified computers or classified networks to access 
and view pornography.  (Ex. 2 at 8; Ex. A.) 
   
 Applicant’s wife and his three oldest children know of his personal battles with 
pornography. Applicant’s wife also knows that he used his employers’ information 
technology systems to access and view pornography and that these actions have 
caused him to lose access to classified information. Applicant has a personal computer 
in his home which he uses to access and view pornography. In 2004, Applicant had a 
pornography monitoring program installed on his personal computer. The monitoring 
system was designed to block pornography so that Applicant could not access or view 
it. The monitoring program remained on Applicant’s personal computer for 
approximately 1½ years. During that time, Applicant figured out how to bypass the 
monitoring system and access and view pornography without anyone knowing.  (Ex. 2 
at 9, 13-14; Tr. 69-70.) 
 
 In the summer of 2007, Applicant again had a pornography monitoring program 
installed on his personal computer. This program was designed to monitor Applicant’s  
internet browsing and report the results to two people selected by him.  Applicant used 
this program for several months.  He then removed it from his computer because he 
said it caused his computer to “run slowly and block some functions I needed to perform 
on it.”  In January 2008, after his interview with an authorized investigator, he reinstalled 
the program again on his computer. (Ex. 2 at 13, 17.) 
 
 In the last six months Applicant has viewed pornographic images about three 
times. In addition to computer searches for pornography, he also rents pay-per-view 
pornographic movies monthly. In an attempt to control his viewing of pornographic 
movies, Applicant has tasked his 21-year-old son with holding the PIN number 
authorizing access to pay-for-view pornography.  (Ex. 2 at 13; Tr. 65-68.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife are separated, and his wife has filed for divorce.  Applicant 
accuses his wife of an extra-marital same-sex relationship.  He hopes to reconcile with 
his wife. In the event the couple does not reconcile and Applicant’s wife is granted a 
divorce, Applicant intends to sue for custody of their minor children. (Tr. 74-78.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s pastor, who has known him for over 15 years, testified about his 
efforts and those of other church members to help Applicant overcome his attraction to 
and compulsive use of pornography.  (Tr. 84-99.) 
     
                                                           Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
6 
 
 
                                           
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
 
 AG ¶12 identifies the government’s concern with Guideline D, in pertinent part, 
as follows:  
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information 
 
While he denies an addiction to pornography, Applicant, who is now 45 years old 
and the father of seven children, acknowledges that, since adolescence, he has battled 
a compulsive desire to access and view pornographic material. Because the record 
does not contain a medical diagnosis of sexual addiction, I conclude SOR ¶ 1.b. for 
Applicant. Applicant made an affirmative choice over a period of twenty years to seek 
help from his church community in controlling his desire to view pornography. That the 
help failed to permanently change or mitigate his behavior does not negate his efforts.  I 
also conclude SOR ¶ 1.c. for Applicant. 
 
For at least four protracted periods of time, between 1992 and 2007, his strong 
and repetitive desire to view pornography caused him to use his employers’ information 
technology systems to access and view pornography. Applicant vigorously denied that 
he sought or used child pornography, but did not deny he had accessed and viewed 
pornography involving teen-aged girls because he considered pornography involving 
teen-aged girls to be legal pornography and found it impossible to determine with 
accuracy whether the individuals on the pornographic images he viewed were adults. 
Applicant’s behavior in viewing pornographic images in the workplace as a government 
contractor reflected lack of discretion and judgment and made him vulnerable to the 
possibility of coercion, exploitation and duress. I conclude that his sexual behavior 
raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 13(b), 13(c), and 13(d).2 
 
An applicant might be able to mitigate Guideline D security concerns. If the   
sexual “behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no evidence of 
subsequent conduct of a similar nature,” then AG ¶ 14 (a) might apply. If “the sexual 
 
2 AG ¶ 13(b) reads: “a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior that the person 
is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a personality disorder.” AG ¶ 13(c) reads: “sexual 
behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress.”  AG ¶ 13(d) 
reads: “sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion or judgment.”  
 
7 
 
 
behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under such unusual circumstances, 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 14(b) might apply.  If “the behavior no 
longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress,” the AG ¶ 14(c) might 
apply.  Finally, if “the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet,” then 
AG ¶14 (d) might apply. Applicant was an adult when he carried out the sexual behavior 
that raises security concerns. He denied his behavior could be defined as a sexual 
addiction, and he did not seek an evaluation of his sexual behavior from a qualified 
professional counselor. His sexual behavior was indiscreet and reflected poor 
judgment. It was repetitive and involved taking high risks that made him vulnerable to 
coercion, exploitation, or duress. I conclude that none of the Guideline D mitigating 
conditions apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 Under the Personal Conduct guideline “[c]onduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide 
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process.”  AG ¶ 15 
 
 Applicant’s high risk sexual behavior was in contravention of the security policies 
of his government contractor employers.  He purposefully concealed his access and use 
of pornography in the workplace from his employers because he knew he might lose his 
job if his behavior was discovered. He also betrayed the trust of his family, church 
community, and those who sought to counsel and support him in overcoming his 
compulsive use of pornography when he disabled computer monitoring controls 
intended to block his access to pornography. I have carefully considered all of the 
Personal Conduct Disqualifying conditions. I have especially considered AG ¶ 16(e), 
which reads as follows: “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing . . . .”  
 
 During his military and civilian careers, Applicant was awarded a security 
clearance. He then engaged in high risk sexual behavior that he kept secret and did not 
report to his security officers, making him vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress. His compulsive use of pornography in the workplace, if known, would have 
affected his personal, professional, and community standing because it raised issues of 
trustworthiness and reliability.  Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶16(e)(1) is raised by the 
facts of Appellant’s case. 
    
  Applicant’s disqualifying personal conduct might be mitigated if he “made prompt, 
good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being 
confronted with the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a) Additionally, Applicant’s disqualifying conduct 
 
8 
 
 
might be mitigated if he “has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”  AG  ¶ 17(e) 
 
  Applicant did not make prompt good faith efforts to correct his concealment.  He 
has not addressed whether he has a sexual addiction that would lead future high-risk 
sexual behavior and a similar pattern of concealment.  I conclude that neither AG ¶ 
17(a) nor AG ¶ 17(e) applies to the facts of Appellant’s case. 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
AG ¶ 39 identifies the Government’s concern under the Use of Information 
Technology Systems  adjudicative guideline: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information.  Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
 For more than 20 years, Applicant used his employers’ computers to access and 
view pornographic materials. His actions contravened his employers’ policies as 
government contractors and raised security concerns about Applicant’s willingness or 
ability to put the Government’s interest in protecting classified information ahead of his 
own desires.  Applicant’s behavior raises a security concern under AG ¶ 40(e), which 
reads: “unauthorized use of a government or other information technology system.” 
 
Three possible mitigating conditions could apply to security concerns arising 
under AG ¶ 40.  If “so much time has elapsed the behavior happened, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 41(a) might 
apply.  If “the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s password or 
computer when no other timely alternative was readily available,” then AG ¶ 41(b) might 
apply.  Finally, if “the conduct was unintentional and inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of supervisor,” then 
AG ¶ 41(c) is applicable. 
 
Applicant’s misuse of his employers’ information technology systems was neither 
minor nor justified in the interest of organizational efficiency and effectiveness. 
Applicant’s last admitted misuse of an employer’s information technology system to 
access pornography occurred in February 2007. When viewed in light of Applicant’s 20 
years of secretive and deliberate misuse, insufficient time has elapsed to conclude that 
Applicant is now reliable and trustworthy and will not likely misuse a government 
 
9 
 
 
employer’s information technology system again to access pornography.  Accordingly, I 
conclude that none of the mitigating conditions identified under AG ¶ 41 apply to the 
fact of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Over a period encompassing1992 to 
1996, 1996 to 1999, 2001 to 2004, and 2005 to 2007, Applicant violated the security 
policies of four different government contractors by accessing and viewing pornography 
on information technology systems owned by his employers and used for their work as 
government contractors. He kept his actions secret from his employers. He deceived his 
family and those in his church community who sought to help him control his compulsive 
desire to access and view pornography. While he asserted he would seek professional 
counseling for his compulsive behavior, he failed to do so and averred he had 
successfully resolved the problem on his own. He failed to mitigate serious concerns 
about his credibility, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to put the government’s 
interests before his own in the protection of classified information.  AG ¶ 2(a)(7). 
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his sexual 
behavior, personal conduct, and use of information technology systems. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph  1.a:              Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
   
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline M:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
