                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-15660
SSN:----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
November 18, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
TESTAN, Joseph, Administrative Judge:
On June 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to applicant detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines J, E, G and H. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 16, 2008, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an Administrative Judge (AJ). Department Counsel
issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on August 19, 2008. Applicant filed a
response to the FORM on September 4, 2008. The case was assigned to me on
October 21, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51 year old employee of a defense contractor.
In 1996, applicant was fired from job as a lab technician because of excessive
absenteeism and tardiness.
In 2000, applicant left his employment after being warned in writing about
excessive absenteeism and tardiness.
In 2001, applicant was fired from his defense contractor job, and his security
clearance was revoked, after admitting during an investigation that he may have left an
object inside a satellite while working on a space launch program.
In 2002, applicant went to an emergency room of a hospital complaining of
depression and insomnia. He was evaluated for auditory and visual hallucinations.
During his intake examination, he admitted that he had used cocaine and abused
alcohol three days earlier.
In November 2005, applicant was arrested and charged with Driving Under the
Influence of Alcohol (DUI). He was convicted of the charge, fined, and ordered to enroll
in an alcohol counseling program. In response to interrogatories sent to him by DOHA in
December 2007, applicant stated he attended six weeks of counseling and eight AA
meetings as a result of the court’s order. He further stated that he was last intoxicated in
November 2005, he last consumed alcohol in December 2007 at a wedding, and he
does not intend to consume alcohol anymore.
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) in August 2005. In response to Question 24, applicant denied any illegal drug
use during the previous seven years. This response was false because, as noted
above, he had used cocaine in 2002.
Policies
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on
national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” (Department of
the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518,527 (1988).) In Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), the President set out
guidelines and procedures for safeguarding classified information within the executive
branch. The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 2.)
To be eligible for a security clearance, an applicant must meet the security
guidelines contained in the Directive. Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth personnel
security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
under each guideline.
3
Initially, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in
the SOR that disqualify or may disqualify the applicant from being eligible for access to
classified information. (Directive, Paragraph E3.1.14.) Thereafter, the applicant is
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.
(Directive, Paragraph E3. 1.15.) An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security
clearance.” (ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).) “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will
be resolved in favor of the national security.” (Directive, Paragraph E2.2.2.)
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to repose a high
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not a
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant. (Exec. Ord. 10865, Section 7.) It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
has established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The security concern for criminal conduct is set forth in Paragraph 30 of the AG,
and is as follows:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Paragraph 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying: Under Paragraph 31.a., “a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses” may be disqualifying. And, under Paragraph 31.c., an “allegation or admission
of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally
prosecuted or convicted,” may be disqualifying. Applicant’s DUI conviction and
intentional misrepresentation of material facts on the 2005 e-QIP (a felony under 18
U.S.C. 1001) raise these two disqualifying conditions.
Paragraph 32 of the AG sets forth conditions that could mitigate security
concerns. I have considered each of them and conclude none apply.
Guideline H:  Drug Involvement
The security concern for drug involvement is set forth in Paragraph 24 of the
AG, and is as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
4
Paragraph 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying. Under Paragraph 25.a., “any drug abuse” may be disqualifying.
Applicant’s cocaine use raises this disqualifying condition.
Paragraph 26 of the AG sets forth conditions that could mitigate security
concerns. Under Paragraph 26.a., it may be mitigating if “the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment.” Applicant’s isolated incident of cocaine use occurred over five years
ago when he was depressed over losing his job. This mitigating condition is applicable.
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set forth in Paragraph 21 of the
AG, and is as follows:
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness.
The AG note several conditions that could raise a security concern. Under
Paragraph 22.a., “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent,” may be disqualifying. Applicant’s DUI conviction and abuse of
alcohol immediately prior to his 2002 visit to the hospital emergency room require
application of this disqualifying condition.
Paragraph 23 of the AG sets out potentially mitigating conditions. Under
Paragraph 23.a., it may be mitigating if “so much time has passed, or the behavior was
so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment.” It has been over five years since the emergency room visit, and almost
three years since applicant’s DUI arrest, and there is no evidence he has consumed
alcohol to excess since November 2005. This mitigation condition is applicable.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set forth in
Paragraph 15 of the AG, and is as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
5
Paragraph16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under Paragraph 16.a., the “deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” may be disqualifying. This
disqualifying condition is applicable because applicant intentionally provided false
material information on the e-QIP. Under Paragraph 16.c., “credible adverse information
in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination
under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected
information,” may be disqualifying. Applicant’s poor job history, use of cocaine, DUI
conviction, and falsification of the e-QIP raise this disqualifying condition.
Paragraph 17 sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I
considered each of them and conclude none apply.
“Whole Person” Analysis 
Under the whole person concept, the AJ must evaluate an applicant’s security
eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances.
An AJ should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG Paragraph
2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
(5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the
conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG Paragraph 2c, the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall common
sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole
person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature man with a
history of employment difficulties, alcohol abuse, illegal drug use, and dishonesty.
Although his statements in response to the SOR and FORM indicate that he accepts
responsibility for his actions and has started to straighten out his life, these
uncorroborated statements of reform cannot be given much weight in view of his
intentional falsification of material facts on the e-QIP. Applicant failed to mitigate the
security concerns arising from the four guidelines.
6
Formal Findings     
Formal findings for or against applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Paragraph 3, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Paragraph 4, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
JOSEPH TESTAN
Administrative Judge
