KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant’s father lives in Afghanistan.  Applicant made two untrue statements
regarding his relationship with an Afghan official.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-13073.a1
DATE: 11/26/2008
DATE: November 26, 2008
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-13073
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Shirley Reed, Esq., Diana Rugh Johnson, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
See Tr. at 46-7.  “Q: Explain the circumstances of how . . .  you told [U.S. officials] that he was a relative of1
yours.  A: I was very nervous . . . [the agent] questioned are you a relative of [Afghan official].  I admit myself that I
knew him . . . I said yes.  But I didn’t change my answer there.”
clearance.  On March 20, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On August 29, 2008, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Charles D. Ablard
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant filed a timely appeal pursuant to
Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s findings of
fact are supported by substantial record evidence and whether the Judge erred in his application of
the relevant mitigating conditions.  Finding no error, we affirm.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant was born in Afghanistan
and came to the U.S. with his family when he was 18.  He has several relatives, including in-laws,
living in Afghanistan, and his wife is an Afghan citizen living in the U.S.  Applicant’s father is a
citizen and resident of Afghanistan, although Applicant has little contact with him.  Applicant does
not currently hold a security clearance.  Applicant made two statements to investigators during the
course of his security clearance investigation.  These statements, which concerned Applicant’s
relationship with a well-known Afghan official, were not true.   1
Afghanistan is an unstable country, much of which is under the control of insurgents opposed
to the U.S.  “[I]t is a dangerous part of the world where there are human rights abuses and acts of
terrorism.”  Decision at 4.  “Applicant does not have a security clearance but desires one so that he
can return to his country of origin and make a contribution to the U.S. national defense by working
for the U.S. military as a translator for at least one year.”  Id. at 3.
The Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported by substantial record
evidence, or are reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the evidence, and are sustainable.
See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same
record.”); ISCR Case No. 06-21025 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2007).  In light of the record as a whole,
the Judge has drawn a rational connection between the facts found and his ultimate adverse security
clearance decision, both as regards the mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors.  See ISCR
Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).  See also Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s decision that “it is not clearly
consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance” is sustainable
on this record.  Decision at 7.  See also Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988)
(“The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security’”).
Order  
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin          
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields        
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
