  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-----------------------------------   )       ISCR Case No. 07-16719
SSN: --------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on May 7, 2008. The SOR is equivalent to an
administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues in this
case fall under Guideline F for financial considerations based on a history of financial
problems. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided for Applicant. 
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant’s response to the SOR was received by DOHA on June 30, 2008, and
he requested a hearing. The case was assigned to me on August 22, 2008. The hearing
took place as scheduled on September 24, 2008. The transcript (Tr.) was received on
October 2, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges eight delinquent debts ranging from $52 to
$14,806 for a total of about $36,320. In his Answer, Applicant denied the two medical
debts for a total of $252 alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, but admitted the other debts
(which appear to be credit card accounts) for a total of about $36,000 alleged in SOR ¶¶
1.c–1.h. Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are established
by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 49-year-old supervisor of a call center. He has worked for his
current employer since October 2002. He was promoted to his current position in June
2003. His annual salary is about $62,000. His employment history includes military
service in the U.S. Marine Corps that ended with his honorable discharge. His first
marriage ended in divorce. He remarried in 2004. His wife is currently self-employed
earning an irregular income that averages about $1,000 monthly.
Applicant has a history of financial problems, which he does not dispute. The
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are established by Applicant’s admissions and the
admitted evidence (Exhibits 2 and 3). He denied the two medical debts because he
does not recognize them and has been unable to find any information on them. To date,
Applicant has not paid, settled, or otherwise resolved any of the debts. 
He traces the origin of his financial problems to the period shortly after his
second marriage in December 2004. When they married, Applicant and his wife had two
homes (his and hers) and they decided to do a major renovation of the larger home.
About six months later in June 2005, Applicant had a serious motorcycle accident. He
was hospitalized for about two weeks, which included time in intensive care. As a result,
he was out-of-work on short-term disability, at two-thirds pay, for about three months.
The loss of income resulted in delaying the home renovations and he started to fall
behind on bills. Also, he incurred out-of-pocket medical expenses that were not covered
3
by his health insurance. Applicant and his wife began to rely on credit cards during this
period. 
Applicant’s wife lost her job in 2006. She was unemployed for about three
months. The resulting loss of income caused them to fall further behind and continue to
delay the home renovation project.
In about January 2006, Applicant and his spouse obtained the services of a
company engaged in debt settlement or repayment. They paid a fee of about $400 per
month for about 12 months without any results. Dissatisfied, they terminated their
relationship with the company as they continued to fall further behind on their bills. 
In about January 2007, they stopped making all credit card payments and
devoted their money for necessities and for the home renovation for which Applicant
was doing most of the work during his free time. Completing the renovations was
necessary because without them the home was neither livable nor sellable. 
In about January 2008, Applicant injured his back during a slip-and-fall accident
at a neighborhood store. Medical examination of Applicant discovered preexisting back
injuries. He initially received a course of non-surgical treatment until it was determined
that surgery was necessary. The May 2008 surgery involved the fusing of vertebrae.
The full course of medical treatment put Applicant out-of-work on short-term disability, at
two-thirds pay, for about five months from March 2008 until he returned to work on
about August 18, 2008. 
He elected to return to full-time work sooner than recommended due to his
mounting financial problems. Also, he started a part-time job working at a home-
improvement store in August 2008. He earns $10 per hour and grosses about $1,000
per month.
Applicant and his spouse considered bankruptcy, but instead have decided to
attempt to pay or settle their debts. The general plan is as follows:
• Renovations are nearly complete and they expect to move into the larger home
in early October 2008.
• After the move, they will prepare and clean the smaller home and put it on the
market for sale. They plan to price the property aggressively to sell it as quickly
as market conditions permit. They think they can sell it within a year and net
anywhere from $30,000 to $40,000, which they will use to pay or settle the debts.
• In addition, together they have about $26,000 in 401(k) plans that they can
withdraw funds from to pay or settle the debts. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
4
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision: (1) denies any application; (2) revokes any5
existing security clearance; and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level and retention of any existing security clearance.  Under Egan, Executive Order6
10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating14
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at 13. 15
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 16
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 17
5
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically14
exists due to significant unpaid debts. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means,
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.”  Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be15
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and
safeguarding classified information.   
The record evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of
financial problems. His history of financial problems is a security concern because it
indicates inability (not unwillingness) to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting16
financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The record evidence is more17
than sufficient to establish these two disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns:
MC 1–the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
 Revised Guidelines at 1–2 (listing nine factors to consider under the whole-person concept). 18
6
MC 2–the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
MC 3–the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
MC 4–the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
MC 5–the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
MC 6–the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
 
All the mitigating conditions have been considered and the most pertinent here is MC 2,
which concerns events or circumstances largely beyond a person’s control. 
Applicant receives credit in mitigation under MC 2 because his financial problems
resulted from events or circumstances largely beyond his control and were not due to a
lavish lifestyle or general financial irresponsibility. Those events or circumstances were
as follows: 1) his motorcycle accident and resulting loss of income in 2005; 2) his wife’s
unemployment in 2006; 3) the unsuccessful effort to resolve debt via the debt-
settlement company in 2006; and 4) his back injury and surgery and resulting loss of
income in 2008. Taken together, these matters had a snowball or cumulative effect, the
consequences of which Applicant is still experiencing. It is apparent that Applicant’s
financial problems would not have occurred but for these events or circumstances.  
In addition, Applicant has acted responsibly under the circumstances. He
returned to full-time employment a few months ago in August 2008, and he started a
second job the same month. With their move to the renovated home in October 2008,
Applicant and his wife are putting themselves in a position where they can address their
delinquent debts. They have a reasonable plan, and although it contains contingencies,
it is likely to allow them to generate addition money to use in repaying or settling their
debts.
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F. Applicant met his ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this conclusion, the
whole-person concept  was given due consideration and that analysis supports a18
 Revised Guidelines at 2 (“the likelihood of continuation or recurrence”). 19
7
favorable decision. Having had the opportunity to listen to his testimony (which I found
credible) and observe his demeanor, I am persuaded that Applicant has both the
intention and self-discipline to follow through and resolve his delinquent debts once he
has the means to do so.  Indeed, looking forward to the next 12 to 18 months, it is likely
that he will successfully resolve his financial problems.  And his financial problems are19
unlikely to recur given that they occurred under rather unusual circumstances. This case
is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.h: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the interests of
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.   
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
