 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-16765 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant:  Michael M. Hadeed, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the Foreign 
Influence adjudicative guideline.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP). On April 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 21, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On August 13, 2008, the case was assigned to   
me. I convened a hearing on September 30, 2008, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses, introduced three exhibits (Ex.), offered 
facts in five official documents of the U.S. Government for administrative notice 
regarding Iraq, and facts in nine official documents of the U.S. Government for 
administrative notice regarding Syria. The Government’s exhibits were identified as Ex. 
1, 2, and 3, and they were admitted to the record without objection. Applicant did not 
object to my taking notice of facts provided in the Government’s administrative notice 
documents. The Government’s administrative notice documents were identified as HE 
1.  Applicant testified on his own behalf, called two witnesses, introduced four exhibits 
(Ex. A, B, C, and D), and offered facts from three official documents of the U.S. 
Government for administrative notice. He also offered a factual definition from a non-
governmental source for administrative notice. The Government did not object to my 
taking administrative notice of facts offered by Applicant. Applicant’s administrative 
notice documents were identified as HE A.   
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until close of business 
October 7, 2008, so that the Government and Applicant could submit additional 
information about Applicant’s wife’s security clearance status. The Government 
submitted a memorandum on the subject, which I identified as Ex. 4 and admitted to the 
record without objection. Applicant also timely submitted one additional document on 
the subject, which I identified as Applicant’s Ex. E and entered in the record without 
objection.  DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on October 7, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations that raise security concerns under adjudicative 
guideline (AG) B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e). In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations under adjudicative guideline B. His admissions 
are admitted herein as findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including witness testimony, 
exhibits, relevant policies, and the applicable adjudicative guideline, I make the 
following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old, married, and the father of two minor children.  He was 
born in Iraq and is an ethnic Kurd.  He seeks a security clearance so that he may be 
employed by a government contractor as a translator.  He is fluent in Arabic, Farsi, and 
two Kurdish dialects. (Ex. 1; Tr. 42-45, 93-94.)  
 
 In 1973 and 1974, Applicant was a member of a Kurdish political organization. 
He joined the party in order to be eligible for a job. He had a 12th grade education.  
Subsequently, he was employed by a local government to teach Arabic and 
mathematics to fourth and fifth grade students in the Kurdish area of Iraq. In 1974, when 
Kurds were being persecuted, he left Iraq and went to live as a refugee in Iran.  He 
resided in a refugee camp and, for about two years, studied to be a social worker and 
took part in a program in the camp for the training of translators. Sometime during 1975 
and 1976, Applicant’s mother, who lived in Iraq, was detained by Iraqi authorities who 
 
3 
 
 
intended to use her to pressure Applicant to return to Iraq. In 1976, believing the 
Iranians were not doing enough to help the Kurds, and unable to return to Iraq for fear 
of being put to death by the Iraqi authorities, Applicant emigrated from Iran to the United 
States. He became a U.S. citizen in 1982.   (Ex. 2 at 3-4, 8-9; Tr. 74-79, 100.)  
 
 Applicant attended vocational school in the United States and learned auto 
mechanics.  He worked for approximately 25 years as an automobile mechanic. (Tr. 47-
49.) 
 
 In 1988, Applicant and a friend, also an ethnic Kurd, traveled to the Kurdish part 
of Syria. They met and married Syrian women of Kurdish background. The women were 
sisters.  When it came time for Applicant and his friend to leave Syria and return to the 
United States, they were detained and questioned by Syrian secret police, who wanted 
to know their purpose in visiting Syria.  After questioning Applicant and his friend for one 
week, the Syrian secret police permitted them to leave Syria.  (Ex. 2 at  8; Tr. 83-84.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife became a U.S. citizen in 1992. She is employed by a U.S. 
government agency but does not have a security clearance. Her father and mother are 
citizens and residents of Syria. Applicant’s father-in-law is approximately 80 years old. 
He owns farm land, rents it to tenants, and shares the profits with them. Applicant’s wife 
sponsored her parents for permanent registered alien status. Applicant’s father-in-law 
has a U.S. Social Security card. From 2000 to about 2003 or 2004, Applicant’s wife’s 
parents visited Applicant and his wife yearly and resided in Applicant’s home when they 
visited them.  Applicant’s wife speaks with her parents by telephone, but Applicant does 
not know how often she communicates with her parents. He thinks his wife might speak 
with her parents about every two months. Applicant’s in-laws complain of poor treatment 
by the government of Syria. Applicant’s wife has a brother and a sister who are also 
citizens and residents of Syria. The Syrian government persecuted the husband of one 
of Applicant’s wife’s sisters. Consequently, he moved to Sweden. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2 at 6, 19; 
Ex. 4; Ex. E; Tr. 83-90, 106-108, 114, 116.) 
 
 Applicant has one sister and eight brothers who are residents and citizens of 
Iraq.  Most of Applicant’s siblings were little children when he left Iraq in 1974. All live in 
the north of Iraq.  Applicant does not communicate regularly with his siblings because 
many of them have no stable work and want his financial help. He cannot afford to help 
them. Recently, one of Applicant’s brothers contacted him and asked for money.  
Applicant arranged for the brother to receive less than $300. (Tr. 58-59, 64, 120-121.) 
 
 Applicant’s sister is a full-time housewife and mother. She is not employed 
outside her home. Since 2005, one of Applicant’s brothers has worked as a driver for a 
military entity in Iraq; another brother is a taxi driver; and a third brother has a small 
vegetable produce shop.  Applicant’s fourth brother is a barber; his fifth brother is a 
mason; and a sixth brother is a day laborer.  Applicant’s seventh brother is a school 
custodian.  His eighth brother is a physician’s assistant.  (Tr. 65-69.) 
 
  
 
4 
 
 
 After the fall of Saddam Hussein, one of Applicant’s brothers received an 
anonymous note threatening him with death unless he moved to another part of Iraq. He 
took the threat seriously and moved. (Tr. 119-120) 
 
 Since emigrating from Iraq to the United States, Applicant has returned to Iraq 
twice, once in 1992 and once in 2005, during the Iraq war.  He traveled with his young 
son to Iraq in 2005 to visit his mother who was ill and who died shortly after his return to 
the United States.  (Tr. 60-61.)   
  
 After working as an automotive mechanic for many years, Applicant suffered a 
heart attack in July 2006 and had three stents placed in his heart.  He decided he could 
no longer do heavy work and sought a job as a translator. After completing his 
application and taking tests, Applicant was informed he could not be deployed as a 
translator to a war zone because he was taking a prescribed blood thinner. Since that 
time, Applicant has been unemployed and on disability.  His wife supports the family 
and holds three jobs.  One of her jobs is with a federal agency. Applicant confirmed that 
he is being sponsored for a job as a translator by a government contractor, pending a 
decision on his eligibility for a security clearance. (Tr. 50-53, 100-102.) 
 
 In his testimony Applicant sometimes rambled and I found it difficult to follow his 
explanations. (Tr. 42-44, 47-48, 53-54, 58, 75,79, 93.) 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about Iraq: 
 
 “In 2003 a U.S.-led coalition removed Saddam Hussein and his Ba’athist regime 
from power.  In March 2006, Iraq’s new government took office after being freely elected 
by the Iraqi people.  However, violence continues to engulf the country.  This violence 
has been fueled and perpetrated by Al Qaeda terrorists, Sunni insurgents, and Shiite 
militias and death squads.”  (HE 1: Iraq: Summary at 1.) 
 
 “The State Department has specifically stated that: ‘[t]he risk of terrorism directed 
against U.S. citizens and interests in Iraq remains extremely high.’  Furthermore, the 
State Department has posted the following warning: 
 
Attacks against military and civilian targets throughout Iraq continue, 
including in the International (or ‘Green’) Zone.  Targets include hotels, 
restaurants, police stations, checkpoints, foreign diplomatic missions, and 
international organizations and other locations with expatriate personnel.  
Such attacks can occur at any time.  Kidnappings still occur; the most 
recent kidnapping of an American citizen occurred in August 2007.” 
  
(HE 1: Iraq: Summary at 2.) 
 
 “Furthermore, there are U.S.-substantiated reports of human rights abuses, 
including a ‘pervasive climate of violence, misappropriation of official authority by 
sectarian, criminal and insurgent groups; arbitrary deprivation of life, disappearances, 
 
5 
 
 
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.’ ” (HE 1: Iraq: 
Summary at 2.)  
 
 “Iraq’s Kurds are represented by two major parties, which since 2003 have 
cooperated in the government of the Kurdish Autonomous Region.  Both parties have 
supported the U.S. presence in Iraq and played important roles in interim governments.  
The secular, nationalist Kurdistan Democratic Party (KDP) is the larger of the two 
parties and held one of two vice presidencies in the Interim Iraqi Government.  Founded 
by the main Kurdish tribe, the Barzanis, the KDP has established good relations with the 
Turkish government.  The Popular Union of Kurdistan, led by Jalal Talabani, also has a 
secular nationalist agenda and represents Kurds closest to the Iran border.” (HE A: 
Country Profile: Iraq, Library of Congress Federal Research Division, August 2006, at 
20.) 
 
 The Peshmerga is an indigenous Kurdish military organization which operates as 
the primary security force for the Kurdistan Regional Government in northern Iraq.  
Authority for Peshmerga’s operations comes from Iraqi law and the constitution of Iraq.  
U.S. troops do not operate in the Kurdish region.  The Kurdish areas are under Kurdish 
provincial control and under the control of the region of Iraqi Kurdistan.  (HE A: Definiton 
of Peshmerga, Backgrounder: Iraq’s Militia Groups, Counsel [sic?] on Foreign 
Relations; U.S. Department of State: Update from U.S. Embassy in Iraq, dated April 10, 
2008, at 2.) 
 
   I take administrative notice of the following facts about Syria: 
 
 “Since March 1963, the Syrian Arab Republic has been ruled by an authoritarian 
regime.  Syria is currently included on the Department of State’s List of State Sponsors 
of Terrorism due to the presence of several terrorist groups in Syria.  According to the 
Department of State, the Syrian Government continues to provide political and material 
support to Hezballah and Palestinian terrorist groups.  Several terrorist groups base 
their external leadership and maintain offices in Damascus.  In addition, Syria permits 
Iran to transfer weapons and supplies through Syria to Hezbollah in Lebanon.  U.S. 
officials criticized Syria for permitting shipments of arms from Iran to Hezbollah in 
Lebanon that fueled the conflict between Lebanon and Israel in July 2006.  Similarly, 
Syria is ‘one of the primary transit points for foreign fighters entering Iraq.’  The 
preliminary findings of a United Nations investigation have indicated that the Syrian 
Government was involved in the February 2005 assassination of former Lebanese 
Prime Minister Hariri, who actively opposed Syria’ influence on Lebanese political 
affairs.”  (HE 1: Syria: Summary at 1-2.) 
 
 “A Travel Warning is in effect for Syria following September 12, 2006 attacks on 
the U.S. Embassy in Damascus.  In 1998 and 2000, mobs in Damascus attacked the 
U.S. Ambassador’s Residence and the U.S. Embassy, respectively.”  (HE 1: Syria: 
Summary at 2.) 
 
 
6 
 
 
 “Due to Syria’s active and passive support of terrorism in the Middle East, 
President Bush signed an executive order implementing sanctions on May 11, 2004.  
These sanctions prohibit the export to Syria of products of the United States other than 
food or medicine, and prohibit any commercial aircraft owned or controlled by the Syrian 
Government from taking off from or landing in the United States. On April 26, 2006, 
President Bush extended the May 11, 2004 executive order to block all property and 
property interests in the United States or in the possession and control of any United 
States person that was involved in terrorist acts in Lebanon perpetrated by Syria on 
February 14, 2005, or otherwise impeding the work of the Commission created to assist 
Lebanon in identifying and punishing those responsible for the February 14, 2005 acts 
of terrorism. On February 13, 2008, President Bush again expanded the 2004 executive 
order to include those persons ‘responsible for or otherwise significantly contributing to 
actions taken or decisions made by the Government of Syria that have the purpose or 
effect of undermining efforts to stabilize Iraq or of allowing the use of Syrian territory or 
facilities to undermine efforts to stabilize Iraq.’ ” (HE 1: Syria: Summary at 2-3.) 
 
 “The Department of State’s Report on Human Rights Practices for 2007 
describes the Syrian Government’s human rights record as ‘worsened.’  The report lists 
the following human rights abuses occurring in Syria: absence of right to change 
government, arbitrary or unlawful deprivation of life, torture in prison, poor prison 
conditions, arbitrary arrests and detentions, absence of rule of law, severely restricted 
civil liberties, limited freedom of religion, government corruption and lack of 
transparency, and violence against women.  Security forces frequently use torture, 
including against foreign citizens.  . . .  The four major branches of the Syrian security 
forces . . . devote resources to monitoring internal dissent and individual citizens, and 
they operate outside the control of the legal system.  Security personnel have placed 
foreign visitors under surveillance, have monitored telephones, and have searched the 
hotel rooms and possessions of foreign visitors.”  (HE 1: Syria: Summary at 3-4.)     
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
7 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶6. 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                           
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline.  The following facts raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions AG 
¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d):1  
  
Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply.   
 
 In 1973 and 1974, Applicant, then a citizen and resident of Iraq, was a member 
of a Kurdish political organization. He joined the organization to qualify for a job.  He 
came to the United States in 1976 and became a U.S. citizen.  He has had no further 
contact with the political organization. I conclude that his membership in the Kurdish 
political party is not a present security concern.  
 
Applicant has nine adult siblings who are citizens and residents of Iraq. He is the 
only sibling who has left Iraq and become a U.S. citizen. While progress has been made 
in stabilizing Iraq, many Iraqi citizens are experiencing disruptions that make it difficult 
to hold stable jobs. One of Applicant’s brothers recently contacted him and requested 
money. Applicant responded to his request. Because he cannot support all of his 
relatives who need money, Applicant does not have regular contact with his siblings. 
However, he is aware of their difficulties, and he helps them when he can.  
 
 Ethnic tensions in Iraq are strong and sometimes violent. After the fall of 
Saddam Hussein’s government, one of Applicant’s brothers received a death threat and 
was forced to move his home. Since 2005, another brother has worked as a driver for a 
military organization in Iraq, a job that could expose him to danger, violence, and the 
threat of terrorism.  Applicant’s contacts with his siblings in Iraq create a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, manipulation, or coercion, and his connections with them could 
 
1 AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or 
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a 
foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.”  AG ¶ 7(d) reads: “sharing living quarters 
with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” 
 
9 
 
 
create a potential conflict of interest between his obligation to protect sensitive or 
classified information and his desire to help his Iraqi Kurd relatives by providing that 
information. I conclude that Applicant’s Iraqi family contacts and connections raise 
security concerns under AG ¶ 7(a) and AG ¶7(b). 
   
The government of Syria sponsors and harbors terrorists.  Its security forces 
target and threaten foreign citizens. In 1988, Applicant, then a U.S. citizen, was 
detained and questioned for several days by Syrian security forces before they 
permitted him to leave and return home to the United States. One of Applicant’s wife’s 
siblings was persecuted by the Syrian government and forced to leave Syria. Applicant 
and his wife’s family have direct knowledge of persecution by the forces of the 
government of Syria.   
 
Applicant’s wife was born in Syria to Kurdish parents.  Her parents, now elderly, 
reside in Syria and are citizens of Syria.  Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law 
have U.S. permanent resident status.  From about 2000 to 2004, they traveled yearly to 
the United States from Syria and stayed with Applicant and his wife in the home they 
shared. Applicant’s contacts with his wife’s family members who are citizens and 
residents of Syria also create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, manipulation, 
and coercion.  These connections could create a potential conflict of interest between 
Applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive and classified information and his desire to 
help his Syrian relatives. Additionally, Applicant shares his home with his wife, a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, whose parents are citizens and residents of Syria. Applicant 
has shared his home with his Syrian relatives. These facts raise security concerns 
under AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d). 
 
An applicant has a heavy burden to show that he and his family members would 
not be subject to undue influence by foreign agents or terrorists operating in Iraq and 
Syria. Applicant failed to provide sufficient information to rebut or mitigate these security 
concerns. I conclude that the mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) are 
inapplicable. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 
10 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant suffered a heart attack which made him unfit for heavy work as an automobile 
mechanic, a trade he had pursued for over 25 years. He knew Arabic, Farsi, and two 
Kurdish dialects, and he sought work as a translator.  Because he was required to take 
a prescribed blood thinner for his heart condition, he was not eligible to be assigned as 
a translator in a war zone. His desire to serve his adopted country as a translator was 
admirable but perhaps impractical. His connections to his family members in Iraq, a 
country that remains unstable and subject to terrorist acts, raised security concerns 
about his potential for pressure and coercion. His connections to family members in 
Syria, an acknowledged state sponsor of terrorism and a country that had persecuted 
him and a member of his wife’s family, created an unacceptable risk of foreign influence 
or exploitation. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under the foreign 
interest adjudicative guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant 
    
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e: Against Applicant 
 
   
 
11 
 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
