1
                                                             
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------, -------- -------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-02203
SSN: ------ ---- -------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Laura J. Anderson, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant has substantial delinquent debt incurred seven years ago that he has
made no effort to repay despite more than six years of steady, well-paying employment.
Based upon a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF-86), on
October 10, 2007. On June 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense (DoD) for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 30, 2008. He answered the
SOR in writing on July 14, 2008, and requested a hearing before an administrative
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 20, 2008, and DOHA
assigned the case to me on August 21, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 3, 2008, and Applicant’s counsel
acknowledged receiving it at least 15 days before the hearing. (Tr. at 20.) I convened
the hearing as scheduled on September 26, 2008. Applicant was not present at the
hearing, but his counsel was present. She represented that Applicant was not present
because he wished to “withdraw his appeal of the DOHA action” and prevent any final
decision being made concerning his security clearance. She had advised him that she
would seek this outcome and he did not need to be present. She was informed that
Applicant did not have the option to unilaterally withdraw from this process, and that the
case must continue to resolution unless and until his employer reported through JPAS
that he no longer required a security clearance. 
Department Counsel and Applicant’s Counsel were given time to contact the
employer’s facility security office and DOHA’s JPAS coordinator to determine whether
his employer had reported that his security clearance application was withdrawn. All
sources consulted indicated that he remained an employee and the security clearance
application remained active. Applicant’s counsel was granted a 70-minute continuance
to contact the Applicant and determine when he could be present. At the conclusion of
the continuance, she had been unable to contact him in any manner. I determined that
Applicant was absent with good cause, since he had relied on his counsel’s good faith
but incorrect advice that he did not need to be present. Accordingly, case processing
was not terminated since the criteria of DOHA OI 28 and Directive ¶ 4.4 were not met.
(See ISCR Case No. 07-05632 (App. Bd. May 13, 2008.)) Applicant’s counsel
expressed her desire, subject to possible change after further consultation with
Applicant, to respond to the Government’s case in writing. She was given until October
10, 2008 to do so, and to request an additional session of the hearing if she or Applicant
desired another opportunity to appear in person before the administrative judge. (Tr. at
6-18.)
Applicant and his counsel submitted a written brief and affidavit, via Department
Counsel, on October 10, 2008. Applicant signed the affidavit attesting to the truth of the
facts asserted in the brief, and neither he nor his counsel requested further hearing
proceedings to permit his personal appearance. Under the criteria of ISCR Case No.
06-13610 (App. Bd. Oct. 31, 2008), I find that Applicant and his counsel thereby
knowingly and intelligently waived his right to present his case by means of a hearing in
which he appears in person under Directive ¶ E3.1.8. Accordingly, the case will be
decided based on the written record pursuant to Directive ¶ E.3.1.7.
Before the hearing was continued for two weeks to permit Applicant’s Counsel to
confer with him, determine whether his employer desired to withdraw his application,
and present any evidence they desired, Department Counsel offered Government
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were admitted without objection. Applicant’s brief,
3
affidavit, and forwarding cover letters were marked Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which
was also admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.)
on October 7, 2008. The transcript is also incorporated into the written record for use in
deciding this case. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a federal contractor, where he has worked
for one year as an employee and three preceding years as a subcontractor employee.
He is an engineer who has worked in the aerospace industry since the 1980s. He has
never married and has no children. In his answer to the SOR, he admitted the
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d, and denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and
1.e. The two admitted allegations involve delinquent debts totaling $15,716, both of
which became delinquent in late 2001. Those admissions are incorporated in the
following findings. 
In 1995, using profits from some favorable stock investments, Applicant
purchased a private airplane. Applicant went through a period of unemployment or
underemployment from February 2000 to July 2002. On his September 2003 SF-86, he
listed periods of unemployment from February to August 2000, and again from
September 2000 to July 2002 after one month of employment from August to
September 2000. (GE 1 at 3-4.) However, his October 2007 SF 86, presently pending
adjudication, states that he was employed from October 2000 to July 2002 as a contract
engineer for a company working on various aviation projects. (GE 4 at 3.)
Applicant took out several loans and incurred credit card balances during this
time that he could not repay. He got a well-paying job again in July 2002, and was able
to bring his mortgage payments current in time to stop the foreclosure proceedings
against his home that were begun by his creditor. His payments on his airplane loan
had also fallen behind, and that lender repossessed and resold the airplane. Applicant
was required to repay the deficit remaining on that loan, as well as substantial attorney
fees for the associated litigation. (GE 3 at 2-3; AE A at 3-4.)
During his November 2003 interview with a special agent of the Defense Security
Service, Applicant admitted owing the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and
1.d. He said he intended to repay those debts by the end of 2004, and produced a
financial statement showing assets of $135,285 and a monthly remainder of income
over expenses of $2,016. (GE 3 at 1-4.) In his April 2008 response to interrogatories, he
denied owing the $181 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but said, “I have not addressed this
debt yet,” concerning the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e. He
further stated that he would pay those bills when other priorities were settled. (GE 7 at
8-11.) His written submission added no information concerning repayment of any of
these debts, but sought instead to attribute them to periods of unemployment beginning
in 1990 and 2002. (AE A.) No other evidence was submitted concerning his
trustworthiness, responsibility, or judgment. He did not explain why he denied SOR ¶¶
4
1.a and 1.e in his formal response to the SOR, nor provide proof the debts were
resolved.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to evaluate
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶¶
2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in
the context of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this order adverse to
an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the Applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Of these nine different disqualifying conditions, the Government asserted
that two were raised by Applicant’s financial circumstances: “(a) inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
(Tr. at 24.)
Applicant has at least a seven-year history of failing to satisfy legitimate financial
obligations. He admitted he has made no effort to resolve at least two of them totaling
more than $15,700 that have been delinquent since 2001. He provided no evidence that
he either resolved or formally disputed any of the SOR-listed debts, although he has
consistently denied owing the $181 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, and it no longer appears
on his most recent credit report (GE 8). All of these debts became delinquent during
2001, but Applicant has not resolved them despite being continuously employed in well-
paying jobs since July 2002. Substantial security concerns are raised under both AG ¶¶
19(a) and 19(c).
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The five
potentially pertinent conditions are:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
6
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented roof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s delinquent debts arose seven years ago, and a substantial number
and amount remain delinquent at present. Despite being continuously employed since
July 2002, he demonstrated no effort to resolve or formally dispute any of the SOR-
listed debts. As recently as April 2008, he admitted not having addressed the largest
four of them. Applicant offered no evidence that he either sought or followed financial
counseling, or that he has any comprehensive plan to address his debts. He has not
contacted these creditors to arrange repayments despite his 2003 statements of intent
and ability to do so by the end of 2004. He said that he disputes the alleged $181
telephone debt, but has not followed through with the creditor about that liability. There
is insufficient indication in this record that his financial issues are either under control or
likely to improve in the foreseeable future. 
The Appeal Board explained the analysis applicable to determining whether an
applicant has mitigated financial concerns arising from delinquent debt as follows:
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and
every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant
demonstrate that he has “ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). The Judge can
reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and
his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the
reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See
Directive ¶ E2.2(a)(“Available, reliable information about the person, past
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching
a determination.”) There is no requirement that a plan provide for
payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable
plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such
debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd.
7
Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually
paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the
SOR.
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant demonstrated
neither a plan to resolve his financial problems nor any significant action toward such
resolution despite more than six years of steady and well-paying employment.
Accordingly, he has not established substantial mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through
(e). 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of potential
concern involves substantial delinquent debts that he has not yet started to repay.
Applicant is a mature, experienced adult who is accountable for his decisions and
conduct. He voluntarily incurred these debts during a period that he was spending more
money than he was earning, including buying a house and private airplane.
Applicant’s debts arose seven years ago, and persist to date. There is ongoing
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress since he remains financially
overextended. Applicant offered no evidence of rehabilitation, behavioral changes, or
that continuation of his financial irresponsibility is unlikely. Despite his knowledge of
security concerns raised by these delinquent debts, he chooses to use his financial
resources on other priorities. 
On balance, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to mitigate reliability and
trustworthiness security concerns arising from his failure to satisfy debts, and history of
8
not meeting financial obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves substantial doubts
as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these
reasons, Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.       
                                  
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
