 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-07005 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Tanya Bullock, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on January 3, 2008. On 
August 7, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 12, 2008; answered it on 
September 3; 2008; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
 
2 
 
 
received the request on September 4, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed 
on September 17, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on September 22, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 29, 2008, scheduling the hearing for 
October 21, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and presented the testimony of two witnesses. The record closed on October 21, 
2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on October 30, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant denied the allegations in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.d and admitted the remaining allegations. He also suggested that the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.l duplicated ¶ 1.c and 1.i. His admissions are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old software systems engineer for a federal contractor. He 
is married and has two children, ages 10 and 8. He graduated from college in June 
1973 with a bachelor of science degree in software engineering. He started a master’s 
degree program in management science and completed all his course requirements, but 
he abandoned his graduate studies when he found full-time employment (Tr. 65-65). He 
received a security clearance in January 1974 while working for a defense contractor 
and held it for 11 years (Tr. 100), but he does not hold a current clearance. He worked 
in the private sector until September 2001, when he was laid off. At the time, his 
effective income, with stock options and other forms of compensation, was about 
$200,000. He testified most of the debts alleged in the SOR were incurred before he 
was laid off (Tr. 69). 
 
Applicant was unemployed until August 2002. He moved back to his home state; 
and he, his wife, and his children lived with his mother (Tr. 73). He was employed in 
various jobs, including low paying “day labor” jobs and as a telemarketer, from 
September 2002 until January 2003. He began working with a mortgage company in 
2003 and eventually became a senior loan officer, earning about $24,000 per year (Tr. 
80). He began working for his current employer in December 2007, and he now earns 
about $92,000 a year. His former supervisor at the mortgage company has offered him 
an opportunity to work part-time as a loan officer to generate additional income, and he 
has accepted the offer, earning an additional $900 per month (Tr. 57; GX 3 at 5). 
 
Applicant’s supervisor at his primary job testified his performance has been 
“superior.” He testified he “couldn’t ask for better.” He described Applicant as reliable, 
dependable, intelligent, and a person who responds to challenges aggressively (Tr. 27). 
 
 The SOR alleges 21 delinquent debts totaling about $38,772, including 9 default 
judgments and two other unpaid judgments totaling $24,511. Applicant admitted all the 
delinquent debts except the default judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d and the four default 
judgments alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Department Counsel presented no evidence to support 
SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
3 
 
 
Over the years, Applicant contacted his creditors to determine who owned the 
debt, but he did not negotiate any payment plans. His supervisor at the mortgage 
company also is his credit counselor. His credit counselor negotiated with Applicant’s 
creditors and received settlement offers on several delinquent debts. Although Applicant 
first estimated he had about $500 per month available for delinquent debts, the credit 
counselor determined that Applicant could cut back on expenses and generate about 
$1,000 per month for delinquent debt payments. He advised Applicant to first pay off the 
smaller creditors and then negotiate payment plans on the larger debts (Tr. 49). As of 
the date of the hearing, no payments had been made on any of the delinquent debts 
(Tr. 52).  
 
The table below summarizes the evidence concerning the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Judgment 
(Time Share) 
$6,383 Unpaid Tr. 41-42 
1.b Judgment 
(Credit card) 
$1,867 Settlement offer for $1949 Tr. 42 
1.c Judgment  
(Credit card) 
$6,208 Unpaid Tr. 42 
1.d Judgment (Rent) $780 Satisfied Tr. 43; Answer  
1.e Judgments (Rent) $3,530 No evidence Tr. 13 
1.f Judgment 
(Personal Loan) 
$1,000 Claim abandoned Tr. 43, 91, 104; 
Answer  
1.g Judgment 
(Medical) 
$979 Unpaid Tr. 44 
1.h Judgment  
(Credit card) 
$3,764 Settlement offer for $2,258 Tr. 44 
1.i Cell phone $311 Unpaid Tr. 44 
1.j Cell phone $418 Unpaid Tr. 44 
1.k Telephone $250 Settlement offer for $125 Tr. 45 
1.l Credit card $6,851 Settlement offer for $4,200 Tr. 45 
1.m Credit card $817 Unpaid Tr. 45-46 
1.n Telephone $219 Unpaid Tr. 46 
1.o Medical bill $651 Unpaid Tr. 46 
1.p Medical bill $480 Unpaid Tr. 46 
1.q Storage $374 Unpaid Tr. 47 
1.r Cell phone $482 Settlement offer for $381 Tr. 47 
1.s Cable $170 Unpaid Tr. 47 
1.t Credit card $3,073 Settlement offer for $615 Tr. 44-45 
1.u Telephone $165 Settlement offer for $82 Tr. 45 
 
 Applicant is living modestly. He does not own a home, and he has only one credit 
card, with a credit limit of $150. He has one car, a seven-year-old minivan (Tr. 124). He 
 
4 
 
 
admitted at the hearing that his delinquent debts have been “off the radar screen” 
because his creditors have not been contacting him. He testified he learned in the 
mortgage business that being proactive toward “essentially dormant” debts can have a 
negative effect on a credit score. He has been working on improving his credit score 
with a view toward buying a home (Tr. 127). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
 
5 
 
 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an Ainability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@ There is no evidence of frivolous or irresponsible 
spending. Applicant was living within his means until he lost his job in September 2001. 
However, his record of longstanding delinquent debts raises AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c), 
shifting the burden to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition. It may be established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or 
Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any 
of the three disjunctive prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully 
established unless the conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
 
6 
 
 
 
 Neither of the first two prongs (“so long ago” or “so infrequent”) is established 
because Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that are not resolved. The third 
prong (“unlikely to recur”) is established because Applicant is employed, highly 
regarded by his supervisor, lives modestly, and has kept up with his current debts. 
Nevertheless, his lack of effort to resolve his delinquent debts after being employed for 
10 months, and his failure to execute the plan devised by his credit counselor casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 
20(a) is not established.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s loss of 
employment and subsequent periods of underemployment were circumstances beyond 
his control. He initially acted responsibly, seeking other employment, accepting 
positions far below his qualifications, and moving in with his mother to save money. His 
lack of effort after he obtained his current position in December 2007, however, was not 
responsible. I conclude he has not fully established the second prong of AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). 
Applicant’s credit counselor presented him with a detailed plan to resolve his debts and 
negotiated settlement offers for many of the debts, but Applicant had taken no action to 
execute the plan as of the date of the hearing. Thus, I conclude AG ¶ 20(c) is not 
established.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@ ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
Applicant resolved the judgment for unpaid rent (SOR ¶ 1.d) and the judgment based on 
the personal loan (SOR ¶ 1.f), but he took no action to resolve his remaining delinquent 
debts. He admitted at the hearing that he allowed the debts to remain dormant in order 
to focus on improving his credit score and qualifying for a home loan. AG ¶ 20(d) is not 
established.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigating by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
suggested that two debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.l might be duplicates of SOR ¶¶ 
 
7 
 
 
1.c and 1.i, but he offered no evidence that he had disputed the duplicate debts. AG ¶ 
20(e) is not established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a talented, well-educated, mature adult. He was articulate, sincere, 
candid, and credible at the hearing. He held a clearance for 11 years without incident. 
He has worked hard to avoid additional delinquent debts, and he has a modest lifestyle. 
He has taken a step in the right direction by obtaining the services of his former 
supervisor as a credit counselor, but he has failed to carry out the financial plan he was 
given, even though he now has the means to begin paying off his debts. Until he 
establishes a track record of systematically resolving his delinquent debts, he will 
remain vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. See Directive ¶¶ 
E3.1.37 through E3.1.41 (reconsideration authorized after one year).  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.u:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
