                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01829
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
November 25, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application on March 15, 2007.
(Government Exhibit 1).  On July 25, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 7, 2008, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge.   This Administrative Judge was assigned the
matter on October 2, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on October 8, 2008,
scheduling the hearing for November 12, 2008.  The Government offered ten exhibits
referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 10, which were received without
objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted three exhibits, referred to
as Applicant’s Exhibits A through C. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.)
on November 20, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 34 years old and has a high school diploma and an Associates
Degree in Electronics Engineering.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a
Production Engineering Support Technician and is seeking a security clearance in
connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because of his questionable judgment, lack of
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations that can raise
questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.
The Applicant was on active duty in the United States Army from September
1992 until January 1995.  He then served in the National Guard from January 1995 until
February 1997.  
The Applicant admitted all of the allegations under this guideline, except
allegation 1(b), in part.  Applicant started working for his current employer in 1997.  He
received a DoD security clearance in March 1998 and held it until March 2008.  At that
time his security clearance was suspended.  
On March 13 or 14, 2005, while holding a DoD security clearance, the Applicant
used methamphetamine that he purchased for $15.00 or $20.00 from a drug dealer on
the street.  He used some of it and saved some of it in his vehicle.  The following day,
on March 15, 2005, the Applicant was stopped by the police for having expired car
license tags.  During the search of his car, the police found the Applicant’s
methamphetamine under the passenger’s seat.  (Government Exhibit 4).  Applicant was
charged with (1) Failure to Appear (on an active bench warrant), (2) Expired Tags, and
(3) Possession of a Controlled Dangerous Substance (methamphetamine).
(Government Exhibit 2).  Applicant spent two days in jail.  He pled guilty to the charges
and was ordered to pay fines/ fees in the amount of $650.00 and was ordered to attend
a Drug Diversion program.  Applicant explained that this involved his attendance and
participation in a twenty week drug awareness course between November 2005 and
March 2006.  (Government Exhibit 3).  Once successfully completed, all charges
against the Applicant would be deemed dismissed.  He was also required to attend
twenty Narcotics Anonymous meetings.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B).  
Applicant contends that this was the first time he had ever used
methamphetamine.  Since he had been working lots of hours and coaching his son’s
baseball game he was tired and needed a pick up.  He did not like the effects of the
methamphetamine as it made him jittery and paranoid.  (Tr. P. 40).  Applicant states
that he did not inform his security department at work about this adverse information
because he was too embarrassed and knew that it could jeopardize his security
clearance and his job.
         
It was also about this time that the Applicant was in the process of applying for
special security access with another government agency.  During this investigation, the
Applicant did not disclose his arrest and drug use on his security clearance application
3
or during his interview with the investigator.  Applicant was ultimately denied this
clearance in June 2006.  (Tr. pp. 45-46).  Applicant testified that he deliberately failed to
disclose the arrest and drug use because he thought that he would automatically lose
his job and his security clearance if he admitted it.  (Tr. p. 46).  
The Applicant further testified that he has learned a harsh lesson from this
experience and regrets what he did.  He almost lost his wife, his family and his house.
He made a mistake and will never do it again.  He was embarrassed about his conduct
and now understands how important it is to maintain a drug free lifestyle and to be
honest.  (Government Exhibit 4).  
Letters of recommendation submitted on behalf of the Applicant attest to his
positive attitude, hard working nature, dedication, trustworthiness, integrity and
leadership abilities. He is highly recommended for a position of trust.  (Applicant’s
Exhibit A).  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
16(b) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities;
16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which,
when considered as a whole supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
16(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under ant other
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which,
4
when combined with all available information supports a whole person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person
may not properly safeguard protected information.  This includes but is not limited to
consideration of:
16.(d)(3)  pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
5
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in dishonesty and rule violations that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in poor personal conduct (Guideline E).  The totality of this
evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the
Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there
is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guideline E of the SOR.
The evidence shows that as recently as March 2005, the Applicant was arrested
for Failure to Appear, Expired Tags and Possession of Methamphetamine.
Furthermore, he purchased and used this dangerous illegal drug while holding a
security clearance from the Department of Defense.  He deliberately failed to disclose
this adverse information to his security department.  During a previous security
investigation by another agency, he deliberately concealed his arrest and drug use and
was denied a special access clearance.  This misconduct demonstrates a pattern of
poor judgment under Guideline E, (Personal Conduct) that is fairly recent and very
troubling.  Under the particular facts of this case, the Applicant cannot be considered
honest or trustworthy.  
Under Guideline E, Disqualifying Conditions 16(b) deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
6
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 16(c) credible adverse
information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected
information; 16(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but
which, when combined with all available information supports a whole person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating
that the person may not properly safeguard protected information.  This includes but is
not limited to consideration of . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations apply.
None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Consequently, his poor judgment
adversely effects his security clearance eligibility at this time.  
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is 34 years old, but has
conducted himself in a very immature and irresponsible manner.  Under the particular
facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines, viewed
as a whole, support a whole person assessment of questionable judgement,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard classified information.     
This Applicant, at this time, has not demonstrated that he is trustworthy, and
does not meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.
Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
   
7
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
