1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-01679
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                             
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,  I
conclude that Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on November
14, 2006. On June 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 17, 2008. She answered the
SOR in writing on August 11, 2008, and requested a hearing before an administrative
AE F is a duplicate and was not admitted into evidence.1
GE 1 (Applicant’s Security Clearance Application) at 2, 9; Tr. 25.2
Tr. 39-40, 53, 56-58.3
Applicant believed that this debt had been paid. She believed this creditor was the same as another creditor4
for a vehicle loan she had prior to buying this car. After discussion of the two creditors at the hearing, she
realized the creditor in SOR allegation 1.h is not the same as the other automobile creditor. She acknowledged
owing this debt. Tr. 38-40, 56-65. 
2
judge. DOHA received the request shortly thereafter. Department Counsel was
prepared to proceed on August 28, 2008, and I received the case assignment on
September 3, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 12, 2008, and I
convened the hearing as scheduled on September 29, 2008. The government offered
five exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received and admitted into evidence without
objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf. She submitted ten exhibits (AE) A
through E, and G through J, which were received. Nine were admitted into evidence
without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 3,1
2008. I held the record open until October 20, 2008, for Applicant to submit additional
documents. On October 20, 2008, she submitted 10 exhibits, AE K through AE T, which
were marked and admitted into evidence, without objection. The record closed on
October 20, 2008.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, dated August 11, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.g of the SOR. She denied the remaining factual
allegations in the SOR. She also provided additional information to support her request
for eligibility for a security clearance.  
Applicant, who is 34 years old, works as an administrative assistant for a
contractor to the Department of State. She has held this job since March 2006. She is
engaged and a single mother, with two daughters, ages 16 and 13, and a
granddaughter. She supports all three children.2
In 2002, Applicant lost her job. She did not work full-time for three or four months.
During this time she received unemployment benefits and worked part-time, no more
than 20 hours a week, as a stock clerk. She has worked steadily since this time.3
About the time she lost her job, her car was stolen. The police recovered it. She
voluntarily returned her car to the creditor after the car was recovered because she
could not afford the car payment. She believed she owed about $5,000 on her loan after
the car was sold. She has no information which verifies her belief. The unpaid balance
on this car loan is SOR allegation 1.h.4
GE 2 (Answers to Interrogatories and attachments) at 17-45; AE C; AE E; AE G; AE H; AE I; AE K; AE L; AE5
P.
GE 2 , supra note 5, at 6. Applicant shares her household expense with her fiancé. 6
GE 3 (Credit report, dated June 19, 2008); GE 4 (Credit report, dated March 28, 2008); GE 5 (Credit report,7
dated December 26, 2006); AE A (Credit report, dated September 19, 2008).
3
After being advised in April 2008 that her past debts and finances presented a
problem with granting her a security clearance, Applicant wrote a letter to the creditors
identified in SOR allegations 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, 1.g, and 1.j through 1.r. She also wrote a letter
to a creditor she believed held the debt listed in SOR allegation 1.h. After some
discussion at the hearing, she realized that the creditor in 1.h was not the same creditor.
The letter sent by Applicant to each creditor requested the creditor to provide
information under the Federal Debt Collection Act regarding her debt. She also
challenged seven SOR debts with one of the credit reporting companies. Following the
hearing, Applicant wrote to the creditors listed in SOR allegations 1.c, 1.d, and 1.h.5
Applicant earns approximately $38,000 a year. Her net monthly income is $2,900
plus children support of approximately $600 a month. Her monthly expenses total
approximately $2,500, leaving approximately $1,000 a month to pay debts.6
A review of Appellant’s credit reports dated December 26, 2006, March 28, 2008,
June 19, 2008, September 19, 2008, and the SOR shows the following debts and their
current status:7
SOR ¶ TYPE OF DEBT AMOUNT STATUS, EVIDENCE
1.a Cell phone bill $     225.00 Challenged, verified, filed fraud
claim (Response to SOR; GE
2-5; AE A, C and S)
1.b Cell phone bill $     612.00 Challenged, verified, filed fraud
claim (Response to SOR; GE
2-5; AE A, C and R)
1.c Check nonpayment $       35.00 Verified; Paid (GE 3, 4; AE L)
1.d Check nonpayment $       25.00 Verified; Paid (GE 3, 4; AE K)
1.e Bank account fees $     175.00 Unpaid
1.f Rent $  2,646.00 Challenged, verified; AE C
Response to SOR; unpaid
1.g Check nonpayment $       27.00 Challenged, verified, paid;
GE 2-5; AE N
Accordingly, I find “For Applicant” with respect to SOR ¶ 1.l to eliminate the duplication.8
Accordingly, I find “For Applicant” with respect to SOR ¶ 1.o to eliminate the duplication.9
AE J (Application for loan); AE T (Loan denial); Tr. 34-35, 67, 84.10
4
1.h Car repossession $10,191.00 Disputes balance; proposed
payment plan - $75 biweekly;
paid $75 on 10/17/08 (GE 3-5;
AE P)  
1.i Utility bill $     469.00
(actual amount
owed $174.20)
Payment plan; paid first of
three installments (AE O)
1.j Rent $  1,892.00 Unpaid
1.k Collection creditor
(original creditor
unknown)
$     832.00 Debt challenged, deleted on
credit report (Response to
SOR)
1.l Utility bill $     469.00 Same as 1.i; deleted from
credit report after challenge8
1.m Loan $     220.00 Challenged, deleted
(Response to SOR)
1.n Clothing store bill $     214.00 Disputes (GE 5), unpaid
1.o Cell phone bill $  1,023.00 Same as 1.r; account closed
(GE 2, 5)9
1.p Insurance bill $     116.00
(actual amount
owed $193.00)
Payment plan (AE M); paid first
of three payments
1.q Collection account
(original creditor
unknown)
$       96.00 Unpaid
1.r Cell phone bill $     906.00 Proposed payment plan of
$75.00 a month; Paid $75 on
10/17/08 (AE Q)
Twice, Applicant co-signed a rental agreement with another person, who
defaulted on the rent payments. One rental company declined to enter into a payment
plan with her, but advised she could pay them monthly. She would not receive
verification of her payments until the debt was paid in full. She sought a loan to pay the
$2,646 debt, but her loan application was denied.  10
Id. at 54-55.11
5
Applicant acknowledges that many of the debts in the SOR are her fault. She has
learned the value of good credit. She misused credit in the past and is now paying for
her behavior. She is working to clean up her credit.11
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
6
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to this guideline is set out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debt over a period of time. She
has lacked the ability to pay her debts and until recently, has been unwilling to resolve
them. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions,
requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial problems have been ongoing for awhile. Her debt did not occur under any
unusual circumstances. This potentially mitigating condition is not applicable. 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant lost her job in
2002, and as a result, she could not afford to make her car payment. She voluntarily
returned her car, a reasonable action at the time.  Her other debts are not the result of
circumstances beyond her control. This mitigating condition partially applies.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Although she did not receive debt counseling,
upon learning that her past debts could negatively impact her ability, Applicant initiated
7
contact with her creditor to obtain information on the status of her debts. Her efforts led
to the removal of a few debts from her credit report, the payment of three small debts
and an offer to pay several larger debts. Because she is making an effort to resolve her
debts, this mitigating condition is partially applicable. 
AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant’s post-
hearing efforts to pay her debts and develop payment plans for her larger debts is not
sufficient at this time to demonstrate that she has made a good faith effort to resolve her
old debts because she has not shown a track record for paying these debts. This
mitigating condition does not apply.
Finally, under AG ¶ 20(e), Applicant could mitigate the government’s security
concerns by showing she had “a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-
due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the
issue.” Applicant acted reasonably when she challenged the validity of seven debts
(allegations 1.a, 1.b, 1.k, 1.l, 1.h, 1.p, and1.q,) because she did not believe that these
debts were hers. Likewise, her decision to challenge the validity of two other debts
(allegation 1.g and a debt not on the SOR) on the grounds she had paid the debts was
rational. Her challenges resulted in the deletion of four debts from her credit report. She
paid one and learned she still owed money to another creditor and is paying this debt
under a payment plan. Because the credit reporting agencies verified the debts listed in
SOR allegations 1.a and 1.b and she denies these debts are hers, Applicant filed a
fraud complaint with the credit reporting agency. The December 26, 2006, credit report
reflects that she disputed the debt listed in SOR allegation 1.n, as she paid the bill. This
mitigation condition applies only to the mitigation of SOR allegations 1.a, 1.b, 1.k, 1.m,
and 1.n.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
8
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
In reaching a conclusion under the whole person concept, I considered the
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and
circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial problems began as a young
woman, trying to raise two daughters on her own with limited funds. (See AG & 2(a)(4).)
Her accumulated debt from the car repossession occurred because she lost her job and
could no longer pay the monthly car payment. In recent years, she has accumulated
additional debts, most of which have not been paid. Six months ago, she realized her
past debts would prevent her from obtaining a security clearance. She is to be
commended for the effort she has taken since then to locate and resolve her debt
problems. Now that she knows what debts are valid, she has started to resolve her debt
issues. She paid her three smallest debts two weeks ago. She has offered to repay
several more debts through payment plans. Two debts will be paid shortly, and the
remaining debts will take some time. Given her past record for not paying her debts, her
present efforts are not sufficient to establish a track record for good financial
management. Applicant needs to demonstrate that she can manage her finances and
pay her bills for a period of time. She has not mitigated the government’s security
concerns regarding her finances.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l: For Applicant
9
Subparagraph 1.m: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
