                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-04308
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On May 12, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 4, 2008 and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on September 4, 2008, and was scheduled for hearing on
October 7, 2008.  A hearing was convened on October 7, 2008, for the purpose of
considering whether it would be clearly consistent with the national interest to grant,
continue, or deny, Applicant’s application for a security clearance.  At the hearing, the
Government's case consisted of three exhibits; Applicant relied on one witness (himself)
and one exhibit.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on October 15, 2008.  Based upon
2
a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied. 
   Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have falsified his security clearance
questionnaire of April 2007 by omitting his March 2001 arrest for alien smuggling when
answering question 23.  Under Guideline J, the alleged omission is incorporated by
reference, and the underlying March 2001 arrest for alien smuggling in violation of 8
U.S.C. § 1324 is also alleged.
 For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted falsifying his security application
and being arrested in March 2001 for alien smuggling.  In explanation, he claimed to not
recall being placed under arrest by the detaining officers.  He claimed the officers
placed him in a room for a long period of time, fingerprinted him, and then released him
after he signed some papers that he did not read before signing.  Applicant claimed.
Alternatively, to miscalculating the dates of coverage in the questionnaire; even though
he was detained in March 2000, instead of 2001.  He claimed he did not recall being
read his “Miranda Rights,” and was only 20 years at the time when he made a mistake
in judgment.  Applicant did not address the details of the arrest in his answer.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 27-year-old-engineering technician for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by
Applicant are incorporated herein and adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Applicant is unmarried and has one child by his girlfriend, who lives with him
(R.T., at 36).  Born and raised in the U.S., Applicant has for many years crossed the
neighboring border to visit family members. Since 2000, he estimates to have crossed
the border three to four times a month on average to dine, and occasionally visit his
aunt (R.T., at 37-38).
While visiting a border country with his cousin in March 2001, Applicant was
arrested by border agents and charged with alien smuggling in violation of 8 U.S.C. §
1324 (a felony).  He had been asked by an unknown individual to drive his car across
the point of entry to the U.S. (R.T., at 32-33, 44-45, 5, 64).  This unknown individual
offered him $300.00 to drive his car across the border (R.T., at 44-45).  Applicant
acquiesced to he individual’ request as a favor (R.T., at 65) and (accompanied by his
cousin) drove the car to the U.S. point of entry (just short of the border) for the car
owner without questioning him about his cargo or intentions or taking the $300.00 (R.T.,
at 33, 45-46).  Federal custom officials declined to prosecute him for his role in the
operation.  At the time of his arrest, Applicant was a lot attendant for a national home
supplier (see ex. 1).
3
When Applicant and his cousin reached the U.S. border, a border agent asked to
open the trunk of the vehicle Applicant was driving.  Applicant acquiesced in the agent’s
request.  When the agent opened the trunk, he found aliens inside (R.T., at 33, 46-47).
The agent grabbed the aliens from the trunk and escorted Applicant out of the vehicle
and upstairs in the building. 
Once inside the building, Applicant was seated and questioned.  He was then
fingerprinted and asked to sign a piece of paper which the agent retained (R.T., at 34,
48-53).  He was detained in the room until he was released on the U.S. side of the
border (R.T., at 51-52).  Because he was never read his Miranda Rights, he claims he
was never physically arrested (R.T., at 33).  Having never been arrested before, he did
not attach any significance to being fingerprinted (R.T., at 54-55).  Applicant never read
the paper he was given to sign before he signed it, and does not remember what he
signed (R.T., at 53-54).  He assures he did not attach any significance either to his
being interviewed in the room for an extended period without being told he was free to
leave (R.T., at 54-55).  FBI records confirm that Applicant was arrested in March 2001
and charged with alien smuggling before being released (see ex. 2).
Just what evidence the border agents developed regarding the extent of
Applicant’s knowledge of the alien cargo he was transporting when stopped and
searched is not clear from the administrative record.  The only evidence of his arrest
and charge of knowing or reckless disregard that he was transporting undocumented
aliens is the FBI criminal information sheet and Applicant’s testimony.  Applicant’s denial
of any pre-knowledge draws some reinforcement from his noted release after
questioning, and later declination to prosecute him for the charge.  Without more
probative evidence of his knowing or reckless disregard of the contents of the vehicle he
was asked to operate across the border, no inferences of criminal conduct can be
drawn with respect to this specific charge.
Asked to complete a security clearance questionnaire (e-qip) in April 2007,
Applicant answered “no” to question 23f, which asks him whether he had ever been
arrested within the last 7 years, or convicted of any offense (leaving out traffic-related
offenses of less than $150.00).  In answering “no” to the question, Applicant omitted his
March 2001 arrest.  He answered “no,” too, to question 23a (that addresses non-time
sensitive felony offenses).  When he came to question 18 of the e-qip (questioning him
about his travel activities), he answered non-applicable (see ex. 1; R.T., at 42).
 Before answering the questionnaire, Applicant had two days to check with
relatives and law enforcement authorities about any questions he had trouble answering
(R.T., at 71-72).  Still,  he never checked for federal arrests, only state arrests, claiming
no understanding at the time of differences between state and federal authorities (R.T.,
at 60-61).  
Applicant attributed his omissions to three reasons: (1) He was never notified of
any arrest resulting from 2001 detention and did not know he had any criminal record at
the state or federal level, (2) he mistakenly assumed his 2001 border arrest occurred in
4
2000, and was beyond the seven year period covered by the question (R.T., at 57-58,
62-63), and (3) he later checked with his state’s arrest records and found no record of
an arrest.  Even though, he assigned three reasons for omitting his arrest, he assured
he would have listed his 2001 arrest if he was certain it was not more than seven years
earlier (R.T., at 58-59).  However, he never articulated any reason why he would have
listed it anyway if he had correctly calculated the date of the arrest. His articulated no
reasons either for not checking with federal authorities (claiming only that he did not
discern a difference at the time).
After he completed his e-qip, Applicant was twice interviewed by an OPM agent.
In his first interview, Applicant was asked by the investigator about his 2001 border
arrest (R.T., at 69-70).   When the investigator asked him whether he was familiar with
the arrest, he responded affirmatively.  In his second interview, he was queried about
his dual citizenship with the border country (R.T., at 70).  Applicant affirmed he was a
U.S. citizen by birth and was not a dual citizen (R.T., at 34, 70). 
Applicant acknowledged that his mother has dual citizenship with this border
country (see ex. 1; R.T., at 73), and he has a father who was born in this country and
has citizenship and possible residence there (ex. 1).  Besides his immediate family
members, Applicant has an aunt and cousin who reside in this border country (R.T., at
37-38).  Because Applicant did not list any of these relatives in his e-qip, their exact
whereabouts in the country is unclear.
In issue then, is whether inferences of knowing and wilful omission can be
attributed to Applicant based on his acknowledged search by border agents, his lengthy
detention and interrogation, his fingerprinting, his affixing his signature on a piece of
paper without reading it, and his confirmed arrest and alien smuggling charge in the
FBI’s criminal information sheet.  While in theory it is certainly plausible that a person
could be detained and fingerprinted based on a suspicious chain of events, and then
released without an arrest, the likelihood of such an occurrence under the
circumstances described by Applicant seems remote.  Detention and fingerprinting by
itself are key elements of an arrest.  So, too, his being asked to sign papers before he
was released in more consistent with some kind of citation or acknowledged arrest than
would be for any neutral acknowledgment of his detention, or even an authorized
release of privacy material.
Further, Applicant himself hedged some on his reasons for omitting his 2001
arrest when he ascribed a second reason in his answer for his omitting his arrest.  He
indicated, alternatively, that he miscalculated the dates and “thought I was past the
seven year mark when I submitted my security paper work on April 13 , 2007" (seeth
Applicant’s response to SOR).  Such an attributed reason, even if framed alternatively,
was provided under oath and clearly acknowledges falsifying his security paper work,
and admitting his awareness of the arrest when he completed his e-qip. Because this
particular arrest is covered by a felony statute, its listing was required in question 23a,
regardless of the amount of time elapsed (see ex. 1). 
5
When answering any allegations or questions under oath, an applicant is
expected to be fully truthful in his responses covering the question.  Applicant was
never able to successfully reconcile these highly divergent reasons for his arrest
omission in his answer and hearing testimony.  
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s e-qip omission of
his 2001 alien smuggling arrest (a serious felony under the governing statutory
provisions, if convicted), inferences warrant that his omission was made either
knowingly, or in reckless disregard of the truth.  Applicant is of record in checking state
courts for evidence of arrests before completing his e-qip, but not federal sources at the
time.  Having family residing in this border country and regularly visiting these family
members provided Applicant with at least some motivating reasons for wanting to keep
his family contacts and visits out of the investigatory process.  If his omission of his
2001 arrest had not been detected, he might well have succeeded in maintaining an
effective separation between his family members and the clearance application
investigatory process.
Applicant is well regarded by his employer.  His direct supervisor describes his
work performance as admirable and worthy of the promotion he received (see ex. A).
His supervisor credits Applicant with long work-days, travel to shore installation sites
and solid team work.  He characterizes Applicant as a punctual employee who has
earned the trust of every supervisor he has worked for (ex. A).
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions,"
if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
6
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 18.
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and
regulations.  Adjudication Guidelines (AG) ¶ 18
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon
a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw
only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of
record.  Conversely, the Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on
speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
As the result of his transporting undocumented aliens across the U.S. border in
March 2001, Applicant was stopped, searched, detained, and eventually arrested and
charged with alien smuggling in violation of 18 U.S.C. §1324.  While he was never
prosecuted for the offense, the FBI’s criminal information sheet confirms that Applicant
was clearly arrested and charged with the smuggling offense.  Security concerns are
7
raised over Applicant’s omitting his arrest in the e-qip he completed in April 2007, and
over the underlying conduct itself. 
Potentially serious and difficult to reconcile with the trust and reliability
requirements for holding a security clearance are the timing and circumstances of
Applicant’s omission of his March 2001 alien smuggling arrest (a felony).  DC ¶ 16(a),
“the deliberate omission, concealment, falsification or misrepresentation of relevant and
material facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities,” applies to Applicant’s omissions.
 So much trust is imposed on persons cleared to see classified information that
deviation tolerances for candor lapses are gauged very narrowly. Applicant’s
explanations were insufficient to avert inferences of knowing and wilful concealment of
his 2001 arrest. 
Mitigation of Applicant’s arrest/charge omission is difficult to credit Applicant with,
since he failed to promptly correct his omissions and misstatements until he was asked
about his arrest in his first OPM interview.   In the past, the Appeal Board has denied
applicants availability of the predecessor mitigating condition of MC ¶ 17(a) (the
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or
falsification before being confronted with the facts) where the applicant has waited many
months to timely correct a known omission. Compare ISCR Case No. 97-0289 (Appeal
Bd. January 1998) with DISCR Case No. 93-1390 (Appeal Bd. January 1995).  
By willfully and knowingly failing to disclose his 2001 alien smuggling arrest and
felony charge, Applicant concealed materially important background information needed
for the government to properly process and evaluate his security clearance application.
His probative reasons for his omitting his arrest/charge (lack of notice of an arrest and,
alternatively, mistaken recall of th date of the arrest) are not sustainable grounds for
averting inferences of falsification. Weighing all of the circumstances surrounding his e-
qip omission, and lack of any prompt, good faith correction, Applicant’s claims lack the
necessary probative showing to avert drawn conclusions that he knowingly and
deliberately withheld material background information about his alien smuggling
arrest/charge. 
Criminal conduct related to e-qip omission and underlying actions
Knowing and wilful falsification is also covered by the criminal conduct guidelines.
Mitigation of the criminal features of his omissions falls along a little bit different fault line
than is the case with personal conduct considerations. To be sure, an applicant’s youth
at the time of the offense in issue and positive work record can play a major role in
mitigating criminal conduct coverage of his omissions.  So while DC ¶ 31(c), “allegation
or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted,” has application to Applicant’s e-qip
8
omission, MC ¶ 32(d), “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive
community involvement,” has potential mitigation benefit as well.
Employment of the criminal conduct guideline and the use of separate whole-
person weighing of Applicant’s actions and personal assessments of his work
contributions weigh in his favor. Applicant has no prior or subsequent criminal record,
and his work contributions demonstrate considerable passage of time and maturity.
Applicant’s avoidance of any recurrent conduct in the last seven years and solid work
record enable him to mitigate the potential criminal implications of his arrest omission. 
To the extent, criminal conduct issues associated with Applicant’s 2001 alien
smuggling arrest/charge retain any security concern, they are unsubstantiated.
Applicant was never prosecuted on any alien smuggling charges, and his advance
knowledge of the cargo of the vehicle he agreed to drive across the border for an
unknown individual, while suspicious, and is no accompanied by any firm evidence of
knowing or reckless smuggling of aliens across the border: proof conditions of 8 U.S.C.
§ 1324. 
Considering all of the evidence produced in this record and the available
guidelines in the Directive (inclusive of the 2(a) factors in Enclosure 2), unfavorable
conclusions warrant with respect to subparagraph1.a of Guideline E. Favorable
conclusions warrant, however, with respect to subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b of Guideline
E.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the 2(a) factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT):                   AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a: AGAINST APPLICANT
GUIDELINE J: (CRIMINAL CONDUCT): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.a FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.b: FOR APPLICANT
9
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
