 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )
SSN: ---------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01256
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
request for eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
On June 20, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor, for whom he has worked since May 2006. (Gx. 1) After reviewing
the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to
classified information. On April 17, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the Revised
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
2
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline E (personal conduct) and Guideline F2
(financial).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on July 9, 2008, and I convened a hearing on September 4, 2008. The
parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented five exhibits (Gx. 1 - 7).
Applicant testified in his own behalf, submitted one exhibit (Ax. A) and presented one
witness. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 18, 2008. I left the record
open after the hearing to allow Applicant time to present additional relevant information.
(Tr. 72) The record closed on September 29, 2008, when I received three additional
documents from Applicant, which have been collectively admitted without objection as
Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) B.
Findings of Fact
The government alleged Applicant owed approximately $36,109 for 16 delinquent
debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.p. In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted owing
these debts and asserted they would be included in a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition he
intended to file. The government also alleged that Applicant deliberately falsified his
answers to e-QIP questions 28.a (debts more than 180 days past due in the last seven
years) (SOR ¶ 2.a) and 23.d (any alcohol- or drug-related offenses ever) (SOR ¶ 2.b).
Applicant is 45 years old. He has been married twice. Most recently, he was
married in 1998 but divorced in 2003. The marriage fell apart when the company he
worked for moved in 2002, leaving him unemployed for almost a year. Attempts at
reconciliation ended because of the effects on both him and his ex-wife from the
accidental death of her son. Applicant moved away and neither he nor his ex-wife
continued paying their bills. (Tr. 30 - 31, 55) The marital residence went into foreclosure,
Applicant returned a car for repossession (SOR ¶ 1.I for $11,164), and a number of
credit cards (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d, totaling $22,643) went unpaid. Utility bills left
over from the marital residence (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.g, 1.j, 1.n, 1.o and 1.p, totaling $978)
some of which are less than $100, have gone unpaid since about 2003. Finally,
Applicant is delinquent on three medical accounts totaling $639 (SOR ¶¶ 1.k - 1.m).
(Gx. 2; Gx. 4)
When Applicant left his marital residence, he was unemployed. He eventually
moved back to his hometown where he currently lives and works. He struggled to find
employment, but now has a steady job. His current job required extensive travel for the
first 10 months. He was able to save much of the per diem he received and used it to
buy a boat in 2007. (Tr. 58 - 59) He lives well within his means, pays his current
obligations on time,  and has about $1,100 remaining after expenses each month;
however, this number does not reflect any payments to creditors. (Gx. 2; Tr. 37, 55 - 58)
When he received interrogatories from DOHA adjudicators in February 2008 (Gx. 2),
 Directive. 6.3.3
3
Applicant retained a bankruptcy attorney. (Ax. A) He has paid the retainer and appears
to have funds for the filing fee, but has not yet provided his attorney with all of the
information needed to actually file a petition. (Ax. A; Tr. 34 - 35)
When Applicant filled out his e-QIP, he answered “yes” to question 28.a (In the
last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?) The only debt he
listed was for a truck repossession during his divorce. Applicant knew his finances and
credit rating were in trouble but insists he did not know he owed as much debt as the
government’s information shows. He first became aware of the true extent of his debt in
September 2007, when he was interviewed by a government investigator during his
background check. (Tr. 37 - 38)
Applicant was arrested in 1988, 1991 and 2000 for driving under the influence of
alcohol (DUI). His 1988 arrest also included a charge of misdemeanor possession of
marijuana. He was convicted of the charges each time. (Gx. 5) When he filled out his e-
QIP, he answered “yes” to question 23.d (Have you ever been charged with or
convicted of any offense(s) related to drugs or alcohol?) He disclosed a March 1996
DUI, by which he was probably referring to his 1991 arrest. (Tr. 41 - 42) Applicant
explained he either did not understand the question or that he was advised by someone
at work that he only had to go back 10 years. (Tr. 32 - 33, 39 - 40) However, his
reference to a 10-year time frame makes no sense in light of his disclosure of a 1996
(actually 1991) arrest. He did not disclose his DUI offense in 2000. (Tr. 42 - 44)
Applicant has a good reputation at work. His most recent performance evaluation
reflects above-average performance and his supervisor characterizes him as reliable
and hardworking. (Ax. B) A long-time friend testified that Applicant is sincere and
trustworthy. The witness also corroborated Applicant’s claim that he struggled to get
back on his feet after his most recent divorce, but that he is now doing better financially.
(Tr. 59 - 64)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors3
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.5
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).6
4
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 15 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) and AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - financial
considerations).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  5
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.6
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The security concern about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
5
The government presented sufficient information to support all of the allegations
in SOR ¶ 1. Available information also shows Applicant has not paid or resolved any of
the debts listed therein. Those debts have been delinquent for about five years. The
record in this case requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶
19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations).
In response, Applicant presented information about his loss of employment, his
divorce and his stepson’s untimely passing as the circumstances that led to his financial
problems. This information requires consideration of the mitigating condition at AG ¶
20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances). He also presented information showing he has taken steps to
resolve his indebtedness by retaining a bankruptcy attorney who will help him repay the
debts through a Chapter 13 wage earners’ plan. Additionally, his current finances show
he is living within his means and should be able to comply with Chapter 13 payments. 
Personal and professional events, such as Applicant has experienced, can have
a significant impact on one’s ability to manage personal finances. However, it is not
unreasonable to expect that Applicant would be more responsive five years later when
faced with such problems. It may be that Applicant was not fully aware of the depth of
his indebtedness before he was interviewed by an investigator in September 2007. He
has chosen bankruptcy as a way to resolve his debts. While this option may be an
acceptable means of resolving one’s debts, Applicant waited until March 2008 to hire a
bankruptcy attorney. As of the date of his hearing, he had not yet given the attorney all
of the information needed to file a petition. Despite the relative health of his current
monthly budget (which enabled him to buy a boat last year), Applicant has not satisfied
the AG ¶ 20(b) requirement that he has “acted responsibly under the circumstances.” 
Applicant’s debts are significant, and must be considered as recent and ongoing
in light of the absence of action to resolve them. In summary, there is no basis in the
record to support application of any of the mitigating conditions under this guideline.
Accordingly, Applicant has failed to present sufficient information that would mitigate the
security concerns raised by the adverse information about his finances.
Personal Conduct. 
A security concern may also exist when, as stated in AG ¶ 15, available
information reflects
[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
6
The government alleged that Applicant deliberately omitted information about his
finances and his arrest record when he answered e-QIP questions 28.a and 23.d,
respectively. The government’s information shows Applicant answered “yes” to both
questions, but that he listed only one of his 16 debts and one of his four drug- or
alcohol-related criminal offenses. Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his answers.
As to SOR ¶ 2.a, he claimed he was not aware of the full extent of his finances
and listed a repossession debts associated with his divorce. However, he also
acknowledged that he and his wife had “walked away” from their finances when the
marriage ended. Based on that knowledge, he should have been able to at least
disclose the possibility of other debts. As to SOR ¶ 2.b, Applicant claimed he was told
he only had to list arrests within the preceding 10 years; however, what he actually
listed was more than 10 years old and he failed to list his only arrest within the past 10
years. 
Because Applicant denied this allegation, the government bore the burden of
“presenting witnesses and other evidence to establish facts that have been
controverted.” (Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.14) To be disqualifying, it must be
shown Applicant knowingly providing false information about relevant information in his
background. Applicant’s e-QIP answers to both questions, viewed together and in light
of all of the information bearing on his finances and arrest record, show he did intend to
minimize the full extent of the adverse information about these issues in his
background. Accordingly, available information requires application of the disqualifying
condition at AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities;).
In response to the government’s information, Applicant provided conflicting
testimony about his intent at the time he completed the e-QIP. He acknowledged
awareness of financial problems but did not explain why he did not disclose other debts
he may have been aware of. His explanation about his answer to the question about
drug-/alcohol-related offenses did not make sense and lacked credibility. Available
information does not support application of any of the Guideline E mitigating conditions.
Accordingly, Applicant has not carried his burden of disproving, mitigating, or
extenuating the adverse information about his personal conduct. 
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 45 years old and
presumed to be a mature adult. He has experienced personal and professional
difficulties that caused him financial problems. He is credited for taking some steps to
resolve his debts, but he generally has not acted responsibly in the face of his financial
problems since obtaining steady employment two years ago. He has not shown that his
debts will be resolved so that he can avoid being at risk of acting inappropriately to raise
 See footnote 3, supra.7
 See footnote 6, supra. 8
7
needed funds. He has also demonstrated a willingness to hedge the truth to further his
own interests (in this case, to get a clearance needed for his job). These facts together
undermine my confidence in his willingness or ability to protect the government’s
interests as his own. The facts and circumstances of Applicant’s finances and personal
conduct present an unacceptable risk to the national interest were he top be given
access to classified information. A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available7
information shows there are still doubts about his ability or willingness to protect the
government’s interests as his own. Because protection of the national interest is
paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the
government.8
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
 Subparagraph 1.a - 1.p: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a - 2.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
