 
1 
 
 
                                                     
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-05158 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns arising from her 
relationship and contacts with France and French citizens. She failed to mitigate the 
foreign preference security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her security clearance application on May 9, 2007 
(Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP)) (GE 1). On July 14, 
2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to her.1 The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign 
 
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended, 
modified, and revised (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                          
Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence).2 The SOR detailed reasons why 
DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on August 8, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on August 26, 
2008. DOHA issued the notice of hearing on September 8, 2008. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled on October 2, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6, which were admitted without objection (Tr. 21). Applicant testified on her own 
behalf, and presented exhibits (AE) 1 through 11, which were admitted without objection 
(Tr. 32). DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on October 10, 2008.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 On October 23, 2008, I called a post-hearing telephone conference call. Present 
during the telephonic conference were Applicant and Department Counsel. The 
purposes of the conference call were: (1) Make Applicant aware of the security 
concerns raised by her possession of a French identification card; (2) Ascertain 
Applicant’s intentions with respect to her French identification card. Applicant promised 
to never use her French identification card to travel again. During the conference call, 
she stated she was not willing to surrender her French identification card because that 
would be equivalent to surrendering her French citizenship.  
 
 On October 27, 2008, I issued an Order summarizing my recollection of the 
conference call. Department Counsel and Applicant were served with a copy of the 
Order and allowed five days, from the date of the order, to submit comments. The Order 
and the parties’ comments are attached to the record as Appellate Exhibit 1 (Order), 
Appellate Exhibit 2 (Department Counsel’s comments, received October 30, 2008); 
Appellate Exhibit 3 (1st Applicant’s comment - a one-page document faxed to me on 
November 1, 2008, dated October 30, 2008); and Appellate Exhibit 4 (Applicant’s 2nd 
comment – a one-page document, dated October 31, 2008, faxed to me on November 
3, 2008). All submissions were considered in my decision. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer, Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations. She explained her 
actions were motivated by practical considerations and denied her actions 
 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
2  On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, modified and revised. 
 
 
3 
 
 
demonstrated any preference for France over the United States. Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of all evidence of record, 
I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 22-year-old research analyst working for a defense contractor. She 
was born in France to a U.S. born father and a French mother. She is a citizen of both 
the United States and France. She grew up and was educated in France. While in 
France, she enjoyed all the privileges and rights of a French citizen. She has never 
been married and has no children. She attended an international high school in France 
to cultivate and nurture her American identity (Tr. 37). After high school, she was 
qualified to attend one of France’s most prestigious universities free of charge. Instead, 
she chose to attend a prestigious U.S. university at her own expense. 
 
Applicant elected to attend a U.S. university because of her attachment to the 
United States, and her belief in the United States’ strength, values, and its education 
system (Tr. 38). In August 2008, she received a Bachelor’s degree in International 
Relations (Tr. 6, 80). While studying in the United States from August 2004 to August 
2008, Applicant travelled to France every summer and fall vacations to visit her parents, 
relatives, and friends. During the 2005 summer vacation, she worked in France for a 
French gourmet food company. In the summer of 2006, she worked for what was then 
the French branch of a U.S. company (Tr. 39, AE 4). During the summer of 2007, she 
worked for a government contractor who detailed her to work for a U.S. government 
agency (AE 5).  
 
From January to May 2008, she worked conducting sensitive research for a 
government contractor. Her employer considered Applicant a proficient and reliable 
employee who could be trusted with important projects. She never misused her access 
to sensitive information (AE 7). After college, Applicant was hired as a full-time 
employee by a U.S. government contractor. She is considered a trusted and valuable 
employee because of her job performance and her knowledge and familiarity with 
several foreign languages and cultures (Tr. 41). 
 
Applicant’s maternal grandmother was raised in the United States and spoke 
English to Applicant’s mother as a child. She still communicates with Applicant in 
English. Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of France. She lived three years in 
the United States as a legal resident alien. In 1976, she married Applicant’s father in the 
United States (Tr. 43). Applicant’s mother is a professor at a French institution. 
Applicant’s mother maintains strong ties with her extended family members in the 
United States. While growing up in France, Applicant frequently travelled to the United 
States, to visit her parent’s family members living in the United States (Tr. 85). 
 
Applicant’s father was born in the United States. He has lived in France for over 
20 years and works as a professor at both a prestigious French institute and a school of 
business (Tr. 44, 68). He never applied for French citizenship, cannot vote in French 
elections, and votes in U.S. elections. Since her arrival to the United States in August 
2004, Applicant has maintained frequent contact with her parents. Her parents call her 
 
4 
 
 
twice a week and they exchange e-mails two to three times a week (Tr. 64). Applicant 
has two uncles, two aunts, a grandmother, numerous extended family members, and 
high school friends who are residents and citizens of France. She has infrequent 
contact when them, visiting them when she travels to France (Tr. 62-63, 87). She last 
traveled to France to visit her parents in March and June 2008 (Tr. 76).  
 
As of the day of the hearing, Applicant had a French bank account with an 
approximate value of $1,200 (Tr. 41). Her father opened the bank account for her when 
she was a minor (Tr. 62, 72). She continues to use the bank account for practical 
reasons, i.e., to access money when she is in France while avoiding paying bank fees. 
She funded the account with money given to her by her parents and grandparents. She 
intends to close the bank account when it runs out of money (Tr. 72). 
 
In December 2006, at age 20, Applicant applied for her first French passport (Tr. 
51-55). Prior to December 2006, she only possessed and used her U.S. passport. She 
explained she applied for the French passport for practical reasons, and not because 
she has a preference for France over the United States (Tr. 35). As part of her U.S. 
university’s curriculum, she participated in a student exchange program with another 
foreign country. While preparing for the trip, she realized her U.S. passport would expire 
while she was abroad. Knowing she would have to surrender her U.S. passport to have 
it renewed, and that it would take approximately one month for her to receive the new 
U.S. passport, Applicant applied for a French passport. She received her French 
passport in March 2007. She used her French passport for a period of approximately 18 
months. During that time, she used her French passport to travel to Israel, Jordan, and 
to travel in and out of France from other European countries. On June 23, 2008, 
Applicant surrendered her French passport to her company’s security officer because of 
the security clearance concerns it raised (AE 2). 
 
Between August 2004 and the day of her hearing, Applicant used the French 
health care system because it was less expensive than the American health care 
system. She used the French health care system (her family doctors) while visiting her 
parents in France during her fall and summer vacations (Tr. 34, 60). The last time she 
used the French health care system was June 2008 (Tr. 74).  
 
Applicant voted in the 2007 French presidential elections and in the 2008 French 
local elections (Tr. 56). She voted in French elections for several reasons: her parents 
live in France and they are affected by French government’s policies; she believes that 
the political orientation and foreign policy agenda of a French president carries 
repercussions on world politics; and she considers important to her what happens in 
France (Tr. 65, GE 3 at item 14). To register and to vote in France, and to use the 
French health care system, Applicant had to establish her French citizenship by 
presenting her French identification card.  
 
The French identification card was issued to Applicant by the French government 
as proof of her French citizenship. As of the hearing day, Applicant was in possession of 
a valid French identification card (Tr. 56). She has used her French identification card to 
 
5 
 
 
                                                     
travel in and out of France, as well as to travel in and out of other European countries 
(Tr. 57-59). At her hearing, Applicant testified she intended to continue using her French 
identification card in her future trips to visit her family in France (Tr. 59).  
 
On October 23, 2008, I called a post-hearing telephone conference call.3 Present 
during the telephonic conference were Applicant and Department Counsel. The 
purposes of the conference call were to make Applicant aware of the security concerns 
raised by her possession of a French identification card, and to ascertain her intentions 
with respect to her French identification card. During the conference call, Applicant 
promised to never use her French identification card as a travel document again. She 
indicated she was not willing to surrender her French identification card because that 
would be equivalent to surrendering her French citizenship.4 At the time, she did not 
consider it to be practical to surrender her French identification card, because she will 
need to use it in her future travels to France to visit her parents (Tr. 59).5  
 
France is one of the United States’ oldest allies and is one of the world’s premier 
democracies. France and the United States share common values and have parallel 
policies on most political, economic, and security issues.6 Relations between the United 
States and France are active and friendly. Differences are discussed frankly and have 
not generally been allowed to impair the pattern of close cooperation that characterizes 
relations between the two countries. France has significantly increased participation in 
NATO’s military wing in recent years. Although France opposed the U.S. invasion of 
Iraq, France has 2,200 soldiers serving in Afghanistan, and assisted in assembling $21 
billion in pledges for economic assistance to Afghanistan. France is a close ally of the 
United States in the war on terrorism.  
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.7 
3  See Appellate Exhibits 1-4. 
 
4  In her October 30, 2008 comments (Appellate Exhibit 3) to my Order, Applicant promised never 
to use her French identification card as a travel document again, and stated practical reasons for her to 
keep the French identification card. In her October 31, 2008 comments (Appellate Exhibit 4), Applicant 
stated her willingness to surrender her French identification card. She indicated she had conferred with 
the French Embassy in the United States and was informed that by surrendering her French identification 
card she would not be renouncing her French citizenship, but renouncing her ability to exercise her rights 
as a French citizen. 
 
5  Id. 
 
6  Adjudication of security concerns under Guideline B require the consideration of the foreign 
country involved and its relationship with the United States (AG ¶ 6). The source the facts in this 
paragraph is the U.S. Department of State, Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs August 2008, 
“Background Note: France,” available at http://www.state.gov. I marked the document Appellate Exhibit 5. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                          
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”8 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
7  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
8  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
7 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under Guideline C the government’s concern is that “[w]hen an individual acts in 
such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then 
he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the 
interests of the United States.” AG ¶ 9. 
 
 Applicant was born in France to a French mother and a native born U.S. father. 
She is a dual citizen of the United States and France. She was raised and educated in 
France. Up to her hearing date, Applicant has enjoyed all the privileges and rights of 
French citizens. Applicant’s possession and use of a French passport in preference of 
her U.S. passport, as well as her use of the French education, healthcare, and banking 
system shows she is exercising her French citizenship and preference for France. She 
worked in France, voted in French elections, and retained a French identification card, 
all constituting an exercise of French citizenship and raising security concerns under 
Guideline C.  
 
 At her hearing, during the October 23, 2008 conference call, and in her October 
30, 2008 comments, Applicant declined to surrender her French identification card 
because she believed that would be tantamount to renouncing her French citizenship. In 
her October 31, 2008 comments, she indicated: “I would in fact be willing to surrender 
it.” However, Applicant provided no evidence she had surrendered her French 
identification card. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior raises security concerns under foreign preference 
disqualifying condition AG 10(a): “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign 
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes . . . (1): possession of a current foreign passport . . ., (3) 
accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits, and 
(7) voting in a foreign election.” 
 
 In 2004, at age 18, she travelled to the United States to attend college and since 
then she has made the United States her home. She also has worked for U.S. 
government contractors. All of Applicant’s financial and economic ties (except for a 
small French bank account) are in the United States. She has no other financial, 
economic, or proprietary interests in any foreign country. Applicant averred all her 
actions (requesting and using a French passport, holding a French bank account, her 
use of the French healthcare system, voting in France, and keeping her French 
identification card) were motivated by practical reasons and do not reflect a preference 
for France over the United States. She surrendered her French passport to her security 
officer on June 23, 2008. 
 
8 
 
 
 
 These facts warrant partial application of foreign preference mitigating conditions 
AG ¶¶ 11(a): “dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a foreign 
country:” 11(c): “exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred . . . when the individual was a minor;” and 11(e): “the passport has been 
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.”  
 
 Notwithstanding, these mitigating conditions do not fully apply. Applicant’s 
security concerns were raised by her exercise of her French citizenship after she 
became an adult. Applicant requested and used a French passport in preference to her 
U.S. passport in 2006. She surrendered her French passport and that mitigated the 
passport specific issues. However, Applicant continues to exercise her French 
citizenship. As of October 2008, she still had a French bank account and possessed a 
valid French identification card. In 2008, she used the French healthcare system and 
voted in French elections. Applicant’s French identification card allows her to travel in 
and out of France, and other European countries. Considering the record as a whole, 
Applicant’s continued exercise of her French citizenship fails to mitigate the foreign 
preference security concerns. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the government’s concern is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 6.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
9 
 
 
                                                     
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.9 Applicant has frequent contacts and a close 
relationship of affection and/or obligation with her parents and grandmother who are 
citizens and residents of France. The closeness of the relationship is shown by 
Applicant’s frequent e-mail, telephone contacts, and trips to France. This contact 
creates a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because there is always the 
possibility that French agents or terrorists may exploit the opportunity to obtain 
information about the United States. Her connection to her parents also creates a 
potential conflict of interest because her relationships are sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about her desire to help them by providing sensitive or classified 
information.  
 
  The government produced substantial evidence raising these two potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the government. 
 
  One Foreign Influence Mitigating Condition under AG ¶ 8 is applicable to these 
disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S. 
 
I do not believe Applicant’s close relationships create a heightened risk of foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation because the nature of the relations between the 
United States and France (active and friendly). France and the United States share 
common values and have parallel policies on most political, economic, and security 
issues. France is considered one of our oldest allies, and its government does not have 
a history of abusing or exploiting their citizens or U.S. citizens. 
 
Since 2004, Applicant has made the United States her home. She attended an 
American university and has worked hard for defense contractors for approximately two 
years. All of Applicant’s financial and economic ties (except for a small French bank 
9  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
10 
 
 
account) are in the United States. She surrendered her French passport. She has 
promised to use her skill and abilities to protect and promote United States’ interests.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
Applicant is 22 years old and has only lived in the United States four years. She 
credibly asserted her desire to help protect and promote the United States interests. 
Applicant lived in France because she was a minor under the control of her parents. 
She attended an international high school and spoke English at home with her parents 
and grandmother, who provided her with a strong American influence. When she turned 
18 in 2004, she moved to the United States and has lived in the United States 
thereafter.  
 
In a short period, she has established herself in the United States. She has 
worked hard for government contractors earning their trust. There is no evidence she 
has ever taken any action which could cause potential harm to the United States, or that 
she lacks honesty and integrity. Her family is not likely to be vulnerable to coercion or 
exploitation by a foreign power or terrorist organizations in France. 
 
Considering the evidence as a whole, numerous circumstances weigh against 
Applicant in the whole person analysis. Applicant’s security concerns were raised by her 
exercise of her French citizenship after emancipation. Applicant requested and used a 
French passport in preference to her U.S. passport in 2006. As of October 2008, she 
still had a French bank account and possesses a valid French identification card. In 
2008, she used the French healthcare system and voted in French elections. Applicant 
received credit for surrendering her French passport. However, she possesses a valid 
French identification card that allows her to travel in and out of France, and other 
European countries. Although she is willing to surrender her French identification card, 
 
11 
 
 
Applicant presented no evidence she surrendered it. Her exercise of her French 
citizenship creates doubt as to whether she would have a preference for France over 
the United States. 
 
I considered the longstanding, active and friendly relationship between France 
and the United States, and that both countries share common values, and have parallel 
policies on most political, economic, and security issues. Notwithstanding, a friendly 
relationship is not determinative. Friendly countries may have profound disagreements 
with the United States or have engaged in espionage against the United States 
especially in economic, scientific, military, and technical fields. Even friendly countries 
can attempt to gain unauthorized access to classified information. ISCR Case No. 08-
0592 (App. Bd. May 4, 1999). Nothing in Guidelines B or C requires that the foreign 
country in question have interests that are inimical to the interests of the United States. 
ISCR Case No. 97-0699 (App. Bd. Nov. 24, 1998). 
 
 “Because of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong 
presumption against granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . .  it 
is deemed best to err on the side of the government’s compelling interest in security by 
denying or revoking [a] clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990).  
 
On balance, after weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the 
facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude she has 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence, but failed to mitigate the 
foreign preference security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and    Against Applicant 
 1.d - 1.f: 
 
 Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.h:    For Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
