                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-01103 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Juliet Boyd, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 28, 2007, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On April 18, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines G, H, and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 24, 2008. He answered the 
SOR in writing on May 7, 2008, and requested a hearing before an Administrative 
Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 20, 2008, and I received 
the case assignment on June 3, 2008. The case was reassigned from another 
administrative judge due to caseload considerations.  DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
on June 10, 2008, setting the hearing for July 3, 2008.  Applicant retained counsel who 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
entered her appearance on June 24, 2008, and requested a continuance.  I granted the 
continuance, and rescheduled the hearing to July 21, 2008.  An Amended Notice of 
Hearing was sent on June 26, 2008.  I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 21, 
2008. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received without 
objection. Applicant testified, offered the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted 
Exhibits A through E, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on July 30, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by deleting ¶ 3.a, alleging 
Applicant used marijuana after obtaining a security clearance in 1996. (Tr. 7, 8.)   
Department Counsel also moved to amend the SOR in ¶ 1.f, by deleting the word 
“drug,” and inserting in its place the word “alcohol.”  Applicant had no objection to these 
amendments, and I granted the motion to make these two changes in the SOR. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated May 7, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in all allegations in the SOR, except in ¶¶ 2.a.1, and 2.a.2, which he denied. 
He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old, and married with three children. His stepson died in 
June 2007.  His wife had a stroke in November 2006, from which she is recovering.  He 
works for a defense contractor in the engineering field.  He started work for this 
employer 23 years ago in 1985.  Applicant has had a security clearance since 1985, 
and has not had any security violations in that time. (Tr. 50-56, 72, 92, 93) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor for the past 10 years testified on his behalf.  The 
supervisor stated Applicant has a good reputation for truthfulness, and is trustworthy.  
He considers Applicant to be a man of integrity, who is a conscientious worker and 
follows the company rules and procedures.  Applicant did tell him about his alcohol 
related arrests in 2006 and 2007.  He also knew about the illegal substance arrests 
because Applicant told him at the time they occurred.  He rearranged Applicant’s work 
schedule so Applicant could go to treatment sessions. (Tr. 20-35) 
 
 A co-worker of Applicant testified next on his behalf.  He has known Applicant 
since 1986.  He considers Applicant very diligent in his work ethic and practices.  The 
co-worker never saw Applicant intoxicated at work, or arrive at work under the influence 
of alcohol.  He is aware of Applicant’s 2006 and 2007 arrests, his wife’s stroke, and his 
stepson’s death.  The witness also knew Applicant went to treatment for alcohol. (Tr. 
37-48) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant submitted his employee evaluations from 1995 to 2007.  His 
evaluations are all high ranking, often in the “exceeds performance requirements” to 
“outstanding performance.”  His 2007 evaluation ranking shows a decrease from the 3 
ranking (“exceeds performance requirements”) to a 2.8 ranking, which is a high “meets 
performance requirements” up to the “exceeds performance requirements” ranking.  
Applicant also submitted a written character reference from a co-worker on the night 
shift with him for the past 20 years.  The reference cites Applicant’s experience and 
abilities to perform difficult tasks quickly and efficiently.  He also is determined and 
dedicated to achieving the goals and objectives given him by his supervisors.  Applicant 
also has shown integrity and high ethical standards.  Applicant also submitted copies of 
several incentive awards he earned from his company over the past few years. (Tr. 65, 
66; Exhibits A, D, and E)  
 
 Applicant consumed alcohol from 1980, when he was in high school, to May 
2008.  At times during those 28 years, he would consume alcohol to excess and 
intoxication.  He drank beer with friends, usually a six pack, over three hours.  It has 
been one year since he drank that quantity. He abstained in 1992 for about six weeks.  
He is currently abstaining from alcohol consumption.  Applicant has four alcohol-related 
arrests.  First, he was arrested on March 23, 1998, on charges of transportation or 
possession of alcohol by an auto operator.  He pled guilty on April 9, 1998, and paid a 
fine of $75.  Next, Applicant was arrested on August 4, 2003, on charges of transporting 
alcohol by an auto driver.  On October 10, 2003, the charges were dismissed.  His third 
arrest was on July 27, 2006, on charges of transportation of alcohol by an auto driver.  
The fourth arrest was on January 11, 2007, on charges of driving while under the 
influence (DUI), driving under the influence of alcohol with a blood alcohol content 
(BAC) of .08, operating an uninsured motor vehicle, and improper lane usage.  On July 
9, 2007, he pled guilty to the DUI charge, and was sentenced to one year supervision, 
ordered to attend a DUI school, and fined $2,051.00.  Applicant remains on court 
supervision until July 8, 2009.  (Tr. 56, 62, 73-81, 90, 91; Exhibits 2, 3)   
 
 Since November 2007, Applicant has attended alcohol education, counseling and 
treatment with a service provider.  This program was part of the court order placing him 
on supervision.  He underwent 10 hours of risk education, and 40 hours of individual 
and group therapy counseling with the same service provider.  The court ordered only 
20 hours of counseling.  The treatment portion of the program showed Applicant that he 
should not use alcohol as a reward for his good job performance.  He has replaced 
alcohol with family activities, such as coaching his son’s baseball team and other 
actions.  He joined Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), and has a sponsor.  This program 
includes substance abuse counseling, including drug abuse.  The documents submitted 
diagnoses Applicant with alcoholism, and that he is in the process of “finishing all 
recommendations”.  (Tr. 54-56, 59, 60, 64, 79, 80, 81, 90; Exhibits 2, B and C) 
 
 Applicant used alcohol as a reward for his hard work, and to relieve stress.  The 
stress he attributed to his wife’s 2006 stroke, and the death in 2007 of her son.  
Applicant felt he was under a lot of stress in 2006 and 2007.  His wife was upset with his 
 
4 
 
 
behavior and threatened to divorce him in 2000.  Applicant did not drink alcohol at 
home, but would go out of his home to consume it.  (Tr. 56, 57, 71, 95, 98, 107) 
 
 Applicant used marijuana on a monthly basis from his senior year in high school, 
in 1980.  This was about the same time he started consuming alcohol.  He used it after 
he was divorced from his first wife in 1989 until about 1995.  He used marijuana alone, 
and monthly or bi-weekly in that time period.  He last used marijuana on March 25, 
2007, as he stated under cross-examination at the hearing and in the interrogatories 
submitted by the Government, which he answered with the March 2007 admission.  
Applicant stated once during the hearing he last used it in January 2007.  Applicant 
used cocaine once in September 1996.  He used the marijuana and cocaine while 
having a security clearance from August 1996 onward to 2007.  He purchased the 
marijuana for his personal use only from dealers.  In September 1996, Applicant was 
arrested on charges of possession of a controlled substance, possession of marijuana, 
and possession of drug paraphernalia. No disposition of this arrest is known.  Applicant 
was again arrested on July 27, 2006, on a charge of marijuana possession.  In August 
2007, Applicant pled guilty and sentenced to two years of probation, ordered to perform 
five days of community service, and fined $750.  He continues on probation for this 
offense until September 2009.  Applicant was again arrested for possession of 
marijuana on March 6, 2007, when going to court on the 2006 arrest.  He had marijuana 
in his coat pocket as he was going through the court security system.  Applicant 
received three months probation in June 2007 upon his conviction for this offense.  His 
treatment program includes substance abuse counseling to address his marijuana use. 
(Tr. 60-64, 82-89, 92, 95, 99; Exhibits 2, B and C) 
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) on March 28, 2007.  
Responding to Question 23(c), “Are there currently any charges pending against you for 
any criminal offense?”, Applicant answered by disclosing his January 2007 DUI offense, 
but not disclosing his July 27, 2006, arrest for marijuana and his March 3, 2007, 
marijuana arrest.  In answering Question 23(d), “Have you ever been charged with or 
convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol and drugs?”, Applicant disclosed only his 
January 2007 DUI offense, not disclosing his September 1996, arrest for marijuana 
possession, his March 2007 marijuana arrest, and his March 1998, August 2003, and 
July 2006, alcohol-related arrests.  Next, he answered Question 24(a), “Since the age of 
16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled 
substance, including marijuana and other controlled substances?”, by stating, “Yes” and 
admitting he used marijuana two times in August 2006, failing to disclose that he used 
marijuana at least four other times since January 2005.  Finally, Applicant failed to  
disclose on his previous July 3, 1996, SCA that he had used marijuana at least monthly 
or bi-weekly between 1989 and 1995 in response to Question 27, “Since the age of 16 
or in the last 7 years, which ever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled 
substance, for example, marijuana, etc.”  Applicant admitted he deliberately failed to 
disclose this information on both SCAs because he was embarrassed and in a “state of 
denial.”  He did not disclose this information to a Government investigator before being 
confronted with it. (Tr. 68, 69, 89, 96; Exhibits 1 and 4) 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying.  The following two conditions apply in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and, 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
 Applicant consumed alcohol from high school until May 2008. He drank to excess 
numerous times during those 28 years.  Police authorities arrested him four times for 
various offenses, including possession of alcohol as a driver in 1998, 2003, and 2006, 
and then in 2007 for DUI, driving an uninsured motor vehicle, and improper lane usage.  
The severity of his series of actions while driving while consuming alcohol or with 
alcohol in the passenger compartment, a violation of law, seemed to have been 
increasing over time. He also used alcohol outside his house, to avoid displaying his 
consumption in front of his family.  That desire to use alcohol outside his home led to his 
driving arrests related to alcohol use. He remains on supervision for his most recent DUI 
conviction until 2009. 
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
alcohol consumption, only one of which may have application: 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser) 
 
 Applicant acknowledges he has an alcohol problem, that he relied on alcohol as 
a reward for his hard work at his corporate employer, and that he should use other 
rewards in his life.  He has recently turned to family activities as a substitute for alcohol.  
But, despite his long history of alcohol abuse and problems, he never sought any 
counseling or treatment until forced to do so by the court as part of his DUI conviction 
 
7 
 
 
sentencing. His period of abstinence is only two months, too short in comparison to 28 
years of irresponsible alcohol abuse.  His evaluator states Applicant has alcoholism, 
and that he is only recently completing the recommendations made by the evaluator, 
including participation in AA for the past two months.  Therefore, it is too early to 
determine if Applicant has established a firm pattern of abstinence. This mitigating 
condition has very limited application.   
  
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed 
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances; and 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Three are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and, 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant also has a 28-year history of marijuana use, during which time he 
purchased it from drug dealers.  He possessed and used it.  He was arrested in a state 
courthouse while going to court on a 2006 marijuana arrest because he had marijuana 
in his coat pocket.  He used marijuana continuously in some pattern over 28 years, and 
cocaine once in 1996, all while holding a security clearance.  He knew using controlled 
substances was a violation of the regulations pertaining to holding a security clearance. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
drug involvement, only one of which may be potentially applicable: 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant is in a court-ordered treatment program resulting from his DUI arrest 
and conviction. His exhibits do not address the drug treatment component of his 
program.  They only address his alcoholism and the recommendations for that issue.  
The court apparently did not prescribe a drug treatment program.  There is insufficient 
evidence that he has satisfactorily completed a prescribed drug treatment program or 
favorable diagnosis by a qualified medical professional.  This mitigating condition has 
no applicability. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying.  These three conditions have applicability: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
9 
 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and, 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant admitted deliberately failing to disclose on his March 2007 SCA his 
March 2007 marijuana possession, his 1996 marijuana possession, and the alcohol-
related arrests in 1998, 2003, and 2006, because he was embarrassed and in a state of 
denial.  He did not correct the information before being confronted with it by a 
government investigator.  His conduct while having a security clearance created a 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress because, if disclosed, his marijuana 
use would affect his professional standing.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns.  These two 
conditions may have some applicability: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
and, 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged his drug use only after the court-ordered DUI treatment 
program.  There is no independent professional verification of his abstinence from 28 
years of marijuana use, albeit his assertions of periodic times over the course of those 
28 years.   His use of family activities to replace his marijuana use is of such short 
duration and lacking in support from his family, such that it is not persuasive.  He failed 
to provide sufficient evidence of said mitigating conditions to overcome his admissions 
that he deliberately falsified his answers on his drug and alcohol arrests and use on his 
SCA in 1996 and 2007.   
   
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
 
10 
 
 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is obviously a good 
worker and is well regarded by his supervisors and co-workers.  He tries to be a good 
father.  But his overall 28-year history of alcohol and drug use, while holding a security 
clearance, shows he places his personal comfort over the Government requirements 
regarding classified information. There is a potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, 
or duress because of his arrests and use of alcohol and marijuana.  While he told his 
supervisor recently of his usage of these substances, the duration of that use is longer 
and of more serious concern.  The overriding consideration in this case is that Applicant 
chose to use marijuana while holding a security clearance.  He also was involved in 
multiple alcohol-related driving arrests, while holding a security clearance.  This conduct 
demonstrates that Applicant is not trustworthy, has questionable judgment, and violates 
laws and rules for his own comfort.  His drinking and marijuana use away from his 
family also shows intent to hide it from those closest to him, and if he would hide it from 
them, he certainly would hide it from his employer and Government.  His recent 
disclosures came only after being confronted with his history by an investigator. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his alcohol 
consumption, drug involvement, and personal conduct.  I also conclude the “whole 
person” concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a to 1.f:           Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a to 2.h:  Against Applicant 
 
11 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 3.b to 3.e:  Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
