                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-00050
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
November 19, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing,
(e-QIP) on September 20, 2007.  On May 29, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guidelines H and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 25, 2008, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to the undersigned
Administrative Judge on September 23, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on
September 30, 2008, scheduling the hearing for October 29, 2008.  The Government
offered two exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which were received
without objection. Applicant offered three exhibits, referred to Applicant’s Exhibits A
through C and testified on his own behalf.  The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was
received on November 10, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 58 years old and has a Bachelors of Science Degree in
Aeronautical Engineering.  He is employed by a defense contractor and holds dual
positions as a Deputy Chief Engineering and Air Frame Chief Engineer, and is applying
for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
The Applicant has been employed in the defense industry since 1973.  He has
worked for the same defense contractor, and has held a security clearance for the past
thirty-five years.  Although he was aware of the illegality of marijuana and that his
company policy and DoD prohibits its use, he began using marijuana in 1996, and
continued to use it on an occasional basis, at times, two to three times per year until
2007.  His employer is unaware of his marijuana use.          
Applicant explained that he started using marijuana in the mid 90's when he was
going through a difficult period in his life; he separated from his wife, and they
eventually divorced.  During this period, he re-entered the singles scene and associated
with individuals who introduced him to marijuana use.  Most of the time, he used it at
social events with his friends, even though he stated that he did not really enjoy it.  His
most recent use of marijuana, however, occurred in his home, when old friends came to
visit and offered it to him.     
In November 2007, the Applicant met with an investigator from the Department of
Defense, and stated that he intended to use marijuana in the future and did not see
anything wrong with its use.  (Government Exhibit 2).  In his answer to the Statement of
Reasons, he stated, “I overstated what I meant.  A better choice of words would have
been that I could never say that I would never use marijuana again.  I don’t’ plan on
using it again, but one never knows.”  Now, he indicates that he still did not properly
articulate his intent.  (Tr. p. 42).  He states that he does not plan on using marijuana in
the future, as he now has a different circle of friends.  (Tr. p. 44).     
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he intentionally falsified material aspects of
her personal background during the clearance screening process.
The Government amended the SOR at the hearing to include Guideline E and
the following allegation:  The Applicant intentionally falsified his Electronic Questionnaire
for Investigations Processing when he answered question 24(b).  Question 24 (b)
asked, “Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance while employed as a law
enforcement officer, prosecutor or court official, while possessing a security clearance,
while in a position directly or immediately affecting the public safety?”  (Tr. pp. 50 -51).
The Applicant answered, “NO”.  (Government Exhibit 1).
This was a false answer.  Applicant testified that he read the question incorrectly,
and that he should have answered, “YES”.  (Tr. p. 51).  I find that the Applicant did not
intentionally try to conceal his marijuana use from the Government on this
3
questionnaire.  It was the Applicant, himself, who informed the government of his illicit
drug use when interviewed two months later.  Therefore, I do not find that he
deliberately concealed this information on the application, but was only careless in
answering the question on the questionnaire.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant under
this guideline.      
Letters of recommendation from the Director of Engineering and Chief Engineer;
and the Chief Engineer and Engineering Business Area Director, both individuals who
are professional colleagues and friends of the Applicant, attest to the Applicant’s
valuable expertise and experience in aerospace engineering and technical design.
From their experiences with him, which include many social activities outside of work in
addition to daily contact at the company, he has always conducted himself ethically and
consistent with company values and behaviors and has consistently demonstrated
responsibility and the commitment to protect and safeguard classified information.  He is
said to be conscientious, trustworthy and strives to do what is right regardless of the
situation.  They consider him to be extremely logical and level headed.  He is well
respected and known as a top performer for the company.   (Applicant’s Exhibit B).
Applicant testified that he told them about his drug use.  (Tr. p. 30). 
Annual performance appraisals of the Applicant from 1997 through 2007 range
from “commendable” to “outstanding” in every category.  Written comments further
indicate that the Applicant has consistently performed in an outstanding manner.
(Applicant’s Exhibit A).
The Applicant regrets his marijuana use in the past and hopes to retain his
security clearance.  He enjoys his job, his colleagues, and being a mentor to the young
engineers.     
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24. The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
4
22.(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
None.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances.
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes.
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
5
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”                                              
      
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in drug abuse and/or dishonesty that demonstrates poor
judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has  engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence
indicates poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus
or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guideline H of the SOR.
The evidence shows that the Applicant used marijuana while holding a DoD
security clearance and when questioned about his future use of marijuana, found it
difficult to state that he would not use it in the future.  Although he now states that he
has no intentions of using it in the future, I am not certain that he will remain drug free.
He used marijuana knowing that it was prohibited by law and clearly prohibited by the
Department of Defense.  This demonstrates poor judgment and untrustworthiness.  The
Applicant is not currently eligible for a security clearance.  If he can continue to remain
6
drug free in the future, he may be eligible for a security clearance sometime in the
future, but not now.  His recent use of marijuana in 2007, absolutely prohibits a
favorable determination in this case.     
Under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions, 25(a) any drug
abuse, 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution or possession of drug paraphernalia, and 22(g) any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance apply.  None of the mitigating
conditions are applicable.  I find his past use of illegal drugs to be recent and of security
significance.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline H, Drug
Involvement. 
Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, as stated above, I find that the Applicant
did not deliberately falsify his security clearance application.  None of the disqualifying
conditions are applicable in this case.  Consequently, I find for the Applicant under
Guideline E, Personal Conduct.  
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is 58 years old, mature,
educated, intelligent, successful, well respected, and a long time employee of the
defense industry who has held a security clearance for thirty-five years.  He has used
marijuana, admittedly on an occasional basis, but during eleven of those thirty-five
years while holding a security clearance.  He last used marijuana in September 2007,
and now states that he has no intentions of using it in the future.  Under the particular
facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed
as a whole, support a whole person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations,
and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
classified information.  
This Applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and does meet the
eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find against
the Applicant under Guideline H (Drug Involvement).  Guideline E (Personal Conduct) is
found for the Applicant.     
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  Paragraph 2 is found for the
Applicant.                                                                                                                           
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
7
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: For the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
