                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-05590 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 25, 2007, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application 
(SF 86). On July 21, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 29, 2008.  He answered the 
SOR in writing on August 2, 2008. On August 27, 2008, Department Counsel submitted 
the Department=s written case.  A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to the Applicant. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.  Applicant received the file on 
September 15, 2008.  Applicant filed a Response to the FORM on September 22, 2008.  
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
I received the case assignment on September 24, 2008.  Based upon a review of the 
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated August 2, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual 
allegations in ¶ 1.b of the SOR. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 44 years old and married. He has one child. He has been employed 
by a defense contractor since May 2006.  Prior to then he held a variety of employment 
positions with defense contractors.  He was unemployed for several periods of time, 
starting with December 1999 to March 2000, March 2003 to January 2004, and April 
2004 to November 2004.  He does not appear to have a college degree or a 
professional degree.  His wife is also employed. (Item 1; Answer; Response) 
 
 Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy on February 4, 1999.  His debts were 
discharged on May 19, 1999.  Applicant lost several contractual employment positions, 
and could not pay his debts.  He sought legal advice about the various options he had 
to pay his debts.  After consultations, he decided to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  His case 
was a “no asset” case because there were no assets in the bankruptcy estate above the 
exemptions Applicant claimed under the state law.  Applicant’s total assets were listed 
as $46,225.  His total liabilities were $68,164.27, of which $56,700 was for his mobile 
home, and two vehicles he purchased.  He surrendered one vehicle and kept the mobile 
home and pickup truck (valued at $30,000 and $15,000, respectively).  The remaining 
$11,464.27 consisted of a $3,000 loan, two medical bills, five credit cards or department 
store charge accounts, a cable television bill, and an air conditioning repair bill.  
Applicant used his credit cards during periods of unemployment prior to filing 
bankruptcy to pay his debts.  His monthly income when he filed the bankruptcy was 
$2,258.45, including his wife’s income.   His monthly expenses were $2,429.87. As of 
May 11, 2000, the date of a statement Applicant gave to a Government investigator, he 
paid his current bills on time. (Items 2-6; Response) 
 
 Applicant owes $19,964 on an auto loan pertaining to a repossessed automobile.  
Applicant purchased a pickup truck in 1998, before he knew he would lose his job and 
might have to file bankruptcy.  He kept the truck and made the payments, reaffirming 
the debt from the bankruptcy.  Then, in 2000, when both he and his wife were 
employed, they purchased a Chevy Blazer, financed by the same company, which 
loaned Applicant the money to buy the pickup truck.  In 2003, Applicant and his wife 
were unemployed.  They withdrew money from his wife’s IRA account and paid off the 
loan on the 1999 pickup truck because they had paid on that loan longer and had more 
invested.  That payment resolution is shown on the credit reports of October 11, 2007, 
and September 1, 2008, in the file.  The monthly $600 payments on the Blazer could not 
be maintained, and the lender repossessed the vehicle.  The balance owed on the loan 
 
3 
 
 
is $19,964.  It is owed to another creditor who purchased the loan from the original 
lender.  Applicant denies owing this debt because the lender repossessed the vehicle 
and sold it.   Applicant claims in his Response to the FORM that the vehicle sold for 
$10,000, and they paid $18,000 on the vehicle when they possessed it.  He further 
claims he borrowed $20,000 to purchase the vehicle, and the amount sought by the 
creditor is nearly that amount, after Applicant has already paid them $18,000 plus the 
$10,000 realized from the sale, making the amount sought far greater than the original 
loaned amount plus the interest required under the loan agreement.  But Applicant did 
not submit his loan agreement for the Blazer as part of his Answer to the SOR or his 
Response to the FORM. This debt remains unpaid. (Items 4, 6, 7, 8; Answer; 
Response) 
 
 Applicant admits he owed $64 to a collection agency.  He paid that debt with a 
check dated September 16, 2008.  This debt resulted from a medical procedure.  
Applicant claims it was treatment for his wife’s burst appendix when they were both 
unemployed.  The debt dates from 2005, when the last payment was made.  (Items 2, 7, 
8; Answer; Response) 
 
 Applicant owed another collection agency $1,276 for a medical debt.  While the 
SOR alleges this amount, both credit reports in the file show only a $25 debt.  It was 
unpaid as of October 11, 2007, but the credit report of July 1, 2008, shows the debt was 
paid January 2008.  This debt is paid. (Items 2, 4, 7, 8; Answer; Response) 
 
 Applicant’s Response shows he paid other debts according to the repayment 
schedule or in full.  The credit reports attached to his Response contain the comments 
about his repayments on schedule. Those debts are not at issue in the SOR, but do 
show Applicant has paid debts in a timely manner.  He did borrow $9,890 on a signature 
loan in February 2007, to purchase a “4-wheeler” for his ten-year-old son and himself.  
He reduced the balance to $3,600 by September 16, 2008, and he contends this regular 
debt repayment shows his responsibility.  The other debts were credit cards and a 
computer purchase.  These items on Applicant’s credit report show zero balances. 
(Items 1, 2, 5, 6; Answer; Response)     
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
 
4 
 
 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
5 
 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated some delinquent debt that he was unable to 
pay for a period of time.  He also filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1999 to eliminate 
$68,000 in debt. After reaffirmations and exemptions under state law, Applicant actually 
eliminated about $22,000 in debt.  The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s 
financial worries arose between about 1998 and 2005. He accumulated two small 
delinquent debts subsequent to his bankruptcy discharge due to his wife=s medical 
issues and sporadic unemployment. His periods of unemployment led to the 
repossession of one of his vehicles in 1995.  These circumstances are no longer extant. 
He completed the bankruptcy nine years ago.  I find the behavior occurred under such 
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur, and it does not raise concerns about 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The evidence raises this 
potentially mitigating condition.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted above, some of 
the financial problems arose from his wife=s medical problems, including the medical 
bills.  Other financial problems resulted from the periods of unemployment for Applicant 
and his spouse. He acted responsibly in identifying and resolving these debts. I find this 
potentially mitigating condition is a factor for consideration in this case.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant received legal counseling about various repayment 
options in 1999 when he was unemployed, and chose to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  He 
was swiftly discharged in bankruptcy because he had no assets above the state law 
allowed exemptions.  Applicant resolved the two other small delinquent debts by 
payment in 2008. He is now more financially sound and prepared for future 
contingencies. I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Finally, AG ¶ 20(e), “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue” is potentially mitigating.  Applicant does not state it 
precisely in his Response that he has not paid the remaining debt of concern in the 
SOR, the $19,964 owed to a collector for a car loan, because he fulfilled the contract 
and does not want to unjustly enrich the creditor, which are valid legal arguments.  
Although he has not asserted these defenses through an attorney to the creditor 
through court action, he does not consider the debt valid because he borrowed $20,000 
on the car, paid $18,000 back under the loan agreement, and the car sale realized 
$10,000.  Applicant would have enhanced his presentation in writing if he had included 
the loan agreement and information about the sale price of the vehicle after 
repossession as part of his Response.  Nonetheless, his position is credible based on 
the other evidence he submitted.  The documented proof is the credit report showing 
the debt.  Applicant is in contact with the creditor, who wants Applicant to admit the 
debt, but he refuses to do so because he terminated the agreement, in his opinion, by 
surrendering the vehicle.  I conclude Applicant has a reasonable legal basis to dispute 
the debt.  He would be well advised to hire an attorney to resolve this debt by some 
compromise to remove it from his credit record. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant suffered economic losses 
because of unemployment at various times.  Applicant was an adult and married when 
these economic woes befell him.  He used a legal process, the Federal bankruptcy law, 
to eliminate about $22,000 in debt after keeping his mobile home and one car in 1999.  
He has shown he has not accumulated additional debt during the past nine years which 
he has not paid.  He did show he pays his debts, and that both he and his wife are now 
employed.  He manages his income within its limits.   
 
 
7 
 
 
 He has shown, however, that on his other debts and total financial picture, he 
has learned from his bankruptcy and past unemployment periods the need to establish 
and maintain good credit.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant is not a security 
risk or threat. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
