1
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of:                                              )
       )
       ) ISCR Case No. 08-01049
                 )
       )
Applicant for Security Clearance                    )
                        Appearances
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                        ________________
                        Decision
                       ________________
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude
that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by under the guidelines for
drug involvement and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance
is denied.
Applicant requested a security clearance by in submitting an Electronic Questionnaire
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) on December 6, 2006. Because of an administrative
Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 1
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply
to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1,
2006.
2
problem, he was required to re-submit it, which he did on February 21, 2007. After reviewing
the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that1
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request. 
On June 24, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which
specified the basis for its decision – security concerns addressed in the Directive under
Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct) of the Revised Adjudicative
Guidelines (AG).2
Applicant received the SOR on July 21, 2008. He signed his Answer on July 29,
2008, in which he admitted to the following SOR allegations: ¶¶ 1.b. through 1f under
Guideline H. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, which addresses the time frame of his marijuana use;
and 2.a, which alleges that he deliberately falsified information he provided on his security
clearance questionnaire. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge.
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 28, 2008, and the case
was assigned to me on September 3. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 1, 2008
and I convened the hearing as scheduled on October 21, 2008.
During the hearing, the government offered two exhibits, Government Exhibit (GE)
1 and 2, which were received without objection. Applicant testified, and offered one exhibit,
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was received without objection as well. I held the record
open to allow Applicant to submit an additional document. It was timely received, and
forwarded without objection by Department Counsel. The document was entered as AE B.
DOHA received the transcript on October 30, 2008, and the record closed on that day.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a thorough
review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the Statement of Reasons, and the record
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant, 54 years old, graduated high school and completed several college
courses (Tr. 5). He married in 1989, and divorced in 2006. He has one daughter who is 17
years of age. Applicant has worked for the same defense contractor for the past 36 years
3
(GE 1). His current position is Designer/Drafter. His first security clearance was granted in
1972, and he held it until approximately the mid-1980s (Tr. 27).
Applicant began using marijuana in 1971, while attending high school, at the age of
17 (Tr. 26). He used it “practically daily” (Tr 26), buying the drug from friends and other
people he knew (Tr. 48). Applicant describes his habit as “...a chronic habit. I freely admit
that. It was a serious habit.” (Tr. 26). Applicant was granted his first security clearance in
1972. It was discontinued for administrative reasons around 1985. During the 13 years that
he held his first security clearance, Applicant used marijuana daily (Tr. 27-29). Applicant
also admits that he had a “mental and physical dependency” on marijuana during the period
1993 to 2003. Given his long-standing marijuana use, Applicant decided not to re-apply for
a security clearance (Tr. 36).
In approximately 1992, Applicant was diagnosed with glaucoma (Tr. 63). Applicant
believes that marijuana temporarily reduces internal pressure on the eye, and at the time,
he considered this medical benefit justified using the drug. Since stopping his marijuana
use, he has discovered a medication that will accomplish the same effect (Tr. 31). He listed
his glaucoma diagnosis on his Security Clearance Application to explain why he continued
to use marijuana at such a mature age. Applicant testified that he would have used
marijuana regardless of whether he had glaucoma (Tr. 33-34). Applicant also used cocaine
a few times between May and June of 2002 (GE 1). 
Through his company’s Employee and Family Assistance Program, Applicant was
referred for drug treatment in 2003 (Tr. 59). From November 2003 until July 2004, Applicant
participated in and completed an intensive treatment program, involving 12 weeks of group
therapy, with four-hour sessions three times per week. The first 12 weeks were followed by
an 18-week period of one-hour sessions once per week. He did not use marijuana during
treatment, but did resume his daily use after completing the program. He continued using
until April 2006 (Tr. 41-42), when he stopped using marijuana. He relapsed and used it once
on December 31, 2006. He has not used marijuana since that date (Tr. 21).
Applicant used marijuana throughout his marriage. Although his wife was aware of
his use, he kept the habit hidden from his daughter for many years (Tr. 35). In 2006,
Applicant and his wife divorced. Because his wife worked nights, and their 15-year-old
daughter still required parental guidance, they agreed that it would best if he took custody
(Tr. 44). The realization that he would have primary custody, and the belief that he needed
to set a good example for his daughter, motivated him to end his marijuana use (Tr. 43).
Since that time, he has disclosed his drug history to his daughter (Tr. 49).
After  Applicant completed his Security Clearance Application on December 6, 2006,
his company closed for the holiday season (Tr. 22). When it re-opened, he completed his
finger-printing, but it was discovered that his Security Clearance Application and his
fingerprint record were not done within the necessary 30-day window. Therefore, he was
required to re-submit his application. In February 2007, Applicant rushed to re-sbumit the
document, re-entering the same information into the computer program that he had entered
the first time (Tr. 54). In between his two submissions, Applicant used marijuana once on
Directive. 6.3.
3 
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.5
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).6
4
December 31, 2006, after having abstained since the previous April. When he re-submitted
the second Application, he failed to update the question regarding drug use to add his last
use in December 2006. He always considered April 2006 as the date that he ended his
long-standing drug use (Tr. 23).
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, and
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised Adjudicative
Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the  “whole person” factors3
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines.
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.
In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require
consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline
H (drug involvement) and Guideline E (personal conduct).  
          A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether it
is clearly consistent with the national interest  for an Applicant to either receive or continue4
to have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. Additionally, the government must be able to
prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it then
falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no
one has a “right” to a security clearance, an Applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.5
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with
the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability
and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or his own. The
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable
doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.6
5
Analysis
Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual's reliability and
trustworthiness both because it may impair judgment and
because it raises questions about a person's ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
The facts raise three disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse) and AG
¶ 25(c) (illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase,
sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia) apply based on Applicant’s
purchase, possession and use of marijuana for more than 35 years. AG ¶ 25(g) (any illegal
drug use after being granted a security clearance) also applies. Applicant was granted his
first security clearance in 1972 and held it until approximately 1985. During the 13 years
that he held his first security clearance, Applicant used marijuana daily (Tr. 27-28).
Guideline H also provides four mitigating conditions, two of which are relevant here.
AG ¶ 26(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) cannot be applied. Applicant’s last
use of marijuana was slightly less than two years ago, which is not distant in time. When
combined with the fact that he used marijuana daily for more than three decades, I cannot
confidently predict that his current abstention will continue. 
AG ¶ 26(b) is also relevant:
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation
AG ¶ 26(b)(3) applies to some extent because Applicant has abstained from using
marijuana for almost two years. However, his recent avoidance of marijuana must be
weighed against more than 35 years of use which he himself characterizes as dependence
6
(Tr. 45). His long record of illegal drug use outweighs the comparatively short length of his
abstention.
Applicant’s signed statement (AE B) attesting that he will not use illegal drugs in the
future, under penalty of losing any security clearance granted to him, implicates AG ¶ 26
(b)(4). However, Applicant qualified his intent to abstain from using marijuana. In his signed
statement and in his testimony, he states that he will not use an illegal drug while holding
a security clearance; he did not state that he would abstain if he were not granted a
security clearance. The question remains open whether or not Applicant would engage in
illegal drug use if he does not obtain a clearance. Moreover, in his testimony, Applicant
stated that if marijuana use were legalized for the treatment of glaucoma, “I really cannot
categorically state here today that I would not take advantage of that.”(Tr. 63). His
statements, taken together, indicate an underlying desire to be able to return to marijuana
use. Applicant fails to demonstrate a complete commitment to avoiding marijuana. Given
these facts, AG ¶ 26 (b) (3) and (4) are insufficient to mitigate Applicant’s disqualifying
conduct.
Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness
and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is
any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the
security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with
the security clearance process.
The government alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose his December
2006 marijuana use, implicating AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities).
Applicant failed to list marijuana use on December 31, 2006, indicating on his
Security Clearance Application that his last use was in April 2006. He testified that he has
always considered April 2006 as the date that he stopped using marijuana. AG ¶ 17(c)
(the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or
it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) mitigates
Applicant’s omission of the December 2006 marijuana use. His failure to include the single
use of marijuana in December 2006 was infrequent, since no other material facts were
omitted. In fact, Applicant disclosed the most serious negative fact – his continuous
marijuana use over a period of 35 years– showing that he did not intend to hide relevant
7
information from the government. Nor did he try to minimize his drug use, even
going so far as to describe it as “chronic” in his security clearance application. Applicant
completed his re-submission in a hurry, and admits that he should have listed the
December use. But considering his disclosure of the extent and nature of his illegal drug
use, as well as his disclosure of other facts against his own interest, such as an arrest for
Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol and a brief use of cocaine, I find that Applicant’s
failure to list the additional use in December 2006 is mitigated because it was not
intentional.
Whole Person Analysis  
 
Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and all
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8)
the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance
must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the
guidelines and the whole person concept. Under each guideline, I considered the
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances
surrounding this case. 
Applicant voluntary decided to use an illegal drug for more than 35 years. He did
not discontinue his use until approximately two years ago, when he was a mature adult
of 52 years. Although it is commendable that he has abstained from using marijuana for
almost two years, Applicant’s past drug use has resulted in poor judgment and
untrustworthy behavior: he hid his illegal drug use from his daughter; he used marijuana
for 13 years while he held a security clearance; for the past 25 years, he avoided applying
for a security clearance because he preferred to use an illegal drug. Finally, his intent to
avoid future use is not unequivocal. His recent abstinence is insufficient to overcome his
extensive history of drug use, and his resulting untrustworthy behavior.
Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines.
8
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1, Guideline H Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f:: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied.
RITA C. O’BRIEN
Administrative Judge
