 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)             ISCR Case No. 08-03807 
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the
guideline for financial considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is
denied.
On November 9, 2007, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive
Positions (SF-86) to request a security clearance required as part of his employment
with a defense contractor (Item 5). After reviewing the results of the ensuing
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly1
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request. 
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included eight documents (Items 1 - 8) proffered in2
support of the government’s case.
2
On June 19, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR),
that specified the basis for its decision – security concerns addressed in the Directive
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG).
Applicant received the SOR (Item 1) on July 3, 2008. He signed his notarized
Answer on July 21 2008, in which he admitted to SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c. and 1d. He denied
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e. and 1.f. In his Answer, Applicant also requested a decision without a
hearing. 
On August 29, 2008, DOHA Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant
materials (FORM)  in support of the government’s preliminary decision. Applicant was2
given 30 days to file a response to the FORM, but did not reply. I received the case on
November 5, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the FORM, I
make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 54 years old and employed by a defense contractor. He served in the
U.S. Army from 1974 to 1977 (Item 5). He is married and has four sons, two of whom
serve in the military. He attended junior college from 1987 to 1990 and received an
associates degree (Item 5). After being steadily employed as an engineering systems
analyst from 1998 to 2003, Applicant was laid off. Although he was unemployed for six
months, he could not receive unemployment compensation because he was in a
“disability” status with his previous employer. He obtained employment at a temporary
agency from June 2004 to December 2005, followed by employment as an
engineer/administrator for approximately one and a half years, until October 2007. He
was then hired by a defense contractor (Item 5).
In his Interrogatory response dated May 23, 2008 (Item 6), Applicant listed his
gross monthly income as $5,356, or about $65,000 annually. When his net monthly
income of $3,856 and his wife’s net income of $800 are combined, Applicant’s total net
monthly income is $4,656. After paying his monthly expenses and debt payments, his
monthly net remainder is $1,458 (Item 6).
Applicant’s credit reports show that he has six debts that became delinquent
between 2005 and 2006 (Items 7 and 8). These debts, listed in the SOR, total $24,492.
His judgments in favor of Celink ($8,048) and Credit Union One ($8,079), along with the
 Directive. 6.3.3
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
3
debt owed to My Personal Credit Union ($8,144), represent the bulk of his delinquent
debt. Of the smaller debts, he denies only the $85 debt to Comcast Cable (Item 4).
Applicant admits the judgment to Celink (Item 4), which represents the default
judgment owed on a repossessed van. Applicant states the van was assigned to his ex-
wife in their divorce (Item 6). As to the debt owed to My Personal Credit Union, he
states in his Interrogatory response that is a credit card that was assigned to his wife in
their divorce agreement. However, in his Answer, he states that this debt is a duplicate
of the Celink debt (Item 4). He provided no documentation to support this contention. 
Applicant also states that he is not liable for the judgment owed to Credit Union
One, because his name was removed as a defendant in the case (Item 4). His evidence
is the court docket. Although the docket lists numerous court actions between April and
November 2006, none indicate that Applicant’s name was removed as a defendant.
Applicant’s 2007 and 2008 credit bureau reports show he is liable for this debt (Items 7
and 8). Although he states he is not responsible, he states that he made payments on
this debt and reduced the balance to $6,455 (Item 6). Applicant provided no evidence of
these payments. 
The evidence does not include a payment plan for the Celink debt. Applicant’s
Personal Financial Statement does not indicate payments being made on any of the
SOR debts (Item 6). Applicant did not state whether he has attended counseling.
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors3
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept.
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
Guideline F (financial considerations) at AG ¶ 18.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an Applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.5
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).6
4
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an Applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a5
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the
requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the government.6
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
Based on the evidence contained in the FORM, the disqualifying conditions AG
¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations) apply. The credit bureau reports show that Applicant‘s
debts became delinquent around 2005 and 2006, and they still appear on his 2008
reports (Items 6 and 7), showing he has a history of failing to meet his financial
obligations. Applicant denies allegation 1.f., a debt to Comcast Cable, for $85, which
became delinquent about 2005 (Item 7). Although it no longer appears on the 2008
credit bureau reports, Applicant offered no documentation showing it has been paid. 
Although it is not completely clear from the record why Applicant has failed to pay
his debts, he assigns responsibility to his ex-wife for the $16,000 owed to Celink and My
5
Personal Credit Union (Item 6). However, his claim is unsubstantiated, because
Applicant did not provide documentation showing which debts were assigned to each
party in the divorce.
The following conditions that can potentially mitigate security concerns are
relevant: AG ¶ 20: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due
debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate
the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
None of the relevant mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s failure to pay his
delinquencies did not occur in the distant past, as five of the six debts listed in the SOR
still appear in his May 2008 and August 2008 credit reports (Items 6 and 8, respectively)
(AG ¶ 20a). The record contains no evidence of financial counseling (AG ¶ 20c).
AG ¶ 20d appears to apply because Applicant claims he made payments on the
Credit Union One debt (Item 6) and intends to set up payment arrangements on the
Celink debt (Item 4). However, without evidence to support the Credit Union One
payments, and with only a promise of future payment on Celink, mitigation is not
available under AG ¶ 20d.
The record evidence shows that Applicant disputes his responsibility for the
debts owed to Celink Credit Union One, and My Personal Credit Union. He contends
that all three are his wife’s responsibility (Item 6). However, he provided no evidence to
support his contention and AG ¶ 20 (e) cannot be applied.
Moreover, the conflicting nature of Applicant’s statements undermine his
contention that he is not liable for the debts. Applicant shifts responsibility for the Celink
debt to his ex-wife (Item 6), but then later accepts his liability by claiming that he is
making arrangements to pay it (Item 4). He states that the My Personal Credit Union
debt is his wife’s responsibility, but later claims that it is a duplication of the Celink debt
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 7
6
(Item 4). Applicant claims that he is making payments on the Credit Union One debt
(Item 6), but in his Answer, he states that he has no responsibility for it because his
name has been removed from the judgment (Item 4). 
AG ¶ 20 (b) is relevant because the record shows that Applicant experienced
unemployment and a divorce, both of which can be conditions that are beyond an
Applicant’s control and may negatively affect finances. Applicant was laid off for
approximately six months at the end of 2003. He did not receive unemployment
compensation, but it appears that he did receive disability payments (Item 5). Without
further information, the extent to which this period of reduced income affected his
finances is unclear. It did occur more than four years ago, and the record indicates
Applicant has been employed since then. The effect of his divorce is also unclear.
Although Applicant blames his ex-wife for being financially irresponsible about
obligations assigned to her in the divorce (Item 6), the negative effect of the divorce on
Applicant’s finances cannot be deduced from the record. AG ¶ 20 (b) does not apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and
all the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant is 54 years old and presumed to be a mature, responsible adult. He
has accrued significant debt over the past several years. In response to the
government’s concerns about his delinquencies, he offered little in the way of mitigation
or resolution. Absent such information, the record presents no evidence sufficient to
overcome the government’s security concerns. A fair and common-sense assessment
of the available information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance
shows he has not satisfied the doubts about his ability or willingness to protect the
government’s interests. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in
these determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.7
Formal Findings
7
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is denied.
                             
______________________________________________
RITA C. O’BRIEN
Administrative Judge
