                                                              
 
1 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 08-04804 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concern because 
he did not present sufficient information about his efforts to pay or resolve his six 
delinquent debts, totaling about $15,500. Personal conduct security concerns are 
mitigated. Access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 29, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) (Item 5). 
On July 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) (Item 1) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised.1 The SOR alleges security concerns under 
 
1Revised Adjudicative Guidelines promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, apply to 
Applicant’s adjudication and other determinations made under the Directive and Department of Defense 
(DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended. 
 
2 
 
                                           
Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On August 1, 2008, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 2). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated September 5, 2008, was provided to 
him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.2 Applicant did not provide additional documents 
within the 30 days. On November 5, 2008, the case was assigned to me.    
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($324), 1.c ($486), 1.d 
($14,078), 1.e ($55), 1.f ($177), and 1.h ($554) and he denied responsibility for the 
debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($88) and 1.g ($33) (Item 2). He admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 
1.i, which indicated he had the resources make payments on his delinquent debts (Item 
2). He said payments on the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f were deferred until July, and 
he is seeking deferment of the payments on the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c (Item 2). He also 
explained that he was not paying his debts because he wanted the divorce court to 
decide the allocation of his marriage’s assets and liabilities. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 51 years old.3 He has worked for a federal contractor since October 
2003 as an over the road (OTR) truck driver. For the last 10 years all of his employment 
has been as a truck driver. He married in 1977, and divorced on May 14, 2007. His 
three children or stepchildren were born in 1978, 1981 and 1981. He is currently 
divorced. He served in the military from January to February 1976.4 He attended a 
vocational/ technical school and received a certificate in 1982. He has no police record. 
He has not used or trafficked in illegal drugs in the last seven years, and has never 
used illegal drugs while in a sensitive position. 
 
 
2Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated September 11, 2008, 
and Applicant’s receipt is signed and dated September 15, 2008. The DOHA transmittal letter informed 
Applicant that he had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to submit information. 
 
3Item 3 (Aug. 29, 2007 SF 86) is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless stated 
otherwise. 
 
4 In Section 19 of his SF 86, Applicant said he received a dishonorable discharge and explained, 
“The discharged (sic) was classified as dishonorable for 2 years. After the 2 years, it is now classified as 
Honorable.” Because a dishonorable discharge cannot be approved unless a general court-martial 
adjudges it as part of the sentence and Applicant denied being charged with any criminal offenses in 
Section 23, and there is no such automatic upgrade provision for punitive discharges, I will assume 
Applicant is mistaken about the characterization of his brief period of military service. 
 
3 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant admitted responsibility for six delinquent debts and denied 
responsibility for two debts (Item 2). The details of the six delinquent debts are outlined 
in the following table. 
 
SOR ¶ 
and Amount 
Credit Bureau Report
Sept. 12, 2007 
Credit Bureau Report 
June 24, 2008 
Source 
1.a--$324 
Indiv Acct  
Last activity on 
account in July 2003 
Delinquent since  
July 2003 
Items 5 & 6 
1.c--$486 
Joint Acct 
 
Not listed 90 days delinquent Item 6 
(Second 
Mortgage) 
1.d--$14,078 
Indiv Acct 
Delinquent since 
March 2006 
Delinquent since  
March 20065  
Items 5 & 6 
1.e--$55 Not listed Delinquent since  
March 2008 
Item 5 
1.f--$177 Not listed Delinquent since 
March 2008 
Item 5 
1.h--$554 
Indiv Acct 
Delinquent since 
July 2007 
Not listed Item 6 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement (PFS) lists a gross salary of $5,300 and 
a net salary of $4,500 (Item 4). His monthly expenses total of $1,590 included $690 for 
alimony/child support/daycare (Item 4). After deduction of his monthly expenses and 
debt payments from his monthly income, $892 remained (Item 4). His PFS showed the 
following debt and payment information: 
 
Account Type Debt Status Total Amount 
Owed 
Actual Monthly 
Payment 
Mortgage Not Listed $65,000 $700 
2nd Mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.c) Not Listed $23,000 $243 
Truck Payment Not Listed $14,000 $302 
Personal Loan Not Listed $13,000 $605 
Personal Loan Not Listed $1,700 $102 
Jewelry Debt Not Listed $400 $45 
Computer Debt Not Listed $500 $24 
Total  $117,600 $2,021 
 
Applicant admitted he had the means to resolve his debts. He said he had been 
advised not to pay the delinquent debts until his divorce court allocated responsibility for 
these debts (Item 2). He promised to pay the delinquent debts allocated to him stating, 
                                            
5 The only SOR debt delinquent over $1,000 is the $14,078 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. Applicant 
explained the SOR ¶ 1.d debt resulted from 2003 vehicle repossession (Item 6). On August 1, 2008, he 
said he wanted the divorce court judge to decide whether half of this debt should be allocated to his 
former spouse (Item 2). 
 
4 
 
“Once a ruling has been made on what I am legally responsible for[,] all debts will either 
be paid in full or monthly payment arrangements will be made.” (Item 2 at 3).   
 
The FORM at pages 4-5 highlights the importance to Applicant of providing 
documentation supporting his good faith in the resolution of his delinquent debts: 
 
More importantly, Applicant has failed to provide any documentation to 
corroborate his claims, including his claim that he was advised not to pay 
any of these delinquent debts. In addition, there is no documentary 
evidence that Applicant has contacted any of these creditors either to 
explain the situation, make payment plans, or defer payments. Nearly all 
of Applicant’s alleged accounts are individual accounts and are of minimal 
amounts, yet Applicant has taken no actions to resolve th[ese] debts. . . 
There is no documentary evidence of any payments or payment 
arrangements made on these accounts. 
 
The FORM emphasized at page 7, “Applicant has failed to explain and provide 
documentary evidence as to how he has been unable to take any steps to rectify his 
financial situation, given his high net monthly remainder [, p]articularly with respect to 
the vehicle repossession which remained unresolved since 2003.” The record does not 
contain any correspondence from Appellant after receipt of the FORM.    
 
Personal Conduct (Guideline E) 
    
 Applicant disclosed he was fired from a job for a log violation in October 2006 
(Item 3, Section 22). He revealed a state tax garnishment in September 2006 for 
$587.91 (Item 3, Section 27). He answered, “No” on his SF 86, executed on August 29, 
2007, to two questions that are relevant to the issue of whether Applicant falsified his 
SF 86. Question 28a. “Your Financial Delinquencies-180 Days In the last 7 years, 
have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” and Question 28b. “Your 
Financial Delinquencies-90 Days Are you currently over 90 days delinquent on any 
debt(s)?”  
 
In his SOR response Applicant said he was truthful when he provided information 
on his SF 86. He explained why he did not disclose the information above about his 
delinquent debts: 
 
When I answered those questions, I thought that all the debts were placed 
on “HOLD” status until a ruling had been made by the Judge as to what I 
am responsible to pay. During the course of my marriage, my former 
spouse handled all financial matters. It wasn’t until she filed for divorce, 
was I aware that some of these debts even existed. I may have [been] 
mistaken in how the debts were being handled but I did not deliberately 
withhold any information.  
 
Item 2 at page 2.  
 
 
5 
 
                                           
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”6 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by Applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [Applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).7 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
6 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind 
might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” ISCR 
Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial evidence” is 
“more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 
F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
7 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
 
6 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
[A]pplicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude two relevant security concerns are under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct).  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports and in his SOR 
response. He has six delinquent debts totaling approximately $15,500. His vehicle was 
repossessed in 2003, eventually resulting in a $14,000 delinquent debt. These six debts 
remain delinquent today. The government established the disqualifying conditions in AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 
7 
 
                                           
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant application of any mitigating conditions. He 
has not described any recent actions to resolve his delinquent debts. Because there are 
six delinquent debts, the financial problems are not isolated. The ongoing nature of the 
six delinquent debts for about $15,500 debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under 
the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 
29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). There is no 
evidence supporting a conclusion that his debts “occurred under such circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur.” Moreover, his delinquent debts do cast doubt on his “current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Under AG ¶ 20(b), he said he was going 
through a difficult divorce, but he did not show his delinquent debts were “largely 
beyond his control.” He did not establish that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.8  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. Applicant did not provide evidence of 
financial counseling. Moreover, there are not “clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control.” There is insufficient information to establish that Applicant 
showed good faith9 in the resolution of his delinquent SOR debts. 
 
8“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). 
 
9The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                            
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable to mitigate any debts because Applicant did not 
dispute any debts. He did not provide “documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute” with respect to any delinquent SOR debts.   
 
Applicant did not provide correspondence with his creditors to establish he acted 
responsibly and in good faith. He said two delinquent debts were deferred until July 
2008 (Item 2), but he did not provide evidence of the deferment. After he received the 
FORM, he did not provide the current status of any debts, or provide any divorce court 
filings showing his efforts to allocate marital debt. He should have been more diligent 
and made greater efforts to resolve his delinquent debt, especially after receipt of the 
SOR and FORM. His overall conduct with his creditors casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He has not carried his burden of proving 
his financial responsibility. Based on my evaluation of the record evidence as a whole, I 
conclude no mitigating conditions fully apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and, 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” 
mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
9 
 
                                           
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately provided false information or omitted 
required information on his 2007 SF 86 about his delinquent debts. Applicant admitted 
he did not disclose six debts that were delinquent on his 2007 SF 86. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 
16(b) apply, requiring further analysis.  
 
AG ¶ 17(f) provides a condition that could mitigate security concerns in this case, 
stating, “the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.” AG ¶ 17(f) fully applies to SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. Although he admitted 
preparing his SF 86, and failing to disclose any delinquent debts, he either did not know 
the status of his debts or believed he was not legally responsible for the delinquencies 
until he received a ruling from the divorce court.10  
 
On his SF 86, Applicant disclosed negative information such as a garnishment, a 
job termination, and he erroneously disclosed a dishonorable discharge from the Army. 
These disclosures show his state of mind and willingness to provide derogatory 
information and his lack of financial and legal sophistication. I conclude he did not 
knowingly attempt to mislead the government about his financial situation. Applicant’s 
alleged falsification of his SF 86 is not substantiated. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
10The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
10 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the AGs and the 
whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
There is some mitigating evidence under the whole person concept. Applicant’s 
record of good employment with a government contractor weighs in his favor. There is 
no evidence of any security violation. Aside from the delinquent SOR debt (which is a 
civil, non-criminal issue), he is a law-abiding citizen. He does not have any record of 
involvement with illegal drugs. His other debts are current. The overall amount of his 
current delinquent debt at about $15,500 is relatively low. His credit reports shows that 
he has paid numerous debts over the years. These factors show some responsibility, 
rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
There is substantial evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. In 2003 he 
had a vehicle repossessed. The debt resulting from that repossession is currently 
delinquent and amounts to about $14,000. His six delinquent debts now total about 
$15,500. The FORM made it clear that he needed to resolve his delinquent SOR debts 
and provide documentation to corroborate his actions to resolve those debts. Waiting for 
a divorce court to address his delinquent debts, especially when his divorce apparently 
became final in May 2007, does not convincingly allay security concerns about financial 
considerations. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the 
facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c to 1.f:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i: Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
