1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-01613
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant completed a Standard Form 86 (SF-86) security clearance application
on April 23, 2007. On March 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) stating security concerns under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended, Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December
29, 2005, and effective for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
In a response dated May 31, 2008, Applicant admitted four of the eleven
allegations raised. The case was forwarded to DOHA for referral to an Administrative
Judge. I was assigned the case on July 10, 2008. The parties agreed to a hearing date
of August 13, 2008, and a Notice of Hearing was issued on July 17, 2008, to that effect.
 Tr. 51.1
 Id.2
 See Ex. 1 (SF-86 Form, dated Apr. 23, 2007) at 2, 6.3
 Ex. 5 (Credit report, dated Apr. 29, 2008); the debt is noted in the SOR at ¶ 1.f.4
2
The hearing took place as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted five
exhibits (Ex.), admitted into the record as Exs. 1-5 without objection. Applicant
submitted 24 exhibits, accepted as Exs. A-X without objection. Applicant gave
testimony. No witnesses were called. The transcript (Tr.) was received on August 19,
2008. Applicant was given through September 2, 2008, to submit any additional
materials. On August 21, 2008, two additional documents were received from Applicant
by facsimile transmission. They were admitted into the record without objection as Exs.
Y and Z. The record was closed on September 2, 2008. Based upon a review of the
case file, exhibits, and testimony, security clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 41-year-old security guard who has worked for the same defense
contractor since February 2007. He is divorced and has no children. Applicant received
a bachelor’s degree in 2000. 
Married in 1996, Applicant’s marriage began to fail. As he went through the
process of a divorce, he returned to college to finish his undergraduate degree.
Wanting to expedite his academic program, he became a full-time student and part-
time wage-earner. As a consequence, his earnings were insufficient to cover the
minimum payments to his creditors.  Meanwhile, the divorce dragged on. During the1
proceedings, he “gave up everything, including the house and the car just to get out of
the relationship.”  As a consequence of these circumstances, he became overextended2
on credit. This continued even after 2000, when the couple’s divorce was granted and
Applicant was awarded a bachelor’s degree.3
Applicant moved to another region and began a new relationship. The
relationship did not work out and his debts continued to go unpaid. He filed for Chapter
7 bankruptcy in September 2003 and his debts discharged in December 2003.
In May 2006, Applicant totaled a sports car. At the time, his car insurance was
not paid to date and he lacked coverage. The wrecked car was returned to the lender.
The account on this automobile was transferred to a credit collection agency in 2004.
His credit report shows an account balance of approximately $12,400 and a past due
sum of about $9,820.  Applicant concedes that the value of the car after the accident4
 Tr. 42.5
 Tr. 42-43, 60.6
 Tr. 47.7
 Id.8
 Ex. L (Money Order); Tr. 34.9
 Ex. I (Money Order).10
 Tr. 39-40.11
 Ex. L, supra note 9.12
 Tr. 41; Ex. S (Dispute letter, dated March 30, 2008).13
3
was “not even close” to the balance owed.  Applicant acknowledges he owes a debt on5
the car and is required to pay, but states that he does not “have the money to do so.”6
Although he has no children of his own, he has five young nieces. Over the past
few years, Applicant has “sent a good portion of money to them to help out.”  He has7
recently considered “spending a little more time taking care of [his] own affairs.”8
Since the bankruptcy, other delinquent debts have been acquired. As noted in
Applicant’s credit reports from 2007 and 2008:
STUDENT LOAN – $366 delinquency noted at SOR ¶ 1.b. -– Applicant was under the
assumption that, pursuant to his bankruptcy, his student loans were to be paid off by
application of his tax refunds. Applicant failed to show any portions of his bankruptcy
paperwork that would corroborate this, but he did show that he has paid $25 on the
account.9
GROCERY STORE – $71 returned check, noted at SOR ¶ 1.c. – Applicant states that
he repaid this merchant in 2003, but offered no evidence of that payment. He did show
a payment of $25 from August 2008.  This account is under dispute.10
COLLECTION ACCOUNT – $563, noted at SOR ¶ 1.d. – Applicant does not recognize
this entry, but is willing to make inquiries with regard to the account entry.  He did,11
however, pay $25 on the account in April 2008.12
COMMERCIAL BANK CREDIT CARD – $157, noted at SOR ¶ 1.e. – Applicant wrote
this creditor in March 2008 to inquire as to whether this account is his, but never heard
back from it.  There is no evidence of Applicant reinitiating contact.13
 Ex. L, supra note 9.14
 Tr. 43.15
 Ex. K (Money Order), Tr. 45.16
 Ex. J (Money Order); Tr. 45.17
 Tr. 46.18
 Exs. B-F (Recommendations and award).19
4
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACCOUNT – $468, noted at SOR ¶ 1.g. – Applicant paid
$25 on this account in April 2008.   No other action has been taken.14
COLLECTION ACCOUNT – $2,839, noted at SOR ¶ 1.h. – Applicant is willing to make
inquiries as to what this account is, but he does not recognize it.15
LOAN ACCOUNT – $875, noted at SOR ¶ 1.i. – Applicant made a $25 payment on this
account in August 2008 to show that he is “making an effort to pay [it] off.”  16
COLLECTION ACCOUNT – $287, noted at SOR ¶ 1.j. – As above, a $25 payment was
made in August 2008 as a token of good faith.17
BANK ACCOUNT – $878, noted at SOR ¶ 1.k. – Applicant closed this account years
ago. He does not know why there is a balance. He wrote to the bank, but has not heard
back from anyone.  There is no evidence he has tried to contact it in any other way.18
Applicant presented little evidence of his present financial condition. He is a
valued employee. Applicant is noted as a superior professional and has received raises
in salary for his work.  19
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior,
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative
process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial
and common sense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny
of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative
Judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).20
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).21
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).22
 Id.23
 Id.24
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.25
5
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a20
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  21 22
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access23
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily24
a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the25
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18.26
6
Analysis
Under GUIDELINE F, failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.  The Regulation sets out several potentially disqualifying conditions26
under this guideline.  
Applicant’s debts were discharged in bankruptcy in December 2003 and he has
acquired approximately $19,000 in new delinquent debt over the past five years. He has
made little progress in addressing this debt. He acknowledged he did not have the
money to address his obligations when discussing his wrecked automobile. Such facts
are sufficient to give rise to Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC)
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) and FC DC AG ¶ 19(a)
(inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) apply. With such conditions raised, the
burden shifts to Appellant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security
concerns. 
Applicant first acquired significant delinquent debt around 2000, when he
commenced divorce proceedings, returned to school full-time, and chose to live on
credit. With the exception of a minor ($366) student loan balance, he relieved himself of
his debt through Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant failed, however, to cite to any
particularly significant events subsequent to his bankruptcy that might have helped
create his current debt and invoke Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC
MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances).
The vast majority of the individual debts at issue were acquired within the past
five years, following Applicant’s December 2003 bankruptcy discharge. This new wave
of debt remains substantially unexplored and unpaid. Although Applicant states that he
takes responsibility for these debts, he provided no explanation or strategy as to how he
can or will honor them. Nor has he demonstrated any budget or plan to cease accruing
delinquent debt in the future. Consequently, FC MC AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened
so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment) does not apply. 
Applicant paid three accounts a nominal $25 each in April 2008, prior to his
receipt of the SOR. Another three accounts received a similar amount in August 2008,
after Applicant received the SOR and shortly before the hearing. Moreover
7
correspondence with his creditors shows some initiative, but fails to demonstrate
genuine persistence or commitment. Other than those sporadic payments and a wave
of dispute letters, little effort to address these obligations in an organized fashion has
been demonstrated. While one can appreciate Applicant’s limited financial resources,
that does not excuse his failure to follow through on his correspondence, make nominal
payments with regularity, or address his debts in an alternative manner, such as either
seeking consolidations or settlements, or soliciting the help of a financial counselor.
Under these facts, however, FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply.
Finally, Applicant failed to provide any evidence that he has received any form of
much needed financial counseling. FC MC 3, AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is
receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem
is being resolved or is under control) does not apply. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole person”
factors. Applicant is an exceptionally affable and engaging man. He is mature and has
considerable life experience. His testimony was direct and he was quick to take
responsibility for his debts. 
The purpose of these hearings is to allow an Applicant the opportunity to come
and present evidence of things that he or she has done to address his or her delinquent
accounts and thereby show that he or she is financially responsible. While Applicant
was able to show that he is highly engaging, devoted to his nieces, and a valued
employee, he was unable to show much effort in addressing his delinquent debts,
regaining his financial stability, or successfully living within a budget. Without significant
evidence in those areas, it is impossible to verify Applicant’s level of financial
responsibility or commitment. With security concerns left unmitigated, I conclude it is
not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance is granted.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
