                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-01177 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on June 7, 2007.  On June 9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns for alcohol consumption, financial considerations, personal conduct, and 
criminal conduct under Guidelines G, F, E, and J, respectively. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on 
August 5, 2008. 
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 25, 2008.  Applicant admitted 
the three factual allegations under Guideline G but denied that there was a security 
concern.  He denied three and admitted two factual allegations under Guideline E, and 
denied there was a security concern under this guideline.  The criminal conduct factual 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
allegations under Guideline J arose both from the actions associated with the alcohol 
consumption offenses as well as the personal conduct allegations for a false or 
inaccurate security clearance application.  Applicant admitted the factual allegations as 
noted for his responses to Guidelines G and E, but denied there was a security concern 
under Guideline J.  He admitted the four factual allegations under Guideline F, but 
denied there was a security concern.  He requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge.   
 
 Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 28, 2008, and the case 
was assigned to me on October 16, 2008.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 
21, 2008, for a hearing on November 5, 2008.  I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
The government offered 13 exhibits, marked government exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 
13, which were received without objection.  Applicant and one Applicant witness 
testified on his behalf.  The record was left open until November 19, 2008, for Applicant 
to submit supporting documents.  Applicant timely submitted four documents, marked 
as Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A through D.  These documents were admitted into the 
record without objection (Gov. Ex 14).  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on November 12, 2008.  Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 34 years old and has been a material control planner for a defense 
contractor for almost three years.  His supervisor hired Applicant for his position in 
2006.  He stated Applicant is conscientious and dependable and has great potential for 
advancement. He is a significant contributor to his company's mission.  Everyone 
Applicant deals with is complimentary of his performance and the support he provides 
them (App. Ex. D, Letter, dated November 19, 2008).  Applicant is married with two 
children.  He has attended college and is a few credits short of receiving his degree 
(Gov. Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated June 7, 2007). 
 
Applicant admits he was arrested for driving while intoxicated and while on a 
revoked /suspended driver's license in November 2000.  He had left a graduation party 
at a relative's house before he was stopped by police.   
 
Applicant was convicted of driving while intoxicated in February 2001, sentenced 
to a suspended jail term, his license was suspended for 12 months, and he was 
required to attend an Alcohol Safety Awareness program.  He failed to complete the 
program and was ordered on July 3, 2001 to show cause why he failed to comply with 
the program (Gov. Ex. 3, Case Information, dated June 4, 2008; Gov. Ex. 4, Case 
Information, dated November 15, 2000; Gov. Ex. 13, Interrogatories, dated August 17, 
2007 at 2).   
 
Applicant admitted that he was again arrested for driving while intoxicated 
(second offense) and driving with a revoked/suspended driver's license in May 2001.  
He was sentenced to a jail term which was suspended except for ten days, his license 
 
3 
 
 
was suspended for 36 months, and he was again required to attend the Alcohol Safety 
Awareness Program.  The show cause order of July 3, 2001 also covered his failure to 
attend this course as ordered (Gov. Ex. 5, Case Information, dated May 24, 2001).  
 
 Applicant admitted he was arrested and convicted in July 2006 for driving while 
intoxicated (third offense) and driving after forfeiture of his license (Gov. Ex. 7, Case 
Information, dated July 21. 2006).  A friend called Applicant and told him he was moving 
from the area and wanted to have a last drink with him.  Applicant drove to meet the 
friend and had two beers.  He was arrested on his way home for driving under the 
influence of alcohol.  His wife had to post his bail and pick up their car.  Applicant did 
not have a license at the time.  Applicant stated he was tired and is not much of an 
alcohol drinker which was the reason he was determined by the police to be intoxicated.  
Applicant admitted he made a conscious decision to drive even though his license had 
been revoked (Tr. 28-29, 44-46; Gov. Ex. 13, Interrogatories, dated August 17, 2007 
at1-2).   
 
Applicant denied that his three convictions for driving while intoxicated were a 
security concern based on alcohol consumption.  Applicant's attorney from the 2006 
offense told him that his convictions were for traffic offenses and were not criminal.  
However, since Applicant received jail sentences he feels the offense were criminal.  
Applicant did attend some Alcoholic Anonymous meetings before and after his 2006 
conviction.  He stopped attending meetings some time in 2007.  He did see a counselor 
concerning alcohol abuse after his earlier convictions.  He has not seen a counselor 
since the 2006 incident.  His last drink of alcohol was the night of the 2006 incident.  He 
does not consider himself an alcohol abuser (Tr. 30-31, 35-38).  Applicant did not 
initially complete the required Alcohol Safety Awareness Program.  He missed a class 
and was ordered back to court.  He eventually completed the course (Tr. 42-43). 
 
Applicant admitted that he was arrested and convicted for speeding and driving 
on a suspended driver's license in April 2002.  He was sentenced to a 90-day jail term, 
of which 80 days was suspended (Gov. Ex. 6, Case Information, dated April 29, 2002).  
He admitted he was arrested and convicted for speeding and driving on a 
revoked/suspended driver's license in March 2005 and sentenced to 180 days, in jail of 
which 160 days was suspended and paid a $200 fine (Gov. Ex. 9, Case Information, 
dated March 31, 2005).   
 
Applicant denied he was charged with disorderly conduct in August 2003 (Gov. 
Ex. 8, Case Information, dated August 11, 2003).  Applicant stated that he was exiting a 
restaurant with friends when a police officer, who was a distance from the restaurant, 
told the group they were being loud, boisterous, and disorderly.  Applicant was charged 
with disorderly conduct.  At his court hearing, Applicant and the police officer testified.  
Applicant informed the judge he was leaving the restaurant with friends and they were 
having a conversation.  The judge entered a finding of not guilty.  He did not believe he 
needed to note the offense on the security clearance application since he was found not 
guilty (Tr. 31-32).   
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant denied falsifying his security clearance application by failing to disclose 
all of the driving while intoxicated offenses and the traffic offenses in response to 
questions concerning his police record.  Applicant listed his 2000 and 2006 driving while 
intoxicated offense in response to questions on his security clearance applicant.  He 
failed to list his 2003 driving while intoxicated offense or his other driving offenses of 
speeding and driving on a suspended or revoked license.  Applicant stated it was an 
oversight on his part to not include the information in response to the question.  He 
completed the form a number of times but it kept getting lost in the system and he had 
to redo the form.  This process may have accounted for his failure to list the offenses.  
He knew the government would be able to examine his record and learn about the 
offenses so there was no reason not to list them.  His failure to list the offenses was not 
intentional.  It did not surprise him that he failed to list the offense because he tends to 
forget bad things that happened to him. (Tr. 32-34).  He did list his alcohol counseling 
as a result of the driving while intoxicated incidents.  He denied that his failure to 
completely list all of his offenses amounted to a security concern for personal conduct.   
 
Applicant admitted that as a result of an automobile accident judgments were 
placed against him for $10,317 by the insurance company of the other vehicle involved 
in the accident (Gov. Ex. 12, Judgment, dated march 31, 2004), and for $5,642 from the 
rental car agency for the car he was driving (Gov. Ex. 11, Judgment, dated June 4, 
2002).  Applicant has not paid the judgments.  He has spoken to representative of both 
creditors stating his intent to pay the judgments.  However, he has not been able to 
make any payments on the debts (Tr. 39-40, 46-49).  
 
Applicant also admitted that he was indebted to one bank on two different credit 
cards for $4,330, and $3,334 (Tr. 49-50; Gov. Ex. 10, Credit Report, dated June 27, 
2007).  Applicant's wife now handles the family finances (Tr. 40-41, 49-50).  She 
testified that she and Applicant have been married for over two years and have two 
young children.  She has known Applicant since they were college students.  She 
herself has had a security clearance for over 13 years with access to sensitive 
compartmented information.  She understands the need for financial responsibility for 
security clearance purposes.  The family has three credit cards with the same bank with 
a total balance of approximately $7,025.  The couple has a total of six credit cards with 
a combined balance of approximately $14,000.  Most of the credit card debt was 
accumulated by Appellant before they were married.  She believes he accumulated the 
debts because he received the cards as a college student and used them to purchase 
items.  She and her husband have a budget and part of the budget is to pay on the 
cards to keep them current (App. Ex. C, Budget, undated).  They are current with 
payments on all credit cards (Tr. 55-61; App. Ex. A, Statement, dated November 6, 
2008; App. Ex B. Letter, dated October 28, 2008).  Applicant denied that these debts 
caused a security concern for financial considerations (See answer to SOR, dated July 
23, 2008). 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 Excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern because it often leads to 
the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21)  Appellant’s 
three arrests for driving under the influence of alcohol raise Alcohol Consumption 
Disqualifying Conditions (AC DC) ¶ 22(a) "alcohol-related incidents away from work, 
such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed 
as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent."   
 
 I considered Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions (AC MC) ¶ 23(a) "so 
much time has passed or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such 
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment" and determine that it 
does not apply.  There were three arrests in a six year period so his incidents of alcohol-
related driving are frequent.  The last incident was only two yeas ago so it is recent.  
There were no unusual circumstances causing the offense.  Applicant willing drank 
alcohol and drove his car afterward.   
 
 I also considered AC MC ¶ 23(b) "the individual acknowledges his or her 
alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of action taken to overcome 
this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser)", and determined that it does not apply.  Applicant 
stated he no longer drinks alcohol.  He attended alcohol-related counseling for awhile 
but ceased attending over a year ago.  He has not actively participated in counsel since 
completion of court order counseling in 2004.  His only positive sign has been his 
marriage and the birth of his children.   
 
 I also considered AC MC ¶ 23(c) "the individual is a current employee who is  
participating in  a counseling or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment 
and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress"; and AC MC ¶ 23(d) "the individual 
has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along 
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program".  
Appellant has had some counseling and attendance at Alcoholics Anonymous.  He has 
not attended these counseling sessions since shortly after the 2006 alcohol-related 
incident.  Appellant has not presented information to meet his burden that his past 
alcohol use does not reflect now on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
Appellant has not mitigated security concerns for alcohol consumption. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15)  Personal conduct is always a security concern 
because it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence 
the person can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information.  The security 
clearance system depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information.  
If a person conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process 
cannot function properly to ensure that granting access to classified information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  Applicant’s incomplete answers to a 
question on his security clearance application concerning his police record raises a 
security concern under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(a) 
"the deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history, or similar form used to conduct 
investigations, to determine security eligibility or trustworthiness". 
 
 Appellant denied intentional falsification.  In response to questions on the 
security clearance application, Applicant listed two of his three alcohol-related driving 
incidents and the alcohol counseling he attended as a result of these offenses.  He 
failed to list one of the driving while intoxicated offense and some other traffic offenses.  
Applicant testified that he completed his security clearance application a number of 
times and it was an oversight on his part not to list all of the offenses.  A security 
concern may arise for an omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any 
written document or oral statement to the government when applying for a security 
clearance.  But every omission, concealment, or inaccurate statement is not a 
falsification.  A falsification must be deliberate and material.  It is deliberate if it is done 
knowingly and willfully.  Since Applicant listed the two driving while intoxicated offenses 
and his alcohol counseling, the available information shows his failure to list all of the 
offenses was not knowing and willful.  Applicant established he did not deliberately fail 
to provide full information on the security clearance application with intent to deceive.  I 
find for Appellant as to Personal Conduct pertaining to falsification of the security 
clearance application.  Since there is no intention to deceive, there is no violation of 
federal law and no criminal conduct.  I also find for Applicant as to the part of the 
criminal conduct security concern based on falsification of the security clearance 
application. 
 
 In addition, Applicant’s two driving on a revoked/suspended driver's license and 
speeding offenses are a pattern of misconduct raising security concerns under PC DC 
16(c) "credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, 
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
 
8 
 
 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protect information"; PC DC 16(d) "credible adverse information that 
is not explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for 
an adverse determination, but which when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulation or other 
characteristics indicting the person may not properly safeguard protected information; 
and PC DC ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or 
community standing, . ."  Since he was found not guilty of the disorderly conduct 
charges, I have not considered that offense as a part of the pattern of misconduct.  
 
 In regard to this issue, I considered Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (PC 
MC) ¶ 17(c) "the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment", PC MC ¶ 19(d) "the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur"; and PC MC ¶ 17(e) "the 
individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation or duress".  Applicant has a pattern of driving an automobile while his 
license is revoked or suspended.  His driving decisions were irresponsible indicating he 
would act irresponsibly towards protecting classified information.  Driving while your 
driver's license is revoked or suspended is not minor, particularly when it happens more 
than once and driving while intoxicated is involved.   
 
 Applicant states that since he is now married and the father of two children, he 
has taken positive steps to change his behavior.  However, he was married in 2006 
when the latest instance of his driving without a license happened.  He has not 
presented any information to show any course of conduct that changes this behavior.  
His wife credibly testified that she has known him for over 13 years and she has seen a 
change in his attitude since their marriage over two years ago.  While this is positive 
information, he last driving without a license offense happened after they were married 
and she had to bail him out and retrieve their car.  His actions were not caused by 
marital issues but by his own irresponsible conduct.  I find against Applicant as to 
Personal Conduct.   
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness.  By its very nature it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. (AG ¶ 30)  Appellant’s convictions for driving 
while intoxicated and two driving on a suspended/revoked driver's license raises 
Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (CC DC) ¶ 31(a) "a single serious crime or 
 
9 
 
 
multiple lesser offenses", and CD DC ¶ 31(c) "allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted". 
 
Appellant has raised by his testimony Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions 
(CC MC) ¶ 32(a) "so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment"; and CC MC 
¶ 32(d) "there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the 
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job 
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement".  There was at least one criminal offense a year from 2000 to 2006.  The 
last offense was the driving while intoxicated offense in July 2006.  All of the offenses 
happened because Applicant made a decision to drive after drinking alcohol or to drive 
knowing that his license was revoked or suspended.  The offenses did not happen 
under unusual or unique circumstances.  Similar criminal incidents are likely to recur 
because his driver's license is still suspended and he could decide to drink and drive or 
just drive without having a license.  Applicant stated he has matured and no longer 
drinks alcohol.  However, he is not involved in any counseling or alcohol prevention 
program.  Applicant has not presented sufficient information to mitigate security 
concerns for criminal conduct.   
 
Financial Consideration: 
 
 Under financial considerations, failure or inability to live within one’s means, 
satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds (AG ¶ 18).  Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to 
protect classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms.  Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an Applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance.  An Applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  Applicant admitted, and credit reports confirm, that he has delinquent debts 
for two unpaid judgments from an automobile accident and two delinquent credit card 
debts to a bank.  These delinquent debts and unpaid judgments are a security concern 
raising Financial Consideration Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) ¶ 19(a) "inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts", and FC DC ¶ 19(c) "a history of not meeting financial 
obligations".   
 
10 
 
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) ¶ 20(a) "the 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment" applies.  The judgments were 
entered against Applicant in 2002 and 2004, and he has not made any payments.  
Applicant talked to the creditors for the damage from the automobile accident but he 
has not followed through on his promises to pay.  The judgments are still outstanding 
and current debts, and cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.  While the credit cards are being paid and are current because of the 
financial management of Applicant's wife, the debts did not happen long and are only 
current because of his wife's actions.  The credit card debt can likely recur even though 
they are now current because of is wife's action in handling the family finances. 
 
 FC MC ¶ 20(b) "the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances" does not apply.  The judgments arose from 
an automobile accident.  Applicant is liable for the damage to the rental car he was 
driving and for the damage to the other vehicle.  The accident was not beyond his 
control.  Applicant presented no reasons for his failure to pay the debts except he does 
not have the funds to do so.  This is not a reason beyond his control.  He has not acted 
reasonably under the circumstances.  
 
FC MC ¶ 20(d) "the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts" applies to the credit cards only and not to 
the judgments.  For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, there must be an “ability” to repay the 
debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a good-faith effort to repay.  A 
systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed.  Applicant and his wife have 
the ability to pay the credit cad debts, have shown a strong desire to pay them, and 
have shown a good effort to pay them.  Applicant's wife has established their budget 
and payments on the credit cards to keep them current.  However, no plan was 
presented to show how or when the judgments would be paid.  Applicant has not acted 
responsibly towards the judgments and has not established his good-faith efforts to 
resolve the judgments.  He has not presented sufficient information to mitigated security 
concerns for his financial situation. 
 
 
“Whole Person” Analysis  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
11 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  I considered that Applicant is a 
good employee and a conscientious and dependable worker held in high regard by this 
supervisors and peers.  I considered Applicant has been married for over two years and 
has two young children.  His wife holds a security clearance and is well aware of the 
requirements to continue to hold a clearance.  His wife and family are a positive 
influence in his life.  I considered that he did not deliberately provide incomplete 
information on his security clearance application.  I considered that Applicant stated he 
no longer drinks alcohol, but he has not presented any information concerning present 
counseling for alcohol abuse or present attendance at any alcohol prevention programs.  
His last alcohol-related incident is recent, only two years ago after he had the positive 
influence of being married.  Sufficient time of no alcohol-related incidents has not 
passed since 2006 to mitigate alcohol consumption issues given that he has a series of 
alcohol-related incidents starting in 2000.  He has two judgments of long standing that 
he has not taken any action to resolve or pay.  He has had at least one criminal conduct 
offense a year from 2000 to 2006.  His actions indicate poor self control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations.  Overall, on balance the 
record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations, personal 
conduct, alcohol consumption, and criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 4.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 4.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 4.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 4.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
