                                                              
 
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-01267 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used and continues to possess a currently valid Polish passport, which 
he renewed in 2005 for travel to Poland after he became a U.S. citizen. He voted in a 
Polish referendum after becoming a U.S. citizen. Security concerns pertaining to foreign 
preference are not mitigated. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 15, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or Security Clearance Application (SF 86) (Item 4). 
On June 30, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him (Item 1), pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised. The revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, are effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. The SOR alleges 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
e.    
                                           
security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The SOR detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On July 21, 2008, DOHA received Applicant’s response to the SOR allegations, 
and he notified DOHA that he wanted to have an administrative judge decide his case 
without a hearing (Item 3). A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated September 5, 2008, was provided to him, and he was afforded an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant 
did not provide additional documents within the 30 days. On November 19, 2008, the 
case was assigned to m
  
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of some basic facts concerning Poland, as well as 
Poland’s relationship to the United States.2 These facts are unnecessary for resolution 
of security concerns involving foreign preference. However, facts about Poland’s 
government and relationship to the United States are pertinent mitigating information 
under the whole person concept. Poland is a democracy and an important ally of the 
United States and these factors among others are described infra in the section of this 
opinion labeled “Poland.”3  
 
 
 
1Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated September 9, 2008, 
and Applicant’s receipt is signed and dated September 11, 2008. The DOHA transmittal letter informed 
Applicant that he had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to submit information. 
 
2Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative 
proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 
at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for 
administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts that are either well known or from government 
reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts 
for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize authoritative information from the 
internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 126 S.Ct. 2749 (2006) (citing internet sources for numerous 
documents). In this case the source for the facts is the U.S. Department of State, Bureau of European 
and Eurasian Affairs, June 2008, “Background Note: Poland,” (Administrative Judge’s exhibit (AJ Ex.) I, 
which is available at http://www.state.gov). 
 
3“[A]n ALJ has a heightened obligation to assist a pro se claimant, in particular to "assist [him or 
her] affirmatively in developing the record." Carroll v. Secretary of Health and Human Services, 872 
F.Supp. 1200, 1204 (E.D.N.Y. 1995) (citing Smith v. Bowen, 687 F.Supp. 902, 906 (S.D.N.Y. 1998)). 
“Especially where an unrepresented claimant's record is inconsistent and incomplete, an ALJ must 
‘scrupulously and conscientiously probe into, inquire of and explore all the relevant facts.’” Id. (citing 
Hankerson v. Harris, 636 F.2d 893, 895 (2d Cir. 1980)). See also Garrett v. Richardson, 363 F. Supp. 83 
(E.D.S.C. 1973) (discussing administrative law judge’s responsibility to obtain reports for full and fair 
hearing).   
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Findings of Fact4 
 
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations with brief explanations (Item 3). His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 34 years old and has worked for a government contractor since 
February 2000 as an engineer. He has never been married and does not have any 
children. He earned a master’s degree in electrical engineering in 2000. Applicant and 
his parents were born in Poland. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in January 2001 (Item 
5 at 18). His parents became U.S. citizens in 2004, and currently live in the United 
States. The remainder of his family lives in Poland (Item 5 at 14).    
 
Foreign Preference 
   
Applicant received a U.S. passport in March 2001 (Item 4). In July 2005, 
Appellant renewed his Polish passport, and it remains valid until July 2015 (Item 5 at 2-
3). A copy of his Polish passport is attached to DOHA interrogatories (Item 5 at 21). The 
FORM and SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c allege that Appellant was unwilling to surrender his 
currently valid Polish passport (SOR ¶ 1.e). Appellant admitted these allegations were 
true (Item 3). He used his Polish passport when visiting Poland and used his U.S. 
passport when visiting other countries. Applicant’s SOR response states as of March 
26, 2008, he was unwilling to surrender his Polish passport and explained he needs his 
Polish passport to travel to Poland. Applicant has not surrendered his Polish passport to 
his security officer, destroyed it in the presence of his security officer, or otherwise 
invalidated or relinquished it. 
 
In the last seven years, Appellant traveled to Poland in 1999, 2001, 2002, 2003, 
2004 and 2006 (Item 1). In July 2003, Appellant voted in the referendum regarding 
Poland’s accession into the European Union (Item 5 at 6; SOR ¶ 1.f). Appellant is 
interested in Polish politics and has attended lectures at universities and meetings at 
the Polish Embassy with high-level Polish government officials (Item 1). 
 
Poland5 
 
Poland is a democratic, constitutional republic with checks and balances among 
the president, prime minister, courts and parliament. The constitution includes judicial 
review, the legislative process and civil rights such as free speech, press and assembly 
(AJ Ex. at 1). 
 
 
 
4Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. Items 3 (response to SOR) and 5 (responses to DOHA 
Interrogatories) are the sources for the facts in this section unless stated otherwise. 
 
5See Administrative Notice, supra. 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Poland is a member of the World Trade Organization and European Union (AJ 
Ex I at 6). Poland became a full member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO) in March 1999 (AJ Ex. I at 7). “Poland’s top national security goal is to further 
integrate with NATO and other west European defense, economic, and political 
institutions while modernizing and reorganizing its military” (AJ Ex. I at 7). Poland is 
receiving U.S. assistance in the modernization of defense forces including acquiring F-
16  multi-role fighters and C-130 cargo planes, High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled 
Vehicles (HMMWVs), and other important U.S. military materials. 
 
Poland and the United States have had warm bilateral relationships since 1989, 
and work closely together in a variety of diplomatic and military endeavors: 
 
Every post-1989 Polish government has been a strong supporter of 
continued American military and economic presence in Europe. As well as 
supporting the Global War on Terror, Operation Enduring Freedom in 
Afghanistan, and coalition efforts in Iraq, Poland cooperates closely with 
American diplomacy on such issues as democratization, nuclear 
proliferation, human rights, regional cooperation in central and eastern 
Europe, and UN reform.   
 
AE I at 8. Clearly, the United States and Poland are close political, military and 
diplomatic allies in many areas.   
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concern is under Guidelines C (Foreign 
Preference) and B (Foreign Influence).  
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) and 10(a)(7) describe conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. These conditions state, “10(a) exercise of any right, 
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the 
foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession 
of a current foreign passport; .  .  . and (7) voting in a foreign election.” 
 
Applicant renewed his Polish passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. He 
continues to possess a Polish passport that will continue to be valid until 2015, 
establishing AG ¶ 10(a)(1). He voted in a Polish referendum in 2003, establishing AG ¶ 
10(a)(7).  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority. 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions apply. Security officials did not authorize 
Applicant’s use of the Polish passport and he did not invalidate or relinquish his Polish 
passport as described in AG ¶¶ 11(d) and 11(e).6 His Polish passport was not 
surrendered to his security officer. Applicant’s vote in the Polish referendum was not 
encouraged by the U.S. government. He obtained the Polish passport and voted in the 
Polish referendum after he became a U.S. citizen.     
 
 
6In the decretal paragraph, I find “For Applicant” with respect to SOR ¶ 1.a because it essentially 
summarizes why the other SOR allegations are a security concern and does not include factual 
allegations about security concerns. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Whole Person Concept 
 
 In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount 
concern. The adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in 
considering the “whole person” concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by 
the totality of his or her acts, omissions, and motivations as well as various other 
variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis.  Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at Directive ¶ E2.2.1:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
voluntariness of participation; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E2.2.3, “The ultimate determination of whether the granting or 
continuing of eligibility for a security clearance is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security must be an overall common sense determination based upon careful 
consideration” of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
There are significant factors supporting approval of Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant’s foreign preference concerns relate to Poland, a 
member of the World Trade Organization, European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization with a democratic, republic form of government. Poland is a close ally of 
the United States on battlefields in Afghanistan and Iraq. The United States has 
provided sophisticated military technology to Poland, showing the close, trusting nature 
of the military and diplomatic relationship between Poland and the United States. 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen since 2001. When he became a U.S. citizen, he took 
an oath of allegiance to the United States. His parents live in the United States and 
have become U.S. citizens. There is no evidence of any performance or work-related 
problems. He is a law-abiding U.S. citizen, who has been contributing to the U.S. 
national defense.  
 
The foreign preference security concerns are more substantial. After becoming a 
U.S. citizen in 2001, Applicant voted in a Polish referendum in 2003 and renewed his 
Polish passport in 2005. He has used his Polish passport for his 1999, 2001, 2002, 
2003, 2004 and 2006 visits to Poland. He did not relinquish or surrender his Polish 
passport to Polish officials or security officials.      
 
After carefully weighing the evidence, I conclude Applicant has failed to carry his 
burden of mitigating the foreign preference security concerns. I take this position based 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my 
“careful consideration of the whole person factors” (See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 
(App. Bd. June 28, 2006)) and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent 
factors under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities 
under the Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b to 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
