                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-00157
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Statement of Case
On June 11, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 3, 2008 and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to another judge on June 12, 2008, and reassigned to me on
September 4, 2008.  It was scheduled for hearing on October 6, 2008.  A hearing was
held on October 6, 2008, for the purpose of considering whether it would be clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant, continue, or deny, Applicant’s application
for a security clearance.  At hearing, the Government's case consisted of six exhibits;
Applicant relied on three witnesses (including himself) and four exhibits.  The transcript
2
(R.T.) was received on October 15, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied. 
Procedural Rulings
Before the close of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR
to correct the date in subparagraph 2.d to read September 1990. For good cause
shown, Department Counsel’s motion was granted.  Applicant admitted the corrected
date in his own answer and did not contest the date correction. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have (a) carried on a four-year long
extra-marital sexual relationship with an unknown individual to which neither his wife,
family, or friends are aware of, (b) refused to provide the name or the contact
information of the individual he was having the affair with, and ©) freely admitted that
this extra–marital sexual relationship could be used against him if blackmailed.
Under Guideline D, Applicant is alleged to have (I) concealed his sexual affair
from his wife, family and friends, (ii) freely admitted that this extra–marital sexual
relationship could be used against him if blackmailed, (iii) consumed too much alcohol
on several occasions and had sexual relationships with unknown individuals, and (iv)
was caught masturbating in a movie booth by local police in September 1999 (corrected
to 1990), and issued a citation for committing a lewd act in a public place. 
 For his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations with
explanations.  He claimed he has been monogamous with his wife for the past six
months, and his relationship with the other individual was always of a casual nature.  He
claimed he never discussed work with this individual, and they parted ways amicably.
He claimed his wife, family, and friends do not know about his affair, and there is no
need to inform them of something that does not exist any more. 
In his answer, Applicant claimed he recently made e-mail contact with the
individual and obtained permission to disclose his name.  He claimed that since he has
worked through his own issues, there is no longer any reason to suspect or fear
blackmail from this individual any more.  He claimed he no longer engages in excessive
alcohol consumption or questionable activities any more.  And he claimed the 1990
incident was an isolated occurrence before he met his future wife, and he has not
received any other citations since he met and married his wife.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old-executive assistant for a defense contractor who seeks
a security clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant
3
are incorporated herein and adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional
findings follow.
Applicant married W in 1992 and has two children from his marriage and one
step child (R.T., at 58).  He served on active duty in the Navy from September 1983
through December 2005 (see exs. 1 and 2), and was honorably discharged in
December 2006 with the rank of chief petty officer (R.T., at 57).  Between December
2005 and December 2006, Applicant was unemployed (although attached to his Navy
command) while waiting for his final navy detachment orders.  
In September 1990 (before his marriage to W), Applicant was caught
masturbating in a movie booth by local police and was issued a citation for committing a
lewd act in a public place (R.T., at 59).  The reporting officer wrote in his report that
Applicant could be easily observed by any person walking down the aisle, for the booth
used by Applicant had no door, curtains or other barrier concealing the entryway (see
ex. 5).  Applicant pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor and was fined $330.00, sentenced to
three years of summary probation, and ordered to attend an AIDS counseling class (see
exs. 4 and 6; R.T., at 59-60).  Applicant assures that he made W (who he was
cohabiting with at the time) aware of the incident (R.T., at 61).  Applicant’s assurances
are credible on this disclosure issue and are accepted.
Beginning in 2004, while still on active duty, Applicant initiated a four-year extra-
marital sexual relationship with a casual male acquaintance he identified as A (see ex.
2; R.T., at 53).  Before initiating this affair with A, Applicant had never cheated on his
wife.   In a June 2007 interview with an OPM investigator, Applicant cautioned that in
the event that any of his encounters were recorded, his sexual relationship with this
individual (A) could possibly be used against him (ex. 2).   However, he had no reason
to believe that any of them were recorded (ex. 2).   In this interview, he told the OPM
investigator that he broke off his relationship with A in May 2007 out of guilt for
“cheating on his wife” (ex. 2).  He also told the investigator that neither W, his family, nor
his friends, had any knowledge of his relationship with A.  Noting that the relationship
with A had ended, he did not want to provide any contact information and identity of this
individual he was seeing out of concern it could hurt his marriage relationship (see ex.
2; R.T., at 65-66).
Since initiating his extra-marital affair with A in 2004, Applicant had an  encounter
with one other individual (R.T., at 62).  He provided no further details of this encounter
or how far it went.  Although he admitted to past battles with alcohol, and several
incidents of questionable behavior, he never provided any specifics.  The record is not
sufficiently developed on the allegations covered by sub-paragraph 2.c to warrant any
adverse inferences on these alcohol-related allegations.
Asked at the hearing, whether he ever disclosed his relationship with A to W or
his family, Applicant indicated he had not, and had no intention of doing so now that the
relationship has been ended (R.T., at 65).  Applicant assures he loves his wife and has
a very good monogamous relationship with her.  He doesn’t want to risk impairment of
4
this positive marital relationship with W by disclosing his prior affairs with A, who he  has
not seen since his last encounter in December 2007 (R.T., at 54, 70-72). 
In an e-mail interchange with A in September 2007, Applicant asked A a series of
questions about their affairs.  Responding to a question in the e-mail inquiry about how
long he knew Applicant, A said April 2004 to March 2007 (see ex. D).  
 When questioned further on the date of his break-up with his male partner, he
confirmed it was December 2007, and not March 2007, as stated by A (with Applicant’s
suggesting) in A’s e-mail response (see ex. D), or May 2007, as previously claimed  by
Applicant in his June 2007 interview with an investigator from the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) (R.T., at 70).  When pressed at hearing to reconcile the conflicting
termination dates he and A provided earlier, he acknowledged concern over
appearances of a more recent cut-off (R.T., at 80).  Applicant has never disclosed his e-
mail to A or his e-mail account to W (R.T., at 71).
After talking with his ex-partner, Applicant is now convinced that this individual
would never try to blackmail him (R.T., at 54-55).  Considering both the inconsistencies
in Applicant’s and A’s accounts of their last encounters, and Applicant’s understandable
unwillingness to inform W of his affairs , it is not possible to discount all doubts about
the Applicant’s potential vulnerability to blackmail at this time.
Applicant’s military service records include an excellent fitness evaluation for
2004 (ex. C).  His evaluation assigns excellent scores for his expertise, teamwork, and
initiative. 
Applicant is well regarded by his employer.  His direct supervisor describes
Applicant as a fine performer (R.T., at 6-10).  His program manager rates him as top tier
performer (R.T., at 17-19).  Applicant’s 2008 performance appraisal assigns a solid
rating in some categories and an excellent rating in others (ex. A). His rater
characterizes him as honest and reliable, with a good attitude, and one who works well
with others (see ex. A). His rater also praises Applicant for his exceptional
communication skills and outstanding team work (ex. A).  Applicant is credited with
completing an acquisition course in August 2008 (see ex. B).  
 
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require
the judge to consider all of the "Conditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions,"
if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued
or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these factors exclusively
in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative Guidelines, judges must
take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation
5
set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  See Adjudicative
Guidelines (AG), ¶ 18.
Sexual Behavior
The Concern. Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense,
indicates a personality or emotional disorder, may subject the individual to
coercion, exploitation, or duress, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or
which may subject the individual to undue influence or coercion,
exploitation, or duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  No adverse
inference concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely
on the basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  See Adjudicative
Guidelines (AG),  ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make a common sense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility
for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
6
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis  
Applicant is a meritorious defense contractor employee who pleaded guilty to a
misdemeanor public indecency charge in 1990 and beginning in 2004 was involved in a
four-year series of extra-marital affairs with another individual without telling his wife and
family.  Applicant admitted to risks of blackmail over his affairs in an OPM interview and
repeated his intention to withhold the information about these affairs from his wife.
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s 1990 conviction, his four-year sexual extra-
marital relationship with A, and allegations pertaining to his consuming alcohol and
having sexual relationships with other unnamed individuals. 
Applicant’s actions raise security concerns under both the personal conduct and
sexual behavior guidelines.  DC ¶ 16(e) of Guideline E, “Personal conduct or
concealment of information that increases an individual’s vulnerability to coercion,
exploitation or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the
person’s personal, professional, or community standing . . .,” is applicable to Applicant’s
situation.  While much of Applicant’s conduct is covered by Guideline D and can be
resolved under that Guideline, there are several allegations under each guideline that
are not incorporated in the other.  For example, subparagraph 1.a that addresses
Applicant’s four-year extra-marital affair is not incorporated in the Guideline D
allegations.  Vice versa, subparagraphs 2.c (addressing alcohol-related sexual
relationships) and 2.d (covering Applicant’s 1990 citation) are alleged under sexual
behavior but not under personal conduct. 
Judgment and blackmail concerns exist over Applicant’s four-year sexual affairs
spanning 2004 and 2007 with A that he has declined to explain to his wife.  These
actions reflect both serious judgment lapses and actions that expose him to risks of
potential blackmail.  Applicant’s actions are expressly covered by Guideline E, and are
entitled to independent cognizance under this Guideline according to the Appeal Board.
See ISCR Case No. 06-20964, at 6 (April 10, 2008).  Where (as here) there is additional
probative adverse information covered by Guideline E that is not covered by Guideline D,
and vice versa, and which reflects a recurring pattern of questionable judgment,
irresponsibility or emotionally unstable behavior, independent grounds do exist for
considering questionable judgment and trustworthiness and exploitation and coercion
risk allegations under Guideline E and Guideline D, respectively.  Authority for
considering overlapping conduct under both guidelines is contained in the guidance
provided in Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(d) of the Directive’s August 2006 amendments. 
7
 So, under Guideline E, core judgment and exploitation concerns covered by D.C.
¶ 16(d), “credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, but which,
when combined with all available information supports a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may
not properly safeguard protected information,” are applicable in this case
Turning to the specific allegations covered by Guideline D (several of which
overlap with those under Guideline E), the pertinent ones associated with Applicant’s
2004-2007 extra-marital affairs with A are covered by several of the disqualifying
conditions in Guideline D.  Applicable to the particular facts surrounding Applicant’s
extra-marital affairs are  DC ¶ 13(a), “sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not
the individual has been prosecuted,” DC ¶ 13(c), “sexual behavior that causes an
individual to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress,” and DC ¶ 13(d), “sexual
behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion or judgment.”  
Additional allegations covering alcohol-related sexual relationships separate and
apart from his extra-marital affairs with A were never developed in the record and lack
any probative  evidence.  As such, these allegations covered by subparagraph 2.c are
concluded to be unsubstantiated.  
To be sure, Applicant is of record in advising W of his 1990 citation and public
decency conviction before their marriage.  While this reduces his vulnerability risk to
coercion and pressure, it does not resolve concerns about his judgment and
trustworthiness.  His 1990 conduct reflects not only poor judgment but a reckless
disposition towards imprudent sexual misbehavior that manifested itself years later in his
series of extra-marital affairs with A.  Such conduct cannot be compartmentalized on a
piece-meal basis and isolated from one another.  Considering the totality of Applicant’s
behavior over a 15-year period, his actions reflect considerable recurrence risks
associated with his judgment lapses and sexual behavior that make him vulnerable to
coercion, exploitation, or duress.  This collective pattern of recurrent behavior are
independently covered by the disqualifying conditions previously set forth under
Guideline D.  
Both judgment lapses and blackmail risks remain key Guideline D concerns.  For
Applicant has never disclosed his sexual encounters with A over the past four years out
of concern for his wife and their marriage.  His concerns are quite understandable.  But
his declinations to inform his wife of his encounters with A also increase his vulnerability
to coercion, exploitation and duress.  Neither the private, discreet nature of Applicant’s
sexual encounters with A, Applicant’s assured cessation of the encounters, nor A’s
reported disinclination to make any trouble for Applicant absolve Applicant of potential
risks of compromise or coercion associated with his encounters with A.   
The recurrent judgment lapses that inhere in Applicant’s 1990 public indecency
conviction and more recent extra-marital affairs, and Applicant’s failure to disclose his
8
extra-marital encounters to W, preclude safe predictive judgments at this time that he will
not engage in any similar activity in the foreseeable future.  Neither the timing of his
actions, the accompanying circumstances, the recurrence risks, nor the still potential for
blackmail warrant the application of any of the mitigating conditions in Guideline D or
Guideline E.  So recurrent and recent are his encounters that the likelihood of their
occurring again cannot be safely discounted.  As long as risks of recurrence and
blackmail exist, Applicant’s conduct cannot be mitigated, either under the guidelines or
under the whole person concept.  
From a whole person perspective, Applicant has established a good relationship
of trust with his employer.  Both his direct supervisor and his program manager
characterize him as a good performer and strong team player.  These are qualities that
serve him well in fulfilling his fiducial responsibilities in protecting accessed classified
information. Applicant credibly makes the case, too, to his making renewed efforts to
strengthen his marriage, but at a price.  For in doing so, he is determined to withhold
information about his sexual encounters (casual as they may be) that could impair or
weaken his marital relationship.  While understandable, his reluctance to inform his wife
also places him at continued risk to pressure, coercion, or duress (core security
concerns). 
It is true that Applicant’s telling his wife about his affairs may well pose something
of a Hobson’s choice for him.  Informing her of the details of his encounters, though, is a
necessary prerequisite to absolving himself of risks of blackmail and other forms of
pressure and coercion.  This is a situation where strong work and family credits cannot
overcome the security risks associated with his undisclosed sexual relationships with A.
Taking into account all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s recurrent
sexual encounters in the 1990 time frame and more recently spanning 2004 and 2007,  it
is still too soon to absolve Applicant of security risks associated with his recurrent 2004-
2007 sexual encounters with A. Based on his recurrent actions reflecting questionable
judgment and trustworthiness concerns, and his continued unwillingness to disclose his
affairs to his wife, Applicant does not mitigate the Government’s security concerns.
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the underlying conduct covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d of Guideline E  and subparagraphs 2.a, 2.b and 2.d of
Guideline D.  Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to subparagraph 2.c. of
Guideline D.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors enumerated in Enclosure 2(a) of the Adjudicative Guidelines of the
Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
9
GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT):        AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a: Against Applicant
Sub-para. 1.b: Against Applicant
Sub-para. 1.c Against Applicant
 Sub-para. 1.d: Against Applicant
GUIDELINE D: (SEXUAL BEHAVIOR):                   AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-para. 2.a:: Against Applicant
Sub-para. 2.b:: Against Applicant
Sub-para. 2.c:: For Applicant
Sub-para. 2.d:: Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
10
  
