 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-03707 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines E (Personal 
Conduct) and J (Criminal Conduct). Applicant’s eligibility for access to Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI) was revoked for drug abuse in May 2005, under 
DCID 6/4, as amended by Intelligence Community Policy Memorandum 2006-700-3, 
dated July 12, 2006; and that action became final when his appeal was denied in 
August 2007. This case concerns Applicant’s collateral security clearance, which was 
not revoked. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on November 8, 2005 
(Government Exhibit (GX) 3). On May 28, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security concerns under Guidelines E 
and J. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 2
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on June 3, 2008; answered it on 
June 18, 2008; and requested determination on the record without a hearing. DOHA 
received his response on June 23, 2008. Department Counsel submitted the 
government’s written case on August 31, 2008. On September 4, 2008, a complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
government’s evidence. Applicant received the FORM on September 15, 2008, and he 
did not respond. The case was assigned to me on November 19, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old principal contract administrator for a defense 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since June 1980 and held a 
clearance since June 1983. He was married in September 1955 and has a 28-year-old 
daughter.  
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in August 1999 in connection 
with his application for SCI eligibility. He admitted he started using marijuana in high 
school around 1974 and used it on a monthly basis with friends on weekends until about 
1980. From 1980 until December 1996, he used it occasionally at parties or vacations 
with family members. He told the investigator he stopped using marijuana in December 
1996 because he had matured and he learned his employer had instituted mandatory 
drug testing (GX 7 at 1). 
 
 At some time in 2000, while his application for SCI was being processed, 
Applicant used marijuana once (GX 5 at 5). He was granted SCI eligibility in March 
2000, but cautioned in writing that any further drug abuse would result in revocation of 
his SCI eligibility (GX 6 at 17). He used marijuana once again in 2003 with his brother 
and cousins at a family picnic (GX 6 at 11).  
 
 When Applicant submitted his e-QIP in November 2005, he answered “no” to 
question 24a, asking if he had illegally used any controlled substance, including 
marijuana, during the last seven years. He did not disclose his use of marijuana in 2000 
and 2003. He also answered “no” to question 24b, asking if he had ever used a 
controlled substance while possessing a security clearance. He did not disclose his use 
of marijuana after receiving a secret clearance in June 1983 and a top secret clearance 
and access to SCI in June 2000. 
 
 In April 2007, Applicant’s access to SCI was suspended after he tested positive 
for marijuana in March 2007. Applicant explained to a security investigator that he and 
his brothers smoked marijuana while grieving after their father’s funeral on the day 
before the urinalysis. He disclosed his marijuana use to his wife (GX 5 3-4).  
 
After Applicant’s positive urinalysis, he was ordered to obtain drug counseling as 
a condition of continued employment. He completed the one-hour session that was 
 
 3
required. At the recommendation of the counselor, he attended four one-hour grief 
counseling sessions in March and April 2007. The counselor did not provide a prognosis 
(GX 5 at 5). Applicant access to SCI was revoked in May 2007 (GX 6 at 2). His appeal 
of that decision was denied in August 2007 (GX 6 at 1). 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated his conduct was “an aberration rather 
than the norm.” He offered to undergo increased random drug testing, polygraph 
examination or other measures at any interval, at his own expense if necessary, in order 
to receive another chance to retain a clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 4
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s top secret/SCI access was suspended by another 
government agency in April 2007 based on a positive drug test for marijuana (SOR ¶ 
1.a); he used marijuana from 1974 through 1996, and in the late 1990s, 2000, 2003, 
and March 13, 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.b); he used marijuana after being issued a clearance in 
June 1983 (SOR ¶ 1.c); he used marijuana after signing receipt of a letter on March 13, 
2000 informing him that illegal drug involvement would result of revocation of access to 
SCI (SOR ¶ 1.d); he continued to use marijuana after receiving a top secret/SCI 
clearance in June 2000 (SOR ¶ 1.e); and he falsified his security clearance application 
by not disclosing his drug involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g). 
 
 The documentary evidence reflects that Applicant’s SCI eligibility was suspended 
in April 2007 and revoked in May 2007, but there is no evidence that his top secret 
collateral clearance was revoked at that time. Thus, the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a that 
Applicant’s top secret clearance was suspended in April 2007 is not supported by 
substantial evidence. 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
 The following disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to 
Applicant’s drug involvement:  
 
[C]redible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
 
 5
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information, . . . [including] a 
pattern of dishonesty or rule violations (AG ¶ 16(d)); and 
 
[P]ersonal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing (AG ¶ 16(e)).  
 
 The reference in AG ¶ 16(a) to “information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline” does not preclude consideration of Applicant’s drug abuse under 
Guideline E instead of Guideline H (Drug Involvement). The Appeal Board has 
determined that the language in Guideline E does not “fundamentally alter the history, 
scope, and purpose of Guideline E.” Instead, the new language “continues the 
longstanding tenet that specific behavior can have security significance under more 
than one guideline and . . . by focusing on the concepts of questionable judgment and 
irresponsibility, it contemplates that behavior will have independent security significance 
under Guideline E in a broad range of cases.” ISCR Case No. 06-20964, 2008 WL 
2002589 at *5 (App. Bd. Apr. 10, 2008). I conclude that Applicant’s history of drug 
abuse before and after he received a security clearance and eligibility for access to SCI 
raise AG ¶¶ 16(d) and (3) under Guideline E. 
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition for Applicant’s falsifications of his security 
clearance application is “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). Applicant’s admission that he falsified his 
answers to questions 24a and 24b on his application raises this disqualifying condition. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(a), (d), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).  
 
 Security concerns based on falsification of a security clearance application may 
be mitigated if “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). 
Applicant submitted his application in November 2005, but he did not disclose his post-
1996 marijuana use until he was interviewed by an investigator after his positive 
urinalysis in March 2007. This mitigating condition is not established. 
 
 
 6
 Security concerns based on personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Although 
individual instances of marijuana use might arguably be considered “minor,” Applicant’s 
long history of marijuana use, his multiple breaches of trust by using marijuana while 
holding a clearance, and his concealment of his marijuana use on his security clearance 
application, are not minor when considered together. Thus, I conclude the first prong of 
AG ¶ 17(c) (“so minor”) is not established.  
 
The second prong of AG ¶ 17(c) (“so much time”) focuses on the recentness of 
the conduct. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ 
The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. 
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa 
significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an 
administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id. 
Applicant’s last marijuana use was in March 2007, about 15 months before the SOR 
was issued. In light of his lifelong history of marijuana use, continuing with periodic use 
in 2000, 2003, and 2007, I am not satisfied sufficient time has passed to warrant a 
finding of rehabilitation. I conclude the second prong of AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. 
 
 Although his father’s funeral might be considered a “unique circumstance,” most 
of Applicant’s marijuana use has been in social and family situations. The totality of his 
behavior casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. I conclude 
AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns can be mitigated if “the individual has acknowledged the 
behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps 
to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur” AG ¶ 
17(d). Applicant received one hour of mandatory drug counseling, and he voluntarily 
received about four hours of grief counseling. Given his lifetime of drug abuse, multiple 
breaches of trust, and falsification of his e-QIP, I am not convinced his behavior is 
“unlikely to recur.” I conclude AG ¶ 17(d) is not established.  
 
 Finally, security concerns may be mitigated if “the individual has taken positive 
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 
17(e). It appears that Applicant’s spouse, family members, and supervisors are aware of 
his drug abuse, but their awareness is not based on Applicant’s “positive steps.” The 
record does not reflect whether Applicant’s coworkers, neighbors, or his daughter are 
aware of his conduct. I conclude AG ¶ 17(e) is not established. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges Applicant’s falsification of his security clearance 
application under this guideline. The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30 as follows: “Criminal conduct creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, 
 
 7
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 30. Conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include “a single serious crime or 
multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 
31(a) and (c). 
 
 It is a felony, punishable by a fine or imprisonment for not more than five years, 
or both, to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch 
of the government of the United States. 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Security clearances are 
matters within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the government of the United 
States. A deliberately false answer on a security clearance application is a serious 
crime within the meaning of Guideline J.  Applicant’s lifelong illegal marijuana use and 
his deliberate concealment of his marijuana use raise the disqualifying conditions in AG 
¶ 31(a) and (c). 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). They also may be 
mitigated if, “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job 
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.” AG ¶ 32(d). For the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶¶ 
17(c) and (d) under Guideline E, I conclude AG ¶¶ 32(a) and (d) are not established.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines E and J in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
 
 8
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has spent his life employed by defense 
contractors, but he also has used marijuana for most of his adult life. He has held a 
clearance for many years, but he has breached the trust implicit in a security clearance 
by continuing his marijuana use and concealing it from his employer. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines E and J, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns based on personal conduct and criminal conduct. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
