                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-04182 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esquire 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding foreign influence. Because of his 
deep and long-standing relationships with his family in the United States and his other 
connections to this country, as well as his support of the U.S. Army while serving under 
hazardous conditions in Afghanistan as a translator, I am confident he will resolve any 
conflicts in favor of U.S. interests. Access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 1, 2006, Applicant submitted an electronic Questionnaire for 
Sensitive Positions (Standard Form (SF) 86)(GE 1). On May 30, 2008, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified. On August 30, 
2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) directed application of revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) to all adjudications and other determinations made under 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                             
the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (Regulation), dated January 1987, as amended. The SOR alleges 
security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The SOR detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On June 17, 2008, Applicant provided a response to the SOR allegations, and 
elected to have his case decided at a hearing (GE 6). On September 10, 2008, the case 
was assigned to me. On September 29, 2008, notice was issued for the hearing, which 
was held on October 30, 2008 (GE 4). At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
three exhibits (Transcript (Tr.) 19, GEs 1-3), and Applicant offered 29 exhibits (Tr. 13, 
28-29, 38-39, 166-167, 196, AE A-AC). There were no objections (except for AE M to 
W, AA and AB), and I admitted GEs 1-3 (Tr. 19) as well as AEs A-L, Y and AA (Tr. 28-
29, 38-39, 166-167, 196). Additionally, I admitted the Hearing Notice, SOR and 
response to the SOR (GEs 4-6). DOHA received the transcript on November 7, 2008. 
The documents not admitted are attached to the record.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel and Applicant asked me to take administrative notice 
concerning materials related to the Afghanistan (GE 7, AE AC). Applicant objected to 
my consideration of facts beyond the Department Counsel’s 6-page document entitled 
Administrative Notice, dated August 11, 2008 (Tr. 20-24, GE 7). Specifically, Applicant 
objected to admission or administrative notice for Exhibits I through VII because those 
documents contain facts that are not relevant to a security clearance determination. I 
granted Applicant’s request; however, I offered the parties two days to request 
administrative notice of any additional facts (Tr. 20-25). Applicant requested 
Administrative notice of facts in AE AC, as supported by AE M through W (Tr. 27). 
Department Counsel did not object to my administrative notice of the facts in AE AC, 
and requested that AE M through W receive the same consideration as Exhibits I 
through VII (Tr. 27). I granted Department Counsel’s request and took administrative 
notice of the facts in GE 7 and AE AC as indicated in the Afghanistan portion of the 
Statement of Facts section of this decision, and did not take administrative notice of 
supporting documents Exhibits I through VII and AE M through W (Tr. 27).  
 
In support of the requested administrative notice of facts concerning Afghanistan, 
supporting documents show detail and context for those facts (Ex. I to VII—listed in 
Request for Administrative Notice at 6). Administrative or official notice is the 
appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-
11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 
12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most 
common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                             
either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 
25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). 
Exhibits I to VII are attached to GE 7 to ensure the administrative record is complete.  
 
I advised the parties that I would provide a document to the parties after the 
hearing listing the facts I would include in my decision about Afghanistan, including 
possibly some facts from documents not already part of the record (Tr. 89-94, 254-255). 
The parties would have an opportunity to object or comment on the facts (Tr. 89-94, 
254-255). On October 30, 2008, I emailed to the parties my proposed factual summary 
concerning Afghanistan with supporting documents (AJ Ex. I to VII). Applicant objected 
to some of the facts included for administrative notice as well as some of the references 
listed, and asserted some facts were taken out of context or incomplete (AJ Ex. IX). 
Department Counsel had no objections to my proposed administrative notice (AJ Ex. I).  
On November 5, 2008, I made some changes to the facts included for administrative 
notice, which I disclosed to the parties, and I offered an additional opportunity to object 
or to submit additional facts to ensure the record is complete (AJ Ex. I). The parties did 
not subsequently submit additional facts or objections, and I closed the record on 
November 12, 2008.  
  
Exhibits AA and AB 
 
 Applicant offered Intelligence Community Directive (ICD) Number 704, 
“Personnel Security Standards and Procedures Governing Eligibility for Access to 
Sensitive Compartmented Information and Other Controlled Access Program 
Information,” effective October 1, 2008 (Ex. AA) (Tr. 29-32). Exhibit AA is an expression 
of the U.S. government’s recognition “risk management” or the need for greater 
flexibility in approval of SCI clearance for Applicants with essential skills, who have 
family members living in dangerous countries (Tr. 29-32). Exhibit AA is applicable to 
determining eligibility for SCI access (para. C, Tr. 33). It authorizes a Head of an 
Intelligence Community Element authority to grant a waiver to express limitations 
“based on all available that the specific risk to national security is manageable and 
acceptable.” (para. F.1). The overall goal of ensuring “the risk to national security in 
manageable and acceptable” (para. D.2) introduces a more flexible standard to SCI 
determinations, which allows translators and other essential personnel with family in 
dangerous foreign countries a greater possibility of receiving a clearance.  Compare 
para. E with Director of Central Intelligence Directive 6/4 (superseded by ICD Number 
704). I denied Applicant’s request for admission of Exhibit AA because Applicant’s case 
does not involve SCI or other controlled access.  However, I accepted the parties’ 
arguments that Applicant’s performance under dangerous conditions in Afghanistan was 
a relevant, admissible consideration under the whole person concept (Tr. 34-39).    
 
 Exhibit AB is primarily a summary of the law as the Appeal Board has articulated 
it, concerning situations where an Applicant has provided valuable service to the United 
States in a combat zone, such as Afghanistan. Exhibit AB quotes portions of ISCR Case 
No. 07-09816 (AJ June 12, 2008), ISCR Case No. 07-00034 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008), 
ISCR Case No. 05-03846 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), and ISCR Case No. 04-12363 
(App. Bd. July 14, 2006), as well as some cases involving the “whole person concept.” 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
Several Appeal Board and Administrative Judge decisions are attached to Exhibit AB. 
Department Counsel objected to admissibility because the brief was more akin to a 
closing argument than evidence. I declined to admit Exhibit AB as substantive evidence 
and instead considered it as a summary of the law. 
   
Findings of Fact1 
 
As to the SOR’s factual allegations, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a to 1.d in his response to the SOR. He admitted his brother, nephew and sister are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan (SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c). His nephew is a body guard 
or security officer for government officials in Afghanistan (SOR ¶ 1.b). He traveled to his 
brother’s funeral in Afghanistan (SOR ¶ 1.d). His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old linguist employed by the U.S. Army in Afghanistan (Tr. 
141, 202-203). He is fluent in Pashtun (Tr. 163). He was born in Afghanistan (Tr. 141). 
He was raised in Afghanistan and completed high school in Afghanistan (Tr. 148). He 
served one year in the Kingdom of Afghanistan Army from 1973 to 1974 (Tr. 231, GE 
3). His military duty was as a military policeman (Tr. 231, GE 3). After high school he 
worked in the tourist industry and for the Afghan airlines as a clerk and accountant (Tr. 
148, 204). Applicant and his wife left Afghanistan in 1979 because it was too dangerous 
to remain there (Tr. 142-143). They first went to Pakistan and stayed in a refugee camp 
(Tr. 143). From Pakistan they came to the United States as refugees 26 years ago 
when he was 29 years old (Tr. 144, 203, GE 3).2 After arriving in the United States, he 
went to school to learn English and about computers (Tr. 145). His employment for the 
first 20 years in the United States was as a book keeper (Tr. 145). He worked for the 
same employer for 18 years (Tr. 146). He became a U.S. citizen on November 7, 1995 
(Tr. 146). He did not return to Afghanistan after arriving in the United States until he 
went to Afghanistan in July 2005 on behalf of the United States (Tr. 203-204). The only 
passport he has ever received is his U.S. passport (Tr. 224). He did not believe he was 
a dual Afghan-U.S. citizen (Tr. 227). He thought his sole citizenship was United States 
citizenship (Tr. 227).   
 
Applicant agreed to deploy for a government contractor in 2004 (Tr. 168). He 
went to Fort Benning, Georgia for two or three weeks for training (Tr. 168, 215). He 
deployed to Afghanistan in January 2005 (Tr. 124, 169). Every six months he received 
three weeks vacation in the United States, otherwise he was deployed to Afghanistan 
from January 2005 until July 2008 (Tr. 124, 169, 177-178, Ex. X, Y). Whenever he left a 
U.S. base in Afghanistan on a mission he wore body armor and a helmet because of the 
danger (Tr. 170-171). He did not carry a weapon (Tr. 171). He said he was under fire 
 
1 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe names, employment or locations in order 
to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific information.  
 
2 Applicant misstated that he has lived in the United States 29 years. His CI Screening 
Questionnaire – Middle East shows his date of entry into the United States as February 2, 1982 (GE 3). I 
believe he meant to say he left Afghanistan 29 years ago, spent about two years in Pakistan and came to 
the United States 26 years ago. 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
(Tr. 171). He was exposed to danger from explosive devices while driving on the roads, 
and on one occasion there were injuries (Tr. 236). He successfully convinced the 
villagers that forces from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the United 
States were there to build roads, hospitals and schools (Tr. 172-175, 216-217). They 
are attempting to establish peace and improve Afghanistan’s infrastructure (Tr. 172-
175). They are not in Afghanistan to occupy the country (Tr. 174). The Afghan people 
want to raise their standard of living, and NATO supports this goal (Tr. 217). The Afghan 
people were very hospitable once he explained the mission of the United States in 
Afghanistan (Tr. 173-174). He was very proud of helping the United States in 
Afghanistan (Tr. 176). The loss of his clearance resulted in his return to the United 
States in July 2008. He wants to return to his duties in Afghanistan as soon as he 
receives his clearance (Tr. 176, 215). 
 
 Applicant’s wife make a statement at his hearing. She was born in Afghanistan. 
She and her husband left Afghanistan and moved to Pakistan (Tr. 97). She is a U.S. 
permanent resident alien (Tr. 99). She tried to pass the citizenship test twice, but was 
unable to do so because her English was poor (Tr. 99). They have been married for 33 
years (Tr. 96). They have three children, a son (age 24), a daughter (age 21), and a son 
(age 17). All of their children were born in the United States and live in the United States 
(Tr. 97-98). They have not expressed any interest in becoming Afghan citizens (Tr. 
227). Applicant was away in Afghanistan, except for brief annual visits for almost four 
years (Tr. 102, 113).  Her daughter took care of the family because his wife had mental 
problems (Tr. 103). She has migraine headaches, is depressed and hears screaming 
(Tr. 111). She takes strong medicine, and feels better now (Tr. 111, 112). She 
described her husband as honest and trustworthy as well as a good husband and father 
(Tr. 104, 107). Applicant was proud of helping Americans in Afghanistan, but he did not 
discuss any details of his duties with her (Tr. 105, 108). She has two brothers who live 
in the United States (Tr. 106). She said Applicant was worried about his family that was 
still in Afghanistan because it was dangerous (Tr. 109). Her 95-year-old father still lives 
in Afghanistan (Tr. 109, 110).  Her father has bad hearing and she does not call him on 
the telephone (Tr. 110). She and her brothers living in the United States send him 
money (Tr. 111). Sometimes Applicant talks to his father-in-law when his wife talks to 
him on the phone (Tr. 225).3 Applicant did not call or visit his father-in-law when he was 
in Afghanistan (Tr. 225).  
 
 Applicant’s daughter made a statement at his hearing (Tr. 119-137). She was 
born and raised in the United States. She has never been to Afghanistan (Tr. 133). She 
currently attends college in the United States and plans to become a pediatrician (Tr. 
119). She has a part time job at a retirement community (Tr. 119). She said Applicant 
served in Afghanistan because he wanted to do his patriotic duty and sacrifice for the 
United States (Tr. 125, 133-134). She was very proud of what he was doing in the war 
against terrorism (Tr. 129). While Applicant was in Afghanistan, she paid the bills and 
took charge of the family (Tr. 125). She drove her mother to appointments and did the 
grocery shopping (Tr. 127). Applicant gave her power of attorney because Applicant’s 
spouse had mental problems (Tr. 126). Applicant did not discuss his duties in 
 
3 Although the SOR did not list Applicant’s relationship with his father-in-law as a potential 
security concern, Applicant’s 2004 Linguist Screening disclosed this relationship.    
 
6 
                                                                                                                                             
Afghanistan (Tr. 128). He is not close to his brother or nephew in Afghanistan (Tr. 132). 
She described him as very honest, loyal, kind, gentle, affectionate and loving (Tr. 129-
132). She speaks English and Farsi (Tr. 136). She did not remember talking to her 
father’s relatives, who live in Afghanistan (Tr. 137). Although she rarely speaks to her 
mother’s father, she spoke to him a couple nights before the hearing (Tr. 137).  
   
 Applicant has about 60 relatives who live in the United States, one sister who 
lives in the Netherlands (Tr. 150-152, 154, Ex. A), and one sister who lives in the United 
Kingdom (Tr. 230, Ex. A). He does not own any property or expect to inherit any 
property in Afghanistan (Tr. 231). He has a U.S. bank account consisting of several 
hundred thousand dollars and does not have any bank accounts in foreign countries (Tr. 
233-234). He plans to purchase a house in the United States and to use some of the 
funds to pay for his children’s educations (Tr. 234-235). 
 
Applicant’s 64-year-old brother, who lives in Afghanistan, is retired (Tr. 152). He 
is married and his spouse is a housewife (Tr. 152-153). They receive financial support 
from their children living in the United States and Canada (Tr. 157-158, 207-208). He 
has never worked for the Afghan military or government (Tr. 152-153). Applicant did not 
know whether his brother receives a pension from Afghanistan (Tr. 207). He had some 
contact with his brother for one year when he was assigned to the same city where his 
brother lives (Tr. 208). After he was moved to a different Afghanistan base, he was not 
able to visit his brother (Tr. 208-209). He has irregular contact by telephone with his 
brother about three to six times a year to ask about his health or family (Tr. 156). His 
Afghan identification card is attached to the record as Ex. K (Tr. 162-163). He did not 
discuss his duties in Afghanistan with his brother (Tr. 164-165). Applicant told his 
brother he was in Afghanistan on business (Tr. 165, 213-214). He sent his brother $500 
last year to defray some of the costs for his other brother’s funeral (Tr. 208). 
 
 Applicant’s nephew is a security guard or body guard for high-ranking Afghan 
officials (Tr. 153-154, 166). He does not have any contact with his nephew and did not 
visit him in Afghanistan (Tr. 157, 166, 210). Applicant obtained proof of his nephew’s 
employment from his sister (Ex. L, Tr. 165-166). 
 
Applicant’s 75-year-old sister, who lives in Afghanistan, is a retired widow (Tr. 
154, 161). His sister’s daughter lives in the United States and provides financial support 
(Tr. 158, 210-211). His sister has never worked for the Afghan military or government 
(Tr. 154). He met his sister one time while he was in Afghanistan (Tr. 211). He has 
irregular contact by telephone with his sister about four to six times a year to ask about 
her health (Tr. 156). Her Afghan identification card is attached to the record as Ex. J 
(Ex. 159-161). Applicant did not discuss his duties in Afghanistan with his sister (Tr. 
161-162). Applicant explained he was in Afghanistan on business (Tr. 162, 212-213). 
 
 One of Applicant’s brothers (age 75) passed away in July 2007 while Applicant 
was working for the contractor in Afghanistan (Tr. 190-197, Ex. H, I). Applicant asked for 
permission to attend the funeral in Afghanistan (Tr. 190-197). The contractor granted 
permission and arranged for a flight from Applicant’s location to the location of the 
funeral (Tr. 190, 192). 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 No one has ever contacted Applicant or his Applicant’s relatives in Afghanistan to 
put pressure on Applicant to provide classified information (Tr. 198, 199). If anyone 
attempted to do so, Applicant would report the attempt to U.S. law enforcement 
authorities (Tr. 198-199). Even if their lives were threatened, he would report the 
attempt to U.S. authorities (Tr. 199).   
 
 Applicant helped the United States, France and Britain with translation and 
advice when he lived in Pakistan for two years while the war with the Soviets was 
occurring in Afghanistan (Tr. 200-202, 205). He volunteered to help the United States in 
Afghanistan because he considered the Taliban to be criminals out to destroy the 
Afghanistan (Tr. 200). Applicant knew the Afghan culture and the environment and 
believed he could help the United States fight the criminals (Tr. 200). He was happy that 
the United States had helped the Afghan people who had suffered so much for so many 
years and was proud to be part of that effort (Tr. 211-212).   
 
Recommendations and Work Performance 
 
 Applicant’s evaluation ending April 1, 2006, described him as an outstanding 
linguist, who quickly builds rapport with the person he is interviewing (Tr. 179, Ex. Y). 
His goal is to become a career interrogator (Tr. 187-188, Ex. Y). Applicant received two 
certificates of appreciation from his employer for his interrogation contributions to the 
U.S. Army in Afghanistan (Tr. 180, 217, Ex. D, E). One certificate noted his “exceptional 
interpreter support facilitating the collection of invaluable intelligence in support of the 
[unit omitted] and the global war on terror” (Ex. D). It also highlighted his deduction to 
duty and personal sacrifices (Ex. D).   
 
 A real estate agent and part time taxi driver, who is Applicant’s “very close friend” 
and neighbor, has known Applicant for five and a half years (Tr. 41-46, 50).  Their 
families frequently socialize together (Tr. 44-45).  Applicant is very trustworthy, very 
nice, “very polite and gentle guy” (Tr. 46, 49). He is generous, friendly, honest and 
helpful (Tr. 47, 49).  Applicant does not discuss what he did while in Afghanistan for the 
last few years (while holding a security clearance) (Tr. 51-52). 
 
 A driver for handicapped people and Applicant’s friend lived in Applicant’s 
neighborhood in Afghanistan in the 1980s (Tr. 57-59). He met Applicant about seven 
years ago, when he saw Applicant in a shopping center in the United States (Tr. 60, 69). 
He decided to move into Applicant’s apartment complex about three years ago (Tr. 60, 
69). They live on the same floor of the same building (Tr. 67). Their families frequently 
socialize together (Tr. 61-62). Applicant is his best friend and is like an older brother to 
him (Tr. 62). He described Applicant as a “nice guy, very respectable, very kind . . . 
patient with the kids” and as “the best person” (Tr. 64, 67).  Applicant is honest and law 
abiding (Tr. 65). Applicant does not discuss his duties while he was in Afghanistan (Tr. 
64). 
 
 The head teller at a bank, with a second job in a pharmacy was born in 
Afghanistan 41 years ago and came to the United States in 1996 (Tr. 76-77). Her father 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
was killed in Afghanistan and she received asylum as a refugee (Tr. 78-79). She is 
currently a U.S. citizen (Tr. 78). She lived in Applicant’s building in the United States for 
two years (Tr. 80-81).  She is a friend of Applicant’s family (Tr. 80-82). She describes 
Applicant as honest a good father and husband (Tr. 82).  He is friendly, helpful, honest 
and generous (Tr. 82-84).  She knew Applicant went to Afghanistan; however, he did 
not discuss what he did there (Tr. 85). She knew Applicant had a brother in Afghanistan; 
however, Applicant did not talk about his brother except to say he is doing fine (Tr. 88).  
 
 Another friend who has known Applicant in Afghanistan before he came to the 
United States and in the United States described Applicant as honest, dedicated, ethical 
and loyal (Tr. 189, Ex. Z). Applicant is responsible and trustworthy (Ex. Z).  
 
Applicant provided four training certificates (Ex. X) and a performance evaluation 
from his employer (Ex. Y). His rating indicates he either meets or exceeds expectations 
(Ex. Y). It was the only rating Applicant had received (Tr. 218).  
       
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan has been an independent nation since 1919. It was a monarchy until 
a military coup in 1973. Following a second military coup in 1978, a Marxist government 
emerged. In December 1979, the Soviet Union invaded and occupied Afghanistan, but 
freedom fighters known as mujahidin resisted the Soviet invasion. In February 1989, the 
Soviet Union withdrew pursuant to an agreement signed by Pakistan, Afghanistan, the 
United States, and the Soviet Union. The mujahidin were not a party to the agreement 
and refused to abide by it. The result was a civil war among several factions, including 
the Taliban. By the end of 1998, the Taliban controlled most of Afghanistan. 
 
The Taliban committed atrocities against minority populations, and provided 
sanctuary to Osama Ben-Laden, Al Qa’ida, and other terrorist organizations. U.S. 
military forces, along with forces from a coalition partnership, forced the Taliban out of 
power by November 2001. With the assistance and support of the United States, a new 
democratic government took office in 2004. 
 
Afghanistan’s human rights record is generally poor, due to the continuing 
insurgency, the weak government, and ongoing recovery efforts from two decades of 
war. Abuses include extrajudicial killing, torture, and restrictions on individual rights and 
liberties. Killings by security forces, militias, terrorists and insurgents are a continuing 
problem. The weak government and internal instability have enabled hostile states, non-
state actors, terrorists, and insurgents to continue operating in Afghanistan. 
“Afghanistan is a nexus of insurgency. A large part of the insurgent problem in the 
country is the Taliban, but there are other militant groups, and they often are facilitated 
by al Qa’ida. Mixed in with this is ‘the effects of a narco-system that’s been in this 
country for a long time  .  .  . It’s also mixed in with smuggling and criminality, and then 
there is a level of corruption that permeates this society. That’s a formula for insecurity 
across Afghanistan.”4 
 
4Interview of Gen. David McKiernan, Commanding General, Afghanistan International Security 
Assistance Force, on Sept. 16, 2008, by Jim Garamone, American Forces Press Service, available at   
 
9 
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                            
Although there is no evidence that the Afghan government conducts intelligence 
operations against the United States, several terrorist groups conduct intelligence 
activities as effectively as capable state intelligence agencies.  
 
“Violence is up in the country 30 percent over last year. Part of this is because 
the insurgents do not challenge NATO, U.S. or Afghan forces directly. Car bombs, 
roadside bombs, indirect fire and small-scale ambushes are their tactics now.”5 To date 
554 U.S. military personnel have been killed in Operation Enduring Freedom in and 
around Afghanistan.6 The increased death toll in Afghanistan of U.S. military personnel 
is indicative of the enhanced dangers faced by those serving in Afghanistan. In calendar 
year 2007, 83 military personnel were killed in action in Afghanistan, and so far in 
calendar year 2008, 115 military personnel have been killed in action in Afghanistan.7 
Attacks are not limited to U.S. military personnel. Terrorists target police, police recruits, 
government officials, civilians, and even school children and aid workers.  
 
The U.S. has supported the emergence of a broad-based democratic 
government and is assisting the Afghan people with rebuilding their country and 
establishing a representative government that contributes to regional stability and 
respects human rights. In May 2005, the presidents of the two countries concluded a 
strategic partnership agreement committing both countries to a long-term relationship. 
On September 26, 2008, President Bush described Afghanistan as an ally in the war 
against terrorism and emphasized the progress and promise of future success in 
Afghanistan. President Bush lauded the efforts of Afghanistan, the United States and 
other countries in economic, education, and infrastructure development with a goal of a 
thriving democracy that will deny a safe haven to terrorists and extremists. The 
spectacular growth of the participation of women in Afghanistan society, education and 
the political process bodes well for Afghanistan’s future. Since 2001, the United States 
has provided $31.9 billion for Afghanistan’s security and development. In September 
2008, the United States announced a substantial increase in U.S. forces to be deployed 
to Afghanistan in the next several months.8 Secretary Gates noted on September 29, 
2008: 
 
In Afghanistan, as the president announced earlier this month, U.S. troop 
levels are rising, with the likelihood of more increases next year. Given its 
terrain, poverty, neighborhood, and tragic history, Afghanistan in many 
ways poses an even more complex and difficult long-term challenge than 
 
http://www.defenselink.mil/utility/printitem.aspx?print=http://www.defenselink.mil/news/newsarticle.aspx?i
d=51202 (AJ Ex. III). 
 
5Id. 
 
6Department of Defense casualty report as of October 30, 2008. Available at: 
http://www.defenselink.mil/news/casualty.pdf (AJ Ex. IVA). 
 
7 Department of Defense chronological casualty report as of October 4, 2008. Available at 
http://siadapp.dmdc.osd.mil/personnel/CASUALTY/oefmonth.pdf (AJ Ex. IV). 
 
8 See n. 4, supra. 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
Iraq – one that, despite a large international effort, will require a significant 
American military and economic commitment for some time.9 
 
In spite of efforts by the United States, the government of Afghanistan, and our 
other allies, Afghanistan continues to be a violent, unsafe, unstable country. Terrorists 
have targeted international non-governmental organizations, United Nations workers, 
and recipients of non-governmental assistance. Suicide bombing attacks continue to 
inflict large numbers of casualties. Recognizing these challenges, Secretary Gates 
recently emphasized, “To be blunt, to fail – or to be seen to fail – in either Iraq or 
Afghanistan would be a disastrous blow to our credibility, both among our friends and 
allies and among potential adversaries.”10 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
 
 
9 Secretary of Defense Robert Gates’ Speech to the National Defense University on Sept. 29, 
2008, at 1. Available at  http://www.defenselink.mil/utility/printitem.aspx?print=http://www.defenselink.mil/ 
speeches/speech.aspx?speechid=1279 (AJ Ex. V). 
 
10 Id. 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                             
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                             
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
*  *  * 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; [and] 
 
*  *  * 
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make 
the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign 
person, group, government, or country. 
 
Applicant’s sister, brother, nephew and father-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. Applicant visited his brother and sister while he was serving in Afghanistan 
on behalf of the U.S. Army. He occasionally has telephone conversations with some of 
these family members living in Afghanistan. His nephew’s employment is linked with the 
Afghan government because of his employment as a bodyguard. Applicant’s spouse is 
a citizen of Afghanistan and a U.S. resident alien. There is a rebuttable presumption 
that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of 
the person's spouse, such as his father-in-law. See ISCR Case No. 01-03120 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant lived in Afghanistan in support of the U.S. armed forces from 
July 2005 to July 2008.  
 
Applicant’s travel to Afghanistan was to perform his duties as a linguist and his 
attendance at his brother’s funeral was a secondary ancillary benefit, as he was already 
in Afghanistan serving on military orders. Serving in support of the U.S. Army does not 
raise any independent security significance. See ISCR Case No. 02-26978 (App. Bd. 
Sep 21, 2005). Applicant’s financial support to his brother to defray part of the funeral 
costs demonstrates his ties of affection and obligation to his family, and it has no 
independent security significance.    
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an Applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                             
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious 
problem in the country with crime or terrorism. The U.S. participation in the war in 
Afghanistan places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his relationship with family members living in Afghanistan 
does not pose a security risk and he is not in a position to be forced to choose between 
loyalty to the United States and his family living in Afghanistan. With the ongoing war 
with terrorists in Afghanistan, it is conceivable that terrorists would target any Afghan 
citizen or former Afghan citizen living in Afghanistan or the United States in an attempt 
to gather valuable information from the United States. 
 
There is evidence that terrorists seek classified information from the United 
States. Applicant’s connections to his family members living in Afghanistan create a 
potential conflict of interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a 
possible security concern about his desire to help these relatives living in Afghanistan 
by providing classified information.    
 
The Government produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s relationships and 
contacts with his spouse and family members living in Afghanistan to raise the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. There is clear evidence that 
Afghanistan remains a very dangerous place, and Applicant is exposed to death and 
serious injury from terrorists, criminals, Al Qa’ida, or the Taliban when serving with the 
Army in Afghanistan.  AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(d) and 7(i) apply requiring further review and 
analysis.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
 
14 
                                                                                                                                             
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) cannot be applied with respect to his family members living 
in Afghanistan. Applicant has an emotional bond with his family members living in 
Afghanistan, and through his wife with his father-in-law, who lives in Afghanistan. 
Applicant communicates with them regularly and frequently (as the Appeal Board 
defines those terms). Although Applicant’s close relationships with his family members 
living in Afghanistan are an important positive reflection of his character, the same close 
relationships raise security concerns for possible foreign influence.  See n. 11, infra.     
 
There is no evidence that his family members living in Afghanistan have been 
political activists or that they have high profile jobs with the Afghan government, the 
military or any news media. There is no evidence that terrorists, criminals or the Afghan 
Government have approached or threatened Applicant’s family members living in 
Afghanistan for any reason. There is no evidence that these family members living in 
Afghanistan currently engage in activities which would bring attention to them or that 
they or other terrorists or other anti-U.S. elements are even aware of Applicant’s 
relationship with those family members. As such, there is a reduced possibility that 
these relatives would be targets for coercion or exploitation. But see n. 11, infra 
(discussing limited weight that can be given to the absence of such information). 
 
Applicant deserves some credit due to the reduced possibility that terrorists will 
exploit Applicant through his relatives in Afghanistan because of the low profile they 
have in Afghan society. Applicant’s close relationship with his relatives in Afghanistan, 
his frequent contacts with them, the nature of the terrorist threat in Afghanistan, and the 
role of the United States in fighting the terrorists in Afghanistan and Pakistan, all weigh 
against mitigating security concerns. See ADP Case No. 05-17812 at 2, 3 n.2 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 11, 2007) (finding contacts with siblings in PRC “once every two or three  months” 
not to be casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 2, 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s parents and sisters a total of about 20 times per 
year not casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 
 
15 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings once every four or five months not 
casual and infrequent).11     
 
Although the United States and Afghanistan are allies in the war on terrorism and 
the U.S. is committed to the establishment of a free and independent government in 
Afghanistan, terrorists and insurgents continue to threaten the government of 
Afghanistan, the interests of the United States, and those who cooperate with the U.S. 
and the government of Afghanistan.  
 
Applicant’s deep relationship with his three children living in the United States 
and his strong connections to the United States developed over the last 26 years tends 
to mitigate foreign interest security concerns. Applicant has “such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [he] can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” His children are U.S. citizens, and they 
all reside in the United States. They are fully inculcated with U.S. values. His wife 
attempted to pass the U.S. citizenship examination, but was unable to do so. She has 
serious medical problems and has enjoyed the benefits of advanced U.S. medical 
therapy and treatments. He has substantial investments in the United States, and no 
property or investments in Afghanistan. He has many friends and colleagues in the 
United States. He is a loyal, dedicated U.S. citizen. He has provided letters and witness 
statements to corroborate his loyalty and trustworthiness. Applicant has worked for 
government contractors with dedication and distinction. For more than three years, he 
has risked his life to support the U.S. Army in Afghanistan. He has put himself in harm’s 
way often, working alongside U.S. forces in numerous military and civil operations. He 
has made significant contributions to national security, fully aware of the risks to himself. 
 
11In ISCR Case No. 06-17838 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 28, 2008), the Appeal Board discussed the 
precedential value of the decisions predating the revision of the Adjudicative Guidelines indicated in n. 3, 
supra, and determined where the language of the Directive is unchanged or not substantively altered, the 
precedent remains valid. AG ¶ 8(c) apparently adopted the Appeal Board’s interpretation of Foreign 
Influence Mitigating Condition 1 (FIMC 1) under the previous guidelines. The Appeal Board had 
determined that contacts with relatives living in a foreign country must be both casual and infrequent to 
apply FIMC 1. See ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). Moreover, contacts with such 
family members are presumed to be “not casual.” Id. In the analysis of countervailing evidence, it is legal 
error to give significant weight to any of the following facts or factors: applicant’s ties to the United States 
(ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 5 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005)); lack of prominence of relatives living in a 
foreign country (Id.); “family members’ low-key and noncontroversial lifestyle, and the fact that the Iranian 
government has not contacted them about Applicant” (ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006); one relative living in a foreign country may be sufficient to negate FIMC 1 (ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006)); a foreign relative’s fragile health (ISCR Case No. 02-29403 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 14, 2004)), advanced age (ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 7 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003), 
financial independence (ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005), or lack of financial 
dependency upon applicant (ISCR Case No. 03-15205 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan 21, 2005)); foreign relatives 
spend part of each year in the U.S. (ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)); the lack of 
any connection between the foreign relative and the foreign government in question (ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)); the absence of any attempt at exploitation in the past (ISCR Case 
No. 03-15205 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005)); a foreign country’s friendly relationship with the U.S., its 
stable, democratic government, or its extensive foreign military agreements with the United States (ISCR 
Case No. 02-22461 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2005)) and an applicant’s “refusal to travel to Iran” and 
“meticulous work habits and practice of strictly following the rules relating to his work” (ISCR Case No. 03-
15205 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005)). Notwithstanding, I conclude that many of these attributes are 
pertinent to the analysis in this case under the whole person concept. 
 
16 
                                                                                                                                             
He strongly wants to return to his duties with U.S. troops. All these circumstances 
demonstrate that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a foreign 
power, terrorist group, or insurgent group at coercion or exploitation. See ISCR Case 
No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). I conclude AG ¶ 8(b) is established.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount 
concern. The adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in 
considering the “whole person” concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by 
the totality of his or her acts, omissions, and motivations as well as various other 
variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis.  Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at Directive ¶ E2.2.1:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the 
voluntariness of participation; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E2.2.3, “The ultimate determination of whether the granting or 
continuing of eligibility for a security clearance is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security must be an overall common sense determination based upon careful 
consideration” of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
Applicant promised to report any foreign or terrorist contacts seeking information 
to law enforcement authorities. I found this promise to be sincere and credible. 
However, in ISCR Case No. 06-24575 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007), the Appeal Board 
reversed an administrative judge’s decision to grant a PRC Applicant’s clearance 
because he gave too much weight to the Applicant’s “strong ties to the U.S.” and 
determined there was insufficient evidentiary support for the conclusion that he “can be 
trusted to resolve any conflict of interest . . . in favor of the U.S.” The Applicant in ISCR 
Case No. 06-24575 said he would not act against the U.S. if faced with the choice. 
However, the Appeal Board gives such promises little weight in their review of the 
evidence,12 stating: 
 
                                            
12 Judge White’s dissenting opinion cogently explains why credibility determinations and 
ultimately the decision whether to grant or deny a clearance should be left to the judge who makes 
witness credibility determinations. Id. at 5-7. See also ISCR Case No. 04-06386 at 10-11 (App. Bd. Aug. 
25, 2006) (Harvey, J., dissenting) (discussing limitations on Appeal Board’s authority to reverse hearing-
level judicial decisions and recommends remanding cases to resolve material, prejudicial error). 
 
 
17 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
An Applicant’s stated intention as to what he would do in the future is of 
relatively little weight, given the record in this case. See ISCR Case No. 
03-09053 at (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2006) (“An applicant’s stated intention 
about what he or she might do in the future under some hypothetical set of 
circumstances is merely a statement of intention that is not entitled to 
much weight, unless there is record evidence that the applicant has acted 
in a similar manner in the past under similar circumstances.”) 
 
Id. at 4. See also ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) (criticizing the 
administrative judge’s reliance on PRC-Applicant’s promise to choose the U.S. over 
PRC should a conflict arise, and reversing the administrative judge’s decision to grant a 
clearance).  I respect the Appeal Board’s position and give little weight to Applicant’s 
promise to report any such contacts that might occur to law enforcement. 
    
A Guideline B decision concerning the Afghanistan must take into consideration 
the geopolitical situation in Afghanistan, as well as the dangers existing in 
Afghanistan.13 Afghanistan is a diplomatic and strategic partner of the United States. 
Both countries have mutual interests and are allies in the war against terrorists and the 
Taliban. The United States has spent billions of dollars and hundreds of U.S. soldiers 
have been killed assisting Afghanistan against terrorists and the Taliban.  
 
One element increasing the foreign influence security concern is Applicant’s 
frequent contacts with his family in Afghanistan, his spouse’s Afghan citizenship, and 
his own duties in Afghanistan. He has a close relationship with his family members in 
Afghanistan, and they are vulnerable to terrorist or Taliban coercion and non-coercive 
measures because of where they live. Because terrorists and the Taliban violate 
International law, they are more likely to use improper and/or illegal means to obtain 
classified information through Applicant’s family living in Afghanistan.  Applicant shares 
the dangers of serving in Afghanistan with thousands of U.S. citizens, and thousands of 
those same U.S. citizens hold security clearances and are subject to coercion to obtain 
classified information. Under the circumstances of an on-going war involving U.S. forces 
those dangers are not determinative.     
 
There are significant factors supporting approval of Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant left Afghanistan 29 years ago, and after two years in 
Pakistan, he and his wife moved to the United States in 1982. He did not return to 
Afghanistan from 1982 until July 2005, when he went there with the U.S. Army as a 
translator. He became a U.S. citizen in 1995. His three children are U.S. citizens. He 
has approximately 60 relatives who live in the United States. He has a large bank 
account in the United States and no investments in other countries. Applicant’s closest 
relatives are his wife and children. All of them live in the United States. His wife has 
medical problems, and she receives excellent medical care in the United States, 
whereas such care would not be available in Afghanistan. Applicant is an excellent 
employee and U.S. citizen. Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. 
 
13 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion).  
 
 
18 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
He was careful during the hearing not to disclose sensitive or classified information 
about his experiences with the U.S. military forces. He compellingly explained why his 
loyalty is to the United States, rather than to the Afghanistan. Applicant sees the fight 
against terrorists, insurgents, and extremists as necessary to protect the quality of life of 
his family members in Afghanistan. He has repeatedly demonstrated his bravery, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. He has mentally and emotionally resolved the conflict 
between the safety of his family and himself from terrorists and his desire to help the 
U.S. military forces. He has repeatedly placed himself in harm’s way to ensure that the 
terrorists will not prevail in the struggle for Afghanistan’s future. He thoroughly 
developed the evidence showing his connections to the United States and to 
Afghanistan. He provided corroborating statements concerning his loyalty and 
trustworthiness, and favorable recommendations of employers and friends who knew 
him in the United States and Afghanistan.    
 
After carefully weighing the evidence of his connections to his family living in 
Afghanistan, and to the United States, I conclude Applicant has carried his burden of 
fully mitigating the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
           I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”14 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
14See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
