This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
1
as amended and modified (Directive), DoD Regulation 5200.2-R, dated January 1987, as amended
(Regulation), and the revised adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-00540
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concern that arises from his financial
irresponsibility as demonstrated by the many debts he has allowed to remain delinquent
for a number of years.  
On April 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) and
Guideline E (personal conduct). Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR, dated June
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
 In addition to the SOR and Applicant’s response, the attachments to the FORM consist of a security
2
clearance application, two credit reports, Applicant’s personal financial statement, a wage stub and several
computer printouts concerning two judgments that have been recorded against Applicant.   
 The identity of the creditors and the amount owing on the charged off account alleged in SOR
3
subparagraph 1.c and the judgment alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.d are identical. Department Counsel
conceded in the FORM these appear to be duplicate allegations of the same account. Thus, SOR
subparagraph 1.c will be found for Applicant.
2
5, 2008, in which he admitted all Guideline F allegations and denied the sole Guideline E
allegation. He requested a clearance decision based on the written record without a
hearing.  
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 28, 2008,
that was mailed to Applicant on July 31, 2008. Applicant was notified he had 30 days from
receipt of the FORM to submit his objections thereto or any additional information he
wanted considered. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on August 11, 2008. He
did not respond to the FORM, object to anything contained in the FORM, or submit any
additional information he wanted considered within the time provided to him. The case was
assigned to me on October 10, 2008.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits,  I make the following findings of fact:2
Applicant is a 40-year-old single man who has been employed as a “baser” by a
defense contractor since January 2001. He was employed as a “cutter” outside the
defense industry from June 1995 to June 2000. He was unemployed from July 2000 to
January 2001. There is no information in the file concerning his educational background.
He did not report having any dependents. 
Applicant’s credit reports and his admissions to the allegations contained in the SOR
establish he has six accounts, totalling $6,635, that were submitted for collection, one
account, owing in the amount of $679, that was charged off as a bad debt, and two
accounts, totalling $4,402, that resulted in judgments being entered against him.  The3
credit reports indicate the collection accounts were submitted for collection at various times
between September 2001 and June 2007. The judgments were recorded in September
2003 and April 2005.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated: “I am in the process of getting my
debts consolidated and intend to pay them off.” On the bottom of the personal financial
statement he submitted, Applicant indicated he was making payments to a debt counseling
service and stated: “$270.00 payments as of today 203.00" He provided no other
information about his contractual relationship with the counseling service, what debts, if
any, of those alleged in the SOR might be included in any repayment plan he may have
agreed to with the counseling service, or what are the terms of any repayment plan he may
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.4
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 5
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).6
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).
7
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.
8
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
9
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.10
3
have entered into with the counseling service. Most importantly, he provided no information
about why he allowed the debts alleged in the SOR to become or remain delinquent.  
The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately falsified the security clearance application
he submitted in June 2007, by failing to disclose the two judgments that had been entered
against him. However, he did disclose in that security clearance application that his wages
had been garnished and that he had accounts that were more than 90 and more than 180
days past due.  
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the Disqualifying
Conditions (DC) and Mitigating Conditions (MC) for each applicable guideline. Additionally,
each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon
the relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole person concept, and the
factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence
of a particular condition or factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the
adjudicative guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this
policy guidance. Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline F (financial
considerations) and Guideline E (personal conduct), with their respective DC and MC, are
most relevant in this case.   
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of4 5
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence ,6
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the7
evidence.”  Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to8
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable9
clearance decision.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.
11
 Id at 531.12
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.13
4
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard11
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to12
classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      13
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Applicant has six accounts, totalling $6,635, that have been submitted for collection,
and two accounts, totalling $4,402, that have resulted in judgments being entered against
him. Those accounts have been delinquent for many years ranging as far back as
September 2001. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy
debts; DC 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations apply. 
Applicant failed to provide any explanation for the delinquent debts. His security
clearance application discloses a six-month period of unemployment in 2000, However, the
unemployment occurred in many cases long before any of the debts alleged in the SOR
became delinquent. Further, he has been continuously employed since January 2001,
during which time all of the alleged debts became delinquent. Thus, Mitigating Condition
(MC) 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under
the circumstances does not apply. 
Applicant asserted in his response to the SOR that he was consolidating and
intended to satisfy his debts. He made entries on the personal financial statement he
submitted that may indicate he has contracted with a debt consulting service and may be
making payments on his debts through that service. However, the entries are so vague and
incomplete that it is impossible to conclude he has actually entered into a repayment plan
that includes the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR or that he has made continuous
payments under any plan he may have entered into. Accordingly, MC 20(c): the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that
the problem is being resolved or is under control; and 20(d): the individual initiated a good-
5
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts do not apply. The
remaining mitigating conditions have no applicability to the facts of this case. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Personal conduct is always a concern because conduct involving questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the (sensitive position eligibility) process or any failure to cooperate with
the (sensitive position eligibility) process.
Applicant failed to disclose the two judgments that were entered against him, as
required, in the security clearance application he submitted in June 2007. However, he did
disclose the adverse financial information about his wages being garnished and accounts
that were more than 90 and 180 days past due. In his response to the SOR, Applicant
stated the omission about the judgments was due to his not understanding the question.
Considering Applicant’s explanation and the adverse financial information he did disclose,
I conclude Applicant did not deliberately fail to disclose the judgments. 
 
The objective of the security clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.
Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of
their acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into
consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking,
and careful analysis.   
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, Applicant has failed to mitigate the
security concerns caused by the financial considerations that are present in this case. He
has not overcome the case against him nor satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It
is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a & b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d - 1.i: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                            
HENRY LAZZARO
Administrative Judge
7
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

