KEYWORD: Personal Conduct; Criminal; Security Violations
DIGEST: Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the
cumulative effect of his history of mishandling classified information, false statements and related
personal conduct, and criminal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
CASENO: 03-11408.h1
DATE: 07/23/2007
DATE: July 23, 2007
In re:
------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 03-11408
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MICHAEL H. LEONARD
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
 Executive Order 10865, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2,1
1992, as amended (Directive).
 See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (December
29, 2005). 
2
Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the
cumulative effect of his history of mishandling classified information, false statements and related
personal conduct, and criminal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his eligibility for a
security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on
February 7, 2007. The SOR—which is equivalent to an administrative complaint—details the factual
basis for the action and alleges a security concern under Guideline E for personal conduct, Guideline
J for criminal conduct, and Guideline K for handling protected information.  
In addition to the Directive, this case is brought under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by
the President on December 29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense
Department, effective September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive and Appendix 8 to DoD Regulation 5200.2-R. They apply to all
adjudications and other determinations where an SOR has been issued on September 1, 2006, or
thereafter.  Both the Directive and the Regulation are pending formal amendment. The Revised2
Guidelines apply to this case because the SOR is dated February 7, 2007, which is after the effective
date. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR on February 19, 2007, and requested a hearing. On February
27 , he filed an amended reply to the SOR. The case was assigned to another administrative judgeth
on May 9, 2007, who caused a notice of hearing to be issued scheduling the hearing for June 20,
2007. The case was reassigned to me on June 9, 2007, due to a scheduling conflict. The hearing took
place as scheduled. DOHA received the hearing transcript on June 29, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Based on his amended answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations set forth in SOR
subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.h, and 2.a. He denied the remaining allegations. Based on the record
evidence as a whole, I find the following facts:
3
1. Introduction
Applicant is a 39-year-old aeronautical engineer for an aerospace and defense company. He
has worked for this company since November 1999. He holds a bachelor’s degree and will soon
complete a master’s degree in technical management. He has never been married and he has no
children. At his job, he works on a program involving military fighter aircraft. He has a favorable
work history, as shown by the numerous letters of recommendation submitted by coworkers (Exhibit
A). He is seeking to obtain a security clearance for his employment in the defense industry. 
2. Applicant’s Mishandling of Classified Information during the 1980s–1990s
From January 1986 to August 1995, Applicant served as a Sailor on active duty in the U.S.
Navy. He achieved the rating of machinist’s mate after completing nuclear field A school. When he
was honorably discharged from the Navy, he was a machinist’s mate first class (paygrade E-6). 
In about 1989, he was serving onboard an aircraft carrier. Like others on his ship, he kept
classified information in his locker/bunk area to study. This resulted in him accidentally removing
a 15 to 20-page classified training handout from the ship when he made a trip to visit his parents.
The handout was a hand-drawn schematic of reactor plant subsystems. He discovered the handout
when he arrived at his parents’ home. He did not report the matter, and intended to return the
handout to the ship. He forgot the handout at his parents’ home. During the drive back to the ship,
he remembered the handout. He exited the interstate at the first opportunity and called his father. He
told his father to burn the handout in the fireplace. He felt comfortable asking his father to do this
because his father had served in the U.S. Air Force and had held a security clearance. Applicant
never reported this incident to the Navy. 
In about 1991 or 1992, while serving onboard the same ship, Applicant was, on short notice,
put in charge of his department’s technical library. He immediately started to inventory the classified
materials and discovered a few manuals were missing. He did not report the missing manuals that
night, and he resumed his inventory the following morning thinking the manuals would likely turn
up. The inventory was completed the next day and materials were still missing. He reported the
matter to his supervisor. An investigation was conducted. It resulted in the department’s security
officer and his supervisor being reprimanded. He received a non-punitive letter of reprimand for his
role in the incident. Because the letter was not punitive, it did not become a part of his permanent
military record. The letter was not made part of the record evidence, and the factual basis for
reprimand is unclear.  
In about 1992, while serving as the custodian of his department’s technical library onboard
the aircraft carrier, he removed a classified schematic diagram of the nuclear power plant. He was
revising a technical manual and replaced the old schematic with the revised schematic. Instead of
destroying the old schematic, he kept it as a souvenir, hiding it under his bunk on the ship. When he
was reassigned in June 1992, he took the schematic with him. He kept the schematic for 18 months
to 2 years until he decided he should not keep it any longer. He destroyed it by cutting it up, placing
it in a bag, and putting it in the trash. Applicant never reported this incident to the Navy. 
3. Applicant’s 1999 Extortion Charge  
 In deciding this case, I have not considered the results of any polygraph examinations. 3
4
Toward the end of his military service, Applicant enrolled at a nearby state military college.
He earned an associate’s degree in August 1995, the same month he was discharged from the Navy.
He then enrolled at a prestigious state university to pursue his bachelor’s degree, which he completed
in May 1999. During this time, Applicant became involved with a woman and that relationship
eventually resulted in the extortion charge.
Applicant met the woman in 1997 when she began cutting his hair. They dated for a period,
but then resumed a platonic friendship. The relationship ended in about January 1999 when
Applicant decided to terminate their friendship and informed the woman of his decision. In February
1999, Applicant was arrested on the extortion charge. The basis for the extortion charge was that the
woman alleged that Applicant had demanded money from her or he would tell her boyfriend they
had dated. Applicant was held in jail for a few hours until he posted bond. The case was set for trial
until the prosecution elected to dismiss the charges. Applicant appeared in court on or about June
14, 1999, and the court dismissed the charge. Applicant maintains the woman fabricated the charge.
4. Applicant’s 1999 Security-Clearance Application
Shortly after starting work with his current employer in 1999, Applicant was selected by his
company to fill a contract position with another governmental agency (AGA). This position required
a top-secret  security clearance along with access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI). To
obtain the clearance and SCI access, Applicant submitted a security-clearance application on
December 1, 1999 (Exhibit 2). In signing the application, Applicant certified that his statements were
true, complete, and correct to the best of his knowledge and belief and were made in good faith.
Also, he acknowledged that a knowing and willful false statement could be punished under federal
law. 
Other than a number of foreign contacts, foreign travel, and the dismissed extortion charge,
Applicant did not report anything of security significance. In particular, in response to Question 27
about illegal drug use, Applicant replied “No,” meaning that he had not  illegally used any controlled
substance in the last seven years. His answer to Question 27 was false because he was then using the
drug Ecstacy. He had used Ecstacy, in a social or party atmosphere, from July 1999 through
November 1999. He continued using Ecstacy until about November 2000. He used it about twice a
month during the six-month period of December 1999–May 2000. Other than this period, he used
it infrequently. He stopped using it due to feeling guilty about violating his employer’s no-drug use
policy.
Based on the 1999 security-clearance application, a background investigation was conducted.
In about May 2000, Applicant was required to take a polygraph examination.  He told the examiner3
about the non-punitive letter of reprimand. During the interview, he was asked if he had withheld
information about mishandling classified information. Although he then did not remember the 1989
incident set forth in SOR subparagraph 1.a, he did remember the 1992 incident set forth in SOR
subparagraph 1.c. He did not disclose it in response to the examiner’s question. 
Applicant took a second polygraph examination about one month later in June 2000. During
the examination, the examiner accused Applicant of trying to manipulate the polygraph by
 I have relied heavily on Exhibit 7 in making my findings of fact. 4
5
controlling his breathing (known as countermeasures). Applicant was not controlling his breathing,
but was flexing his sphincter muscle in an attempt to manipulate the polygraph. He learned about
this method by conducting research about the polygraph. He was doing this because he was lying
about his mishandling of classified information. He denied using any countermeasures and the
examination ended with an argument between Applicant and the examiner.
Two to three months later in about September 2000, Applicant was scheduled for his third
polygraph examination. Applicant denies deliberately failing to disclose information about handling
classified information during this interview. He may have told the examiner about mishandling
classified information, but does not explicitly recall having done so.
In about January or February 2001, Applicant met for an interview with another investigator.
In this interview, he admitted that he had been lying about mishandling classified information. He
detailed his mishandling of classified information as described above. He also admitted to using
countermeasures (flexing his sphincter) during the polygraph examination. Based on these matters,
the AGA denied Applicant a security clearance in about August 2001.  
5. Applicant’s 2001 Security-Clearance Application
A few months later in October 2001, Applicant completed a second security-clearance
application (Exhibit 1). In signing the application, Applicant certified that his statements were true,
complete, and correct to the best of his knowledge and belief and were made in good faith. Also, he
acknowledged that a knowing and willful false statement could be punished under federal law. 
In response to Question 21 about his police record, Applicant reported the extortion charge.
In response to 27 about illegal drugs, Applicant reported using Ecstacy from about July 1999 to
November 2000. He estimated his usage at 13 to 14 times. In response to Question 32 about his
investigative record, he reported being denied a security clearance by AGA in August 2001. 
Another background investigation was conducted based on the 2001 security-clearance
application. In a sworn statement, dated October 2002, Applicant described, among other things, the
circumstances surrounding the extortion charge and his use of Ecstacy (Exhibit 4). In a second sworn
statement, dated March 2003, he provided information about his family and friends who are foreign
nationals (Exhibit 5). In a third sworn statement, dated August 2004, he provided information about
the denial of a security clearance in 2001 (Exhibit 6). 
In a fourth sworn statement, dated December 2006, he gave a detailed, nine-page accounting
of: (1) his association with relatives and friends who are foreign nationals; (2) his foreign travel; (3)
his military service; (4) his arrest for extortion; (5) his illegal drug involvement; and (6) the denial
of a security clearance by AGA (Exhibit 7).  He admitted mishandling classified information and4
telling numerous lies trying to conceal it (Exhibit 7 at 8). He lied because he was fearful what would
happen to him if the admitted mishandling classified information. He pledged that he would never
intentionally mishandle classified information in the future and would be truthful about all security
matters. In this regard, Applicant described his now positive attitude toward security matters for his
present employment duties (R. 95–103).   
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.5
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (App. Bd. Jul. 11, 1997).6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a11
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plain that thereth
is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.12
6
POLICIES
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating
conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access
to classified information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access
to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that the applicant has not met the strict5
guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for a security clearance.
BURDEN OF PROOF
The only purpose of a security-clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an applicant.  There is no6
presumption in favor of granting or continuing access to classified information.  The government7
has the burden of presenting evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been
controverted.  An applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or8
mitigate facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate burden9
of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.10
No one has a right to a security clearance.  As noted by the Supreme Court in Department11
of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the12
Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information
will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
 Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,13
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 Deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator,14
security official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative. 
7
CONCLUSIONS
1. The Personal Conduct Security Concern 
The concern under Guideline E is conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, which may raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of special
interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process
or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
The three incidents of mishandling classified information set forth in SOR subparagraphs 1.a,
1.b, and 1.c under Guideline E are properly addressed under Guideline K, where they are also
alleged. This is consistent with the change in the Revised Guidelines that eliminated the catch-all
disqualifying condition of any “reliable, unfavorable information” from Guideline E. The current
version of Guideline E has more limited language, and includes conditions that relate to false
statements, or credible adverse information that is not sufficient to support action under another
guideline. Here, the matters in subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c do not fall within any disqualifying
condition under the current version of Guideline E. On this basis, I find for Applicant on these
subparagraphs under Guideline E; however, they will be addressed under Guideline K. 
The same logic applies to the denial of the security clearance by the AGA in 2001 as set forth
in subparagraph 1.h. In my view, this matter does not fall within a disqualifying condition under
Guideline E. On this basis, I find for Applicant on this subparagraph. But the denial is a relevant and
material fact that I have considered in deciding this case. 
Turning to the falsification allegations, the government has established its case under this
guideline. He lied on his 1999 security-clearance application when he deliberately omitted,
concealed, or falsified relevant facts by denying any involvement with illegal drugs. He continued
lying in May and June 2000 by deliberately providing false or misleading statements about his
history of mishandling classified information in the Navy. Aggravating his false statements are his
efforts to manipulate the polygraph examination in June 2000. I am not persuaded, however, that the
evidence is sufficient to establish a falsification during the September 2000 interview as set forth in
subparagraph 1.g. 
Although he eventually cooperated and provided a full accounting of his conduct, it was only
after significant time and resources were expended. Given the false statements made when he
completed the 1999 security-clearance application and during interviews in May and June 2000,
both DC 1  and DC 2  apply. 13 14
 Collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or in any other unauthorized location.15
 Any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other sensitive information. 16
8
I reviewed the mitigating conditions under the guideline and conclude none apply. Making
deliberately false and misleading statements to the government during the security-clearance process
is serious misconduct. It is not easily explained away, extenuated, or mitigated. 
2. The Handling Protected Information Concern
The concern under Guideline K is that deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules
and regulations for protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability to safeguard such
information. As such, it is a bona fide security concern. 
The government has established its case under this guideline. Applicant was involved in two
incidents that raise concerns about his willingness and ability to properly handle and safeguard
classified information. 
The incident in 1989 is of moderate concern because Applicant should have reported the
incident as soon as he discovered that he had inadvertently taken the classified training handout to
his parents’ home. He complicated the situation by forgetting it and then telling his father to destroy
it without reporting the incident to the Navy. 
The incident in 1991–1992 is of no concern. He was reprimanded for his role as the newly
appointed custodian of the department’s technical library. But the letter was not punitive, which
indicates that he was not the root cause of the library’s security problems. And because the basis for
the reprimand is unclear, this incident does not rise to the level of a security concern under the
guideline. 
The incident in 1992 presents the most serious concern. It was an intentional and knowing
violation when Applicant removed and kept the classified schematic. Taken together, the two
incidents of concern paint a picture of Applicant as an individual who had a lax attitude toward
handling classified information. Given these circumstances, DC 2  and DC 7  apply.  15 16
I reviewed the mitigating conditions under the guideline and conclude Applicant receives
some credit. Each MC is summarized and discussed below.
The first MC—so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and no longer casts
doubt on the individual—applies in a limited fashion. The two incidents of concern took place when
he was in the Navy. This was many years ago when he was a relatively young Sailor, and that is no
longer the case. The credit in mitigation is limited, however, due to Applicant’s efforts to conceal
his history of mishandling classified information.
The second MC—the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward security—does not apply. Although he  now
9
professes a positive attitude toward security, there is no evidence showing Applicant  had counseling
or remedial security training.
The third MC—the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training—does
not apply. There is no evidence to support the conclusion that improper supervision or training
contributed to Applicant’s two incidents of mishandling classified information. The fault was
Applicant’s on those two occasions. 
3. The Criminal Conduct Security Concern
The concern under Guideline J is that criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
Starting with the 1999 extortion charge, the government has not established its case. Besides
Applicant’s testimony, the only evidence supporting this matter is the FBI Identification Record
(Exhibit 3), which merely shows Applicant was arrested in February 1999 for extortion. Applicant
claims the charge was made up by a former girlfriend. The charge was dismissed or dropped a few
days before trial. Based on these facts, the evidence is insufficient to prove criminal conduct of any
security significance. 
In addition to the extortion charge, the criminal conduct at issue here is making a false
statement within the jurisdiction of a federal agency in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 based on the
four falsification allegations (SOR subparagraphs 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g). Because I concluded that
three of the falsification allegations were substantiated, the criminal conduct concern under
Guideline J is decided against Applicant as well. None of the mitigating conditions apply. Given the
gravity of his misconduct, his evidence in reform and rehabilitation is insufficient to mitigate his
criminal conduct of making false statements to the federal government. 
4. Conclusion
I have also considered this case in light of the whole-person concept and conclude the
disqualifying evidence outweighs the mitigating evidence. In particular, I considered Applicant’s
highly favorable letters of recommendation (Exhibit A). But I gave the letters less weight because
none of the individuals who wrote the letters were familiar with the nature of the allegations in this
case (R. 83). 
In his closing argument, Applicant conceded that he has made mistakes in the past. He argues
that he has reformed during the last several years and this period should be enough to mitigate his
case (R. 118–119). Although many years have passed since he mishandled classified information in
the Navy, and several years have passed since he lied on his security-clearance application in 1999
and during interviews in 2000, the passage of time is not sufficient to mitigate the security concerns.
The record evidence shows Applicant was untruthful and dishonest during the security-clearance
process. His multiple false statements and attempt to manipulate the investigative process is serious
misconduct. The seriousness of his misconduct continues to create a substantial doubt about his
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Stated somewhat differently, the gravity of his
misconduct outweighs the favorable evidence.  
10
Viewing the record evidence as a whole, I conclude Applicant did not present sufficient
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the cumulative effect of his history of mishandling
classified information, false statements and related personal conduct, and criminal conduct. And
Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Here are my conclusions for each allegation in the SOR:
SOR ¶ 1–Guideline E: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs a, b, c: For Applicant
Subparagraphs d, e, f: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs g, h: For Applicant
SOR ¶ 2–Guideline J: Against Applicant
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: Against Applicant
SOR ¶ 3–Guideline K: Against Applicant
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant (on ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c)
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge
