KEYWORD: Guideline M; Guideline K; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Findings challenged by Applicant are either permissible characterizations or
harmless error.  There is a strong presumption against granting a clearance.  Once the
government presents evidence raising security concerns the applicant has the burden to establish
mitigation.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 03-21688.a1
DATE: 07/02/2007
DATE: July 2, 2007
In Re:
---------
SSN:-----
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 03-21688
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Dennis J. Sysko, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On October 27, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the
Applicant incorporated the first three assignments of error into his challenge to the Judge’s findings.  1
The Judge’s favorable decisions under Guidelines M and K are not at issue on appeal.2
2
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline M (Misuse of Information
Technology Systems), Guideline K (Security Violations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On November 30, 2006, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Christopher
Graham denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant filed a timely appeal pursuant
to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred by considering
evidence not in the record; whether the Judge erred by misinterpreting and improperly and
erroneously considering evidence in the record; whether the Judge erred by improperly excluding
psychological testimony; whether the Judge’s findings of fact were not supported by substantial
evidence;  and whether the Judge’s adverse clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary1
to law.  Finding no error, we affirm.2
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  Facts
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant joined the U.S. Air Force
in 1978, taking early retirement in 1997.  On three separate occasions, twice in the 1980s and once
in 1990, Applicant copied software belonging to the U.S. Air Force or to civilian universities for use
on his personal computer.  He did so in connection with the discharge of his official duties.
Additionally, in the mid 1990s, he used a government computer to browse the internet after working
hours.  This computer was not classified and was set aside especially for such personal use and
members checking their home e-mail accounts, etc.  In 1996, he scanned a photograph of himself
onto this computer and forwarded it to his home.  He then forwarded this picture to an internet
agency specializing in assisting customers in meeting women from Eastern Bloc countries.  Upon
submitting his retirement application, Applicant used this government computer to seek post-military
employment.  
Applicant set up a private post office box in order to receive correspondence from the Eastern
Bloc women he contacted through the internet service.  He received letters from 10 women.  The
Judge found that Applicant never discussed classified information with them.  In 1997, when his
private post office box closed, letters were forwarded to his work address, where they were
discovered by a secretary and presented to Applicant.  Applicant claimed that someone must have
been joking with him.  He took the letters to the Air Force Office of Special Investigations (OSI) and
filed a complaint.  He subsequently made a second false report, presenting the OSI with a second set
of letters.  This was shortly before Applicant retired.  Applicant did not tell his wife of his activities
with the internet dating service until 2006.  
In 2003, Applicant had two security violations while working for his civilian employer.  He
had submitted reports to customers using an unclassified e-mail system.  The reports contained
3
“subtle violations” that were not caught by Applicant’s employer or by the program manager.
Applicant received a letter of reprimand and was given additional training as well as additional staff.
B.  Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of facts is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence–such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  Directive
¶  E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s findings
from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S.
607, 620-21 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give deference to the
Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive  ¶  E3.1.32.1. 
The findings which Applicant challenges are either permissible characterizations by the Judge
or harmless error, in that they would not be reasonably likely to change the outcome of the case.
Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge’s material findings do not reflect
a reasonable or plausible interpretation of the record evidence.  We note Applicant’s challenge to
the Judge’s handling of testimony by a psychologist concerning the results of testing performed on
Applicant.  The Judge had permitted the psychologist to testify over Department Counsel objection.
In his decision, the Judge summarized this testimony: “[The psychologist stated that] Applicant’s
conduct [in filing the false complaints with the OSI] can be explained away because his ethnic
background is such that the fear of embarrassment and humiliation are some of the worst things that
can happen to Applicant.”  The Judge went on to state, “I reject the psychologist’s testimony as
irrelevant and pure speculation.”  Decision at 9.  Applicant interprets this statement as meaning that
the Judge extended the testimony no consideration at all.  After reading the record, we conclude that
the Judge did, in fact, consider the testimony but that he found it not to be persuasive.  Considering
the record as a whole, the Judge’s challenged findings of security concern are sustainable.  
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 581, 528 (1988). The Appeal
Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Directive  ¶¶  E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.  
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.”   Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert den 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the government presentsth
evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish any appropriate
mitigating conditions.  See Directive  ¶  E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and mitigating
conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them apply
to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of sound discretion
Many of these same facts were also alleged under Guidelines M and K, which the Judge resolved favorably3
to Applicant.  We find no inconsistency in the Judge having done so.  While Applicant may have met his burden of
persuasion as to alleged misuse of technology or to security violations, the Judge could still reasonably believe that the
totality of Applicant’s conduct reflected negatively upon his judgement and reliability.  See Directive  ¶  D2.A5.1.1.  
4
in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20,
2006).  
We have examined the Judge’s findings in light of the record as a whole.  We conclude that
he articulated a rational connection between those findings and his ultimate decision.  See ISCR Case
No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).  While the Judge focused most of his attention on
Applicant’s  two false reports to the OSI and the fact that Applicant neglected for nine years to
inform his wife of his activities with the internet dating service, the Judge’s formal findings under
Guideline E encompassed the whole of Applicant’s conduct as reflected in his findings of fact.3
Under the circumstances, we conclude that his adverse decision is neither arbitrary, capricious, nor
contrary to law.
   
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jea E. Smallin                 
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
