KEYWORD: Guideline M; Guideline K; Guideline E
DIGEST: Although Department Counsel has established error in the Judge’s decision, the
Judge’s decision is sustainable.  The Board need not agree withe Judge’s to conclude that is
rationally based on the Judge’s findings.  Favorable decision affirmed.
CASENO: 04-08749.a1
DATE: 07/23/2007
DATE: July 23, 2007
In Re:
---------
SSN: -------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 04-08749
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Eric Borgstrom, Esq.,  Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Thomas Albin, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 5, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline M (Misuse of Information
Technology Systems), Guideline K (Security Violations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-04264 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Sept. 8, 2006).1
2
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)(Directive).  Applicant requested
a hearing.  On December 11, 2006, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello
granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel timely appealed pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30. 
Applicant has worked for the same defense contractor for 30 years.  While working in a space
with classified computers, he misused company equipment on numerous occasions by making copies
of music CDs and by viewing and editing personal photographs on a classified computer.  The
viewing and the editing of the personal photographs also constituted security violations under the
National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM).  Applicant’s record is otherwise
unblemished.  After a period of suspension without pay, Applicant returned to his job and retained
his security clearance.
Department Counsel raises the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s overall
analysis of the case is flawed because she failed to address or employ the “very heavy burden”
standard when evaluating Applicant’s evidence in mitigation; whether the Judge’s application of
Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition 5 was arbitrary, capricious and contrary to law; whether the
Judge’s application of Security Violations Mitigating Condition 4 was arbitrary, capricious and
contrary to law; whether the Judge’s application of Misuse of information Technology Systems
Mitigating Condition 5 was arbitrary, capricious and contrary to law; and whether the Judge’s whole-
person analysis is sustainable.  Department Counsel’s arguments have mixed merit, but overall they
fall short of establishing harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the Board affirms the
Judge’s decision. 
Department Counsel asserts that whether evaluating security violations under Guideline K,
Guideline E or Guideline M, or the whole person factors, the Judge was required to utilize a “very
heavy burden” standard when evaluating Applicant’s claims of reform and rehabilitation.  The Board
concludes Department Counsel’s argument fails to establish error on the part of the Judge. 
There is no presumption of error below.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 00-0339 at 3 (App. Bd.
Mar. 22, 2001).  In her decision, the Judge indicated that she considered the appropriate legal
standards.  Citing applicable Directive provisions, the Judge properly explained Applicant’s burden
with respect to extenuation and mitigation, as well as stating the clearly consistent with the national
security standard as the basis for granting a security clearance. Decision at 5.   While the Judge did
not specifically mention the “very heavy burden” that Applicant has to demonstrate in terms of
establishing extenuation or mitigation where security violations are involved,  there is no language1
in the decision to suggest that she employed a lesser standard.  While a specific enunciation of a
“very heavy burden” would have been appropriate, its omission does not constitute error.  Decisions
of DOHA administrative judges are not measured against a standard of perfection.  See, e.g.,  ISCR
Case No. 95-0319 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 18, 1996).  Department Counsel’s argument appears to be that
because Applicant’s security violations were multiple and deliberate, the fact that the Judge
concluded that they were not ultimately security clearance disqualifying is proof that she did not
employ the correct standard.  In other words, Department Counsel appears to be arguing that,
because the security violations are disqualifying as a matter of law, the Judge must have employed
the wrong standard of review.  This argument is not persuasive.  The record evidence in this case
“The individual has taken positive steps to significantly reduce or eliminate vulnerability to coercion,2
exploitation, or duress.”
“Personal conduct or concealment of information that increases an individual’s vulnerability to coercion,3
exploitation or pressure.”
“Violations were due to improper or inadequate training.”4
3
included matters in extenuation and mitigation, and the Judge was not required as a matter of law
to conclude the security violations were disqualifying on this record.  The Judge’s ultimate weighing
of the record evidence, and her ultimate conclusions, standing alone, do not provide sufficient proof
that the Judge employed the wrong legal standard.  Absent more specific indicators in the Judge’s
decision that provide evidence of the Judge’s use of an inappropriate standard, Department Counsel
has not met its burden of establishing error.      
The Judge applied Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition 5  to the case.  As pointed out by2
Department Counsel, vulnerability to coercion or duress as a result of misuse of technology or
security violations was not an issue raised by the government in the SOR.  By its plain meaning,
Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition 5 addresses the concerns covered by Personal Conduct
Disqualifying Condition 4.   See, e.g., ADP Case No. 30-1130 at 5-6 (App. Bd. January 4, 2001).3
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition 4 was not discussed by or relied upon by the Judge and,
given its absence, she did not articulate an adequate basis for the inclusion of Personal Conduct
Mitigating Condition 5.  In this instance, Department Counsel has met its burden of establishing
error. 
Department Counsel asserts that the Judge erred by applying Security Violations Mitigating
Condition 3  to the case.  In support of this argument Department Counsel states that the Judge’s4
conclusion that the “lax” security training by Applicant’s employer was a matter in mitigation is
unsupported by the record evidence.  Department Counsel notes that, at the hearing, Applicant
provided evidence that his employer had not strictly enforced the security procedures and NISPOM
provisions he had violated for a number of years.  Department Counsel goes on to state that the
Judge erred by conflating the concept of relaxed enforcement of security rules with the concept of
security training, and that relaxed enforcement does not rise to the level of mitigation.  The Board
does not agree.  Even if the concept of lax enforcement of rules is not included within the purview
of Security Violations Mitigating Condition 3, the Judge could still evaluate it as a matter in
mitigation when doing a “whole person” analysis of the totality of the record evidence.  Moreover,
on this record, there is substantial record evidence of the fact that, prior to an investigation of
Applicant and his subsequent disciplining,  Applicant’s employer’s security training program was
perfunctory at best.  The evidence supports the Judge’s conclusion that this resulted in a situation
where, when coupled with lack of rule enforcement, Applicant and his fellow employees were
largely unfamiliar with security rules that related to the specific practice of loading and editing
personal photographs onto classified computers.  Thus, the Judge’s conclusion that the employer’s
inadequate training program was a contributing factor to the violations, and was therefore mitigating,
is sustainable.
“[actions that] Demonstrate a positive attitude towards the discharge of security responsibilities.” 5
“The misuse was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation.”6
4
Department Counsel complains that the Judge inappropriately applied Security Violations
Mitigating Condition 4.   Department Counsel asserts that the Judge’s application of the mitigating5
condition was based solely on her conclusion that there was no evidence that Applicant violated any
of the provisions of the NISPOM and/or his employer’s rules since his reinstatement in 2003.  The
Board concludes that Department Counsel is reading the Judge’s decision too narrowly.  In her
decision, the Judge went beyond the basic finding that Applicant has committed no security
violations since 2003 and also found that Applicant had demonstrated a renewed sense of
commitment to security rules and regulations and has been diligent in ensuring that he abides by all
the rules and procedures since 2003.  A review of the record evidence convinces the Board that these
findings of the Judge are sustainable.  Department Counsel also argues that when applying Security
Violations Mitigating Condition 4, the Judge did not take into consideration the frequency,
seriousness and deliberateness of Applicant’s security violations and Applicant’s initial false and
evasive responses to inquiries during a March 2003 investigation into possible compromises of
classified information.  There is a rebuttable presumption that an administrative judge has considered
all the record evidence unless he or she states otherwise.  Department Counsel does not overcome
that presumption here.  The record indicates that the Judge did consider the frequency and
deliberateness of Applicant’s actions and did not mitigate the government’s concerns on those bases.
The frequency and deliberateness of Applicant’s security violations and his evasiveness during the
initial phase of the investigation do not make the mitigating factor inapplicable as a matter of law.
At most, they go to the weight that the Judge could reasonably assign to the mitigating factor.  After
reviewing the entire record, which includes substantial evidence of Applicant’s improved attitude
and conscientious security practices since his suspension, the Board is not persuaded that the Judge
applied Security Violations Mitigating Condition 4 in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious or
contrary to law.
Department Counsel next argues that the Judge erred by applying Misuse of Information
Technology Mitigating Factor 5.   Department Counsel’s assertion is persuasive.  While there is6
ample record evidence to support the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant demonstrated a positive
attitude toward security responsibilities after 2003, there is no record evidence to support a
conclusion that Applicant took affirmative, noteworthy steps to correct the misuse of his company’s
computer equipment either before or immediately after his company found out about it.  In this
instance, the fact that Applicant engaged in the misuse of computers briefly after he learned that his
employer was becoming concerned about it and the fact that Applicant was initially uncooperative
during the company’s investigation into the matter necessarily preclude the application of Misuse
of Technology Mitigating Factor 5, which contemplates prompt, affirmative corrective measures
undertaken in good faith.           
 
Department Counsel asserts that the Judge’s whole person analysis is unsustainable and
undercuts an analysis of the Government’s concerns under the specific Guidelines.  The Board does
not agree.
Department Counsel states that the Judge’s whole person analysis consists of a short list of
favorable facts which erroneously rely on the same unsupported conclusions that were inadequate
5
under the specific mitigating conditions of Guidelines K, E, and M.  Inasmuch as the Board has
sustained several of the Judge’s conclusions regarding the applicability of specific mitigating
conditions, this argument is significantly undercut.  Additionally, contrary to Department Counsel’s
argument that the Judge’s whole person analysis consists only of collective consideration of the same
individual components that relate to each mitigating condition, the Board concludes that the Judge’s
whole person analysis is appropriately broader than her analysis of the case under the individual
disqualifying and mitigating conditions.  The Judge’s whole person considerations include: (a)
Applicant’s successful 30-year history with his employer; (b) the practice of copying CD music tapes
(not involving classified systems)and loading personal photographs onto classified computer systems
was widespread among members of Applicant’s shop; (c) because of his unusual facility with
computers, Applicant often copied for others at their request as well as himself; (d) Applicant’s
activities were conducted in the open during work hours with the full knowledge of the workforce;
and (e) importantly, much of Applicant’s activity was requested by his immediate supervisor, who
gave him at least tacit and constructive approval of the activity, and even encouraged Applicant to
do copying for him after it was apparent that the company was looking into the unauthorized
practices.
In his reply brief, Applicant insists that the Judge’s decision was rationally based on all the
evidence presented.  The Board need not agree with the Judge’s ultimate disposition of the case to
conclude that Applicant’s assertion is correct.  Notwithstanding the Judge’s errors identified herein,
remand would serve no useful purpose as the decision as a whole is sustainable.   
 
          Order
The decision of the Judge granting Applicant a security clearance is  AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett        
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple          
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
SEPARATE OPINION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE MICHAEL Y. RA’ANAN
This case is disturbing.  There is ample record evidence that Applicant was dishonest and
deceptive immediately after he was caught.  There is one piece of evidence that reports that
Applicant remained so for at least two months after he was caught.  A May 26, 2003 Security
Violation —Report of Findings says Applicant “has been uncooperative and deceptive regarding
6
what equipment and processes he used to copy his personal items.”  The same report found that the
risk of compromise to classified information from Applicant’s was “HIGH.”
Applicant’s dishonesty and failure to cooperate were not alleged in the SOR.  Neither the
Administrative Judge nor the Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to conform with the
evidence, although either one could have done so (Directive, ¶E3.1.17).  The failure to amend the
SOR has produced an anomaly where Applicant is eligible for a favorable decision in light of what
was alleged but would have been ineligible if all the pertinent record evidence of his conduct were
properly at issue.  Such an outcome does not make sense in light of the “clearly consistent with the
national interest” standard. 
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
