KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline J
DIGEST: The Board’s review of a Judge’s finding determine if the finding is supported by such
relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support such a conclusion in
light of all the contrary record evidence.  There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is
impartial and unbiased and a party seeking to rebut that presumption has a heavy burden of
persuasion. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 04-03834.a1
DATE: 07/02/2007
DATE: July 2, 2007
In Re:
----------
SSN: -------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 04-03834
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Stephen P. Dalrymple, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On November 2, 2005, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and
The SOR was amended prior to the hearing on the motion of the government to add paragraph 2.b.1
Applicant’s Brief at 5.2
2
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive).   Applicant requested the case be decided on the written record.  However, the1
government requested a hearing, and on October 31,  2006, after the hearing, Administrative Judge
Elizabeth M. Matchinski denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely
appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred with respect to a
finding; whether the Judge was biased; and whether the Judge erred by  concluding that the security
concerns raised under Guidelines E and J had not been mitigated.
(1) Applicant argues that: “The Administrative Judge err[ed] by describing the DUI in 1996
as ‘driving drunk.’  While this term may be acceptable in the vernacular, it is not a correct legal
description of the offense charged and exhibits bias on the part of the judge in this context.”   The2
Board does not find this argument persuasive.    
The Board’s review of a Judge’s findings is limited to determining if they are supported by
substantial evidence—such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to
support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
“This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two
inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s finding from
being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620,
(1966).  The Board does not review a case de novo.  Considering the record evidence as a whole, the
Board concludes that the Judge’s finding is supported by substantial evidence and is sustainable.
Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge’s material findings of security
concern do not reflect a reasonable or plausible interpretation of the record evidence. 
There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and unbiased, and a party seeking
to rebut that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at
4 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004).  The issue is not whether Applicant personally believes the Judge was
biased or prejudiced against Applicant.  Rather, the issue is whether the record contains any
indication the Judge acted in a manner that would lead a reasonable person to question the fairness
and impartiality of the Judge.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-04713 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003).
Bias or prejudice is not demonstrated merely because the Judge made adverse findings or reached
unfavorable conclusions.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 94-0954 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 1995).
Moreover, even if an appealing party demonstrates error by the Judge, proof of such error, standing
alone, does not demonstrate the Judge was biased or prejudiced.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0515
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 1999).  Applicant has not met his heavy burden of persuasion on this issue,
merely because the Judge referred to Applicant’s 1996 DUI as “driving drunk.”  Moreover,
Applicant fails to identify anything in the record below that indicates or suggests a basis for a
reasonable person to question the fairness, impartiality, or professionalism of the Judge. See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 03-00740 at 2 (App. Bd. June 6, 2006). 
Id at 4.3
Because the Board finds no error with respect to the Judge’s adverse conclusions under Guidelines J and E,4
it need not address Applicant’s additional request that the Board recommend to the Director, DOHA that he waive
application of 10 U.S.C. § 986, which admittedly applies in this case.  In any event, there is no provision for waiver
recommendations by Judges or others.  See DOHA Operating Instruction 64, as revised, Sept. 12, 2006 (“. . . the
Administrative Judge shall not opine whether a waiver of 10 U.S.C. 986 is merited, nor recommend whether to consider
the case for a waiver of 10 U.S.C. 986").  Only the Director, DOHA or his designee has the authority to grant waivers
in meritorious case. See “Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Dec. 29, 2005).” 
3
(2) Applicant argues that the Judge should have concluded, as a matter of law, that
Applicant’s disqualifying conduct under Guideline J was extenuated or mitigated because the
conduct was an isolated incident; it was not recent; it was not likely to recur; it would not subject
Applicant to coercion; and Applicant has subsequently demonstrated rehabilitation.  Applicant
argues that the Judge should have concluded, as a matter of law, that Applicant’s disqualifying
conduct under Guideline E was extenuated or mitigated because “it is an impermissible stretch to
consider [Applicant’s] one-time failure to disclose his criminal record as a violation of Guideline
E.”  The Board does not find Applicant’s arguments persuasive.3
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn
simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact,
the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
 
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence against the nature and seriousness
of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant mitigating conditions
and whole person factors. The Judge reasonably explained why the evidence presented in mitigation
was insufficient to overcome the government’s security concerns.  The favorable record evidence
cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. June 29, 2005).  Given the record
that was before her, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under Guidelines E and J
is sustainable.4
4
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple   
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin         
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields         
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
