KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Directive’s guidelines set forth a variety of off-duty conduct and circumstances
which are of trustworthiness concern to the government.  A whole-person analysis is not
confined to the workplace.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 05-16601.a1
DATE: 07/02/2007
DATE: July 2, 2007
In Re:
---------
SSN: ---------
Applicant for Trustworthiness Designation
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 05-16601
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a
trustworthiness designation.  On June 21, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising
Applicant of the basis for that decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive
5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On December 7,
2006, after the hearing, Administrative Judge James A. Young denied Applicant’s request for a
In his brief, Applicant essentially reasserts the same evidence and argument he presented below.  In that
1
regard, Applicant states that he contacted a financial planner who advised him not to pay off his old debts until he
had purchased a home, because his credit score would be affected adversely.  He was then told he could refinance
the home in a year and use the equity to eliminate his old debts.  Applicant further states that he is presently working
with a realtor and a lender to implement this plan.  Applicant’s Brief at 1.   
2
trustworthiness designation.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s unfavorable
trustworthiness determination under Guidelines F and E is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.
Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse trustworthiness determination should be reversed
because he has taken reasonable steps to resolved his outstanding debts.   He also argues that there1
is no connection between his prior financial problems and his ability to perform his job and protect
sensitive information.  Applicant’s arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge erred. 
The federal government need not wait until an applicant actually mishandles or fails to
properly handle sensitive information before it can deny or revoke access to such information.  See
Adams v. Laird, 420 F. 2d 230, 238-239 (D.C. Cir. 1969), cert. denied, 397 U.S. 1039 (1970).  An
applicant with good or exemplary job performance may engage in conduct that has negative
trustworthiness implications.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-0123 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 11, 2000).  The
Directive's Guidelines set forth a variety of examples of off-duty conduct and circumstances which
are of trustworthiness concern to the government and mandate a whole person analysis to determine
an applicant's trustworthiness eligibility.  A whole-person analysis is not confined to the workplace.
See ISCR Case No. 03-11231 at 3 (June 4, 2004).
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn simply on a finding
that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the
exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-
14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone
compel the Judge to make a favorable trustworthiness determination.  As the trier of fact, the Judge
has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the
unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
The Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the financial considerations and personal conduct allegations had not been mitigated.  Although
Applicant strongly disagrees with the Judge’s conclusions, he has not established that those
conclusions are arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a history of not meeting financial obligations
which extended over many years and had deliberately failed to disclose adverse information about
his indebtedness on his Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF-85P).  At the date of the hearing
3
he still had significant outstanding debts.  In light of the foregoing, the Judge could reasonably
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were still ongoing.  The favorable record evidence cited
by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. June 29, 2005).  The Judge weighed the
mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the length and seriousness of the disqualifying
conduct, and considered the possible application of relevant mitigating conditions.  He reasonably
explained why the evidence Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome  the
government’s trustworthiness concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.   Given the
record that was before him, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable trustworthiness determination under
Guidelines F and E is sustainable.  Thus, the Judge did not err in denying Applicant a trustworthiness
designation.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a trustworthiness designation is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin        
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields       
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
