KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and unbiased and a party
seeking to rebut that presumption has a heavy burden on appeal.  Adverse decision affirmed
CASENO: 06-09462.a1
DATE: 07/19/2007
DATE: July 19, 2007
In Re:
--------
SSN: -------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-09462
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 24, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On January 3, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Joseph Testan
2
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether Applicant was denied due process;
and whether the Judge’s unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline F is arbitrary, capricious,
or contrary to law.
(1) Applicant argues that he was denied due process because he did not receive a full
investigation of the case, and a fair and impartial common sense determination based upon a totality
of the evidence.  The Board does not find this argument persuasive.
The method and scope of background investigations are outside the scope of review of the
Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-0293 at 4 (App. Bd. May 5, 2000).  The hearing is the
Applicant’s opportunity to produce other evidence beyond that developed by his background
investigation for the purpose of rebutting, explaining, extenuating, or mitigating facts to which he
has admitted or which have been proven by Department Counsel.  See, e.g., Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The
Judge is then duty bound to consider all of the evidence developed on the record of the case before
him.  Any attempt on the part of the judge to independently investigate allegations or develop facts
would, of course, conflict with the judge’s role as an impartial fact finder.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
02-32606 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2004).
There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and unbiased, and a party seeking
to rebut that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at
4 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004).  The issue is not whether Applicant personally believes the Judge was
biased or unfair.  Rather, the issue is whether the record contains any indication the Judge acted in
a manner that would lead a reasonable person to question the fairness and impartiality of the Judge.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-04713 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003).  Lack of partiality is not
demonstrated merely because the Judge made adverse findings or reached unfavorable conclusions.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 94-0954 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 1995).  Moreover, even if an appealing
party demonstrates error by the Judge, proof of such error, standing alone, does not demonstrate the
Judge was biased or unfair.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0515 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 1999).  
Applicant has not met the heavy burden of persuasion noted above, in that he fails to identify
anything in the record below that indicates or suggests a basis for a reasonable person to question
the fairness, impartiality, or professionalism of the Judge. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-00740 at 2
(App. Bd. June 6, 2006).
(2) Applicant contends that the Judge should have concluded that the security concerns raised
by his multiple unpaid debts was mitigated because his debts were largely the result of circumstances
beyond his control—loss of employment and unexpected medical expenses; they were isolated
incidents that were not recent; and Applicant has received counseling and there are indications that
the problem is under control.  In support of his contention, Applicant essentially reargues his case
The Board may not consider new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Accordingly, we may not
1
consider Applicant’s additional explanations, and they do not demonstrate error on the part of the Judge.
3
with respect to the evidence he presented at the hearing and provides addition statements as to his
current financial situation.   Applicants’ arguments do not demonstrate that the Judge erred. 1
“[T]here is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown,
913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9  Cir. 1990), cert. denied 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  Once the governmentth
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn simply
on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application
requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 01-14740 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.15, 2003).  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence
does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact,
the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs
the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
The Applicant has not met his burden of demonstrating that the Judge erred in concluding
that the security concerns raised by Applicant’s unpaid debts had not been mitigated.  Although
Applicant strongly disagrees with the Judge’s conclusions, he has not established that those
conclusions are arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3.
In this case, the Judge found that Applicant had a history of not meeting financial obligations
which extended over many years.  At the time the case was submitted for decision, he still had
significant outstanding debts and had only recently begun to repay his debts.  In light of the
foregoing, the Judge could reasonably conclude that Applicant’s financial problems were recent, not
isolated, and still ongoing.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-00799 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 16, 2007).  The
favorable record evidence cited by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision
is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-28041 at 4 (App. Bd. June
29, 2005).  The Board does not review a case de novo.   Given the record that was before him, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable clearance decision under Guideline F is sustainable.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple    
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin        
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields        
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
