KEYWORD: Alcohol
DIGEST: Applicant, a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor for the past 33 years, mitigated
security concerns arising from alcohol consumption resulting to two DUIs in the 1980s and a work
related alcohol incident in 2004 when he was escorted from his workplace. Since the most recent
event, he has been in a treatment program and is now in Alcoholics Anonymous where he has a
sponsor and has been abstinent since entering the program earlier this year. Applicant’s motivation
to not repeat his problems is sufficient to overcome any problem arising from the relatively brief
period of his abstinence. Clearance is granted. 
CASENO: 06-08708.h1
DATE: 07/11/2007
DATE:  July 11, 2007
In Re:
----------------- 
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-08708
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
CHARLES D. ABLARD
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq. , Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Thomas Albin, Esq. 
SYNOPSIS
Applicant, a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor for the past 33 years, mitigated
security concerns arising from alcohol consumption resulting to two DUIs in the 1980s and a work
related alcohol incident in 2004 when he was escorted from his workplace. Since the most recent
2
event, he has been in a treatment program and is now in Alcoholics Anonymous where he has a
sponsor and has been abstinent since entering the program earlier this year. Applicant’s motivation
to not repeat his problems is sufficient to overcome any problem arising from the relatively brief
period of his abstinence. Clearance is granted. 
STATEMENT OF CASE
On October 9, 2006, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, as amended and
modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended and modified, issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant. DOHA recommended the case be referred to an
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked.
On October 25, 2006, Applicant responded to the allegations and requested a hearing. The
matter was assigned to me on March 28, 2007. A notice of hearing was issued on May 8, 2007 for
a hearing held on May 31, 2007. Seven government exhibits and one Applicant exhibit were
admitted into evidence. Applicant and one witness on his behalf testified. The government amended
one SOR allegation to conform to the facts. The transcript was received on June 20, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted with explanation the five allegations relating to alcohol consumption.
After a complete review of the evidence in the record and upon due consideration of the entire
record, the following findings of fact are made:
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor for 33 years with the same
company who works as a nuclear machinist in a shipyard. He has held a security clearance since
1987. 
Applicant has had difficulty with alcohol consumption. He has had two arrests for alcohol-
related activities. They were for DUI’s in 1985 and 1988 for which he received counseling for the
first and loss of his driver’s license, a $500 fine, and two days in jail with six months suspended
while on probation for the second. In 1996 he completed a treatment program for alcohol use at a
well-known local facility near his workplace. He went voluntarily because he realized he needed
help. His in-patient treatment was interrupted by hospitalization for pneumonia but he participated
as an outpatient for ten of the twelve sessions offered by the facility and completed the program (Tr.
53-55). 
In January 2004, his most recent incident occurred while on the job when he was given a
breathalyser and escorted from his workplace. His shipyard had been closed for the holidays and he
had drank to excess over that period. He voluntarily went into treatment for 28 days at the same
3
facility where he had been in 1996. He was diagnosed as alcohol dependent according to the facility
records (Exh. 7) but he was not given a discharge summary so was not advised of the diagnosis until
this matter arose and he received documentation from the government. Thus, he thought that he
could drink in moderation which he was doing but did not recognize that one who is alcohol
dependent should be abstinent. 
On September 12, 2006, Applicant was evaluated by a licensed clinical social worker who
found that he had been over two years in post in-patient treatment without relapse and that his overall
prognosis was good provided he continued to monitor his alcohol usage and frequency (Exh. A). 
At the time of the hearing, Applicant was abstinent and had been since March 2007 when he
entered Alcoholics Anonymous after first learning of the diagnosis of alcohol dependence. He
attends meetings every Friday and is in the twelve step program. He has a sponsor who supports him
and he has adjusted to the program. He does not intend to use alcohol in the future (Tr. 59-61). 
Applicant is well regarded by his employer. His supervisor who has known him for 30 years
vouches for his trustworthiness, reliability, and integrity as well as his work ethic (Tr. 24-25). In
addition to his regular duties, Applicant mentors younger employees of the company and those who
have returned to work needing refreshers after lay-offs. He works as much overtime as he can and
that is often 70-80 hours a week. 
Applicant has never been married, lives alone, walks to work, and has his mother, siblings
and their children in his supportive family with whom he is close. His work at his company has been
his life since graduation from high school when he was first hired by the company. He intends to do
all within his power to insure that he continues to work, and that he does not endanger his health.
POLICIES
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to control access to
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently
trustworthy to occupy a position that will give that person access to such information.” Id. at 527.
An evaluation of whether the applicant meets the security guidelines includes consideration
of the following factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6) the presence or absence
of rehabilitation and other behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential
for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Directive, ¶ E2.2.1. Security clearances are granted only when “it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to do so.” Executive Order No. 10865 § 2. See Executive Order No. 12968 § 3.1(b).
Initially, the government must establish, by something less than a preponderance of the
evidence, that conditions exist in the personal or professional history of the applicant which
disqualify, or may disqualify, the applicant from being eligible for access to classified information
See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. The applicant then bears the burden of demonstrating it is clearly
4
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance. “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will be resolved
in favor of the national security.” Directive, ¶ E2.2.2. “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. See Executive Order No. 12968 §
3.1(b).
CONCLUSIONS
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all appropriate
adjudicative factors, I conclude the following with respect to all allegations set forth in the SOR:
The government cited a disqualifying condition (DC) under the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) pursuant to the Directive concerning alcohol consumption under Guideline G. The
security concern is that excessive alcohol consumption leads to exercise of questionable judgment
and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness (AG 21). The specific
concern is alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence. (AG
22 a), alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work in an intoxicated or impaired
condition (AG 22 b), and diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional of alcohol dependence
(AG 22 d). 
Possible mitigating conditions (MC) might include the fact that so much time has passed, or
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgement (AG 23 a), the individual
acknowledges his alcoholism, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem and has
established a pattern of abstinence if alcohol dependent (AG 23 b), and the individual has
successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling along with required aftercare, has
demonstrated an clear and established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in such as
participation in meetings of AA and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program (AG 23 d).
Both DUI arrests occurred three years apart 20 years ago and do not indicate a pattern of
conduct. The 2004 incident at work resulted in Applicant’s taking action to resolve his alcohol
related difficulties and he has received a favorable prognosis from a licensed clinical social worker
in September 2006. While the period of his abstinence is relatively brief, the briefness of the period
is overcome by Applicant’s strongly stated and demonstrated intent not to jeopardize his employment
and health, and the fact that he was not aware of the alcohol dependent diagnosis until he received
documents relating to this proceeding. The mitigating factors cited are applicable in view of the facts
established in this matter. 
In all adjudications the protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Persons
who have access to classified information have an overriding responsibility for the security concerns
of the nation. The objective of the security clearance process is the fair-minded, commonsense
assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information. The “whole
person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of their acts and omissions. Each
case must be judged on its own merits taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and
applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful analysis. 
Applicant has held steady employment for 33 years and is well regarded for his work and
5
dedication to his company. He has recognized his conduct could jeopardize his job which is his
entire life outside his family. He has taken the necessary steps to insure that further incidents with
alcohol do not happen. 
After considering all the evidence in its totality, and as an integrated whole to focus on the
whole person of Applicant, I conclude it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant a
security clearance to him.
FORMAL FINDINGS 
Formal findings as required by the Directive (Par. E3.1.25) are as follows:
Paragraph 1. Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.: For Applicant 
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or renew a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is granted.
Charles D. Ablard 
Administrative Judge
