KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Board cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 06-07827.a1
DATE: 07/20/2007
DATE: July 20, 2007
In Re:
-------
SSN: -------
Applicant for ADP I/II/III Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-07827
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) proposed to deny or revoke access to
automated information systems in ADP-I/II/III sensitivity positions for Applicant.  On August 2,
2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested that the case be
decided on the written record.  On January 31, 2007, after considering the record,  Administrative
The Judge found in favor of Applicant with respect to SOR paragraph 1.f.  That favorable finding is not at issue1
on appeal.
2
Judge Joan Caton Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant
timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.1
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge.
Rather, it contains new evidence which establishes that Applicant has been budgeting her income
and has paid off four of her outstanding debts while the decision in her case was pending.  The Board
cannot consider this new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the appealing party
has alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  It does not review cases de novo.  Applicant has not
made an allegation of harmful error.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge denying Applicant a
trustworthiness designation is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael D. Hipple 
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields    
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody        
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
