KEYWORD: Foreign Preference
DIGEST: Applicant is 66 years old, divorced, and has two adult sons.  She lived for 26 years in
Australia, holding a U.S. passport and citizenship the entire time.  In 1990, she understood the U.S.
changed its policy to allow U.S. citizens to hold Australian citizenship also.  She became an
Australian citizen and obtained a passport.  In 2000, she returned to the U.S. to live again in her
home state permanently.  Applicant mitigated the foreign preference trustworthiness concern.
Eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position is granted.
CASENO: 06-10048.h1
DATE: 07/30/2007
DATE:  July 30, 2007
In re:
------------------------------
SSN:  -----------
Applicant for ADP I/II/III Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-10048
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
PHILIP S. HOWE
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
Applicant is 66 years old, divorced, and has two adult sons.  She lived for 26 years in
Australia, holding a U.S. passport and citizenship the entire time.  In 1990, she understood the U.S.
changed its policy to allow U.S. citizens to hold Australian citizenship also.  She became an
Australian citizen and obtained a passport.  In 2000, she returned to the U.S. to live again in her
home state permanently.  Applicant mitigated the foreign preference trustworthiness concern.
Eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position is granted.
Adjudication of trustworthiness cases for ADP I, II, and III positions are resolved using the provisions of DoD1
Directive 5220.6 (Directive), pursuant to the memorandum from Carol A. Haave, Deputy Under Secretary of Defense
for Counterintelligence and Security to DOHA Director, Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases (Nov. 19, 2004).
Pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended2
and modified, and the Directive.
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a
position of trust for Applicant .  On August 15, 2006, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons  (SOR)1 2
detailing the basis for its decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign
Preference) of the Directive.  Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 2, 2006, and
elected to have a hearing before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on May 2,
2007.  On June 1, 2007, I convened a hearing to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a trustworthiness determination for Applicant.  The Government
and the Applicant submitted exhibits that were admitted into evidence.  DOHA received the hearing
transcript (Tr.) on June 8, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant's admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated as findings of fact.  After a
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and full consideration of that evidence,
I make the following additional findings of fact:
Applicant is 66 years old, divorced, with two adult children (ages 51 and 49).  She works for
a defense contractor in the health insurance business as a customer service representative.  She is a
native-born U.S. citizen.  She lives alone since her stepfather died, and has no desire to travel outside
the U.S. again, to Australia or anywhere else. (Tr. 29, 36, 38, 39; Exhibit 1, Answer)
Applicant visited Australia in 1974 on vacation and liked the topography, climate, and its
people.  She  stayed for 30 days, then returned to her home in the U.S.  Applicant was a computer
programmer then and could find work in Australia.  She applied for residency and obtained a job
with an Australian company.  She left her 18 and 16 year-old sons here in the U.S. when she moved
to Australia.  She worked for that company for nine months.  Then, she found a job with another
company and worked there for 13 years until 1990, when the company moved its information
technology operations to Singapore from Australia.  She traveled throughout the Pacific region for
business while employed with that company.  She used her U.S. passport for that travel because it
was the only passport she had until 1992. (Tr. 21, 26-29, 33, 36; Exhibits 1-5)
While living in Australia, she married an English citizen who lived in Australia.  They were
married from 1986 to 1990.  She lived in Australia until April 2000, when she returned to live in the
U.S. because she missed her father and other family members.  She claims she loves the U.S. more
than Australia, which why she returned home in 2000.  She always intended to return to the U.S.,
but did not do so earlier because she was married and had a job in Australia.  After June 1990 she
read in a publication in Australia that the U.S. Government henceforth allowed U.S. citizens to
4
obtain dual citizenship with Australia.  She thought she should obtain Australian citizenship because
she lived there and wanted to live by the law of Australia because she was there.  She would not have
applied for it if she thought the U.S. Government would not allow her to have it.  Applicant claims
she did not swear allegiance to Australia, but only affirmed she would obey its laws.  She voted once
in an Australian election because the law there requires citizens to vote.  She has voted in another
Australian election over the internet from the U.S. after 2000, then learned she does not have to vote
to avoid breaking Australian law if she is not in the country physically.  She will not vote in an
Australian election again.  She voted once in a U.S. election by absentee ballot since 1974.
Applicant would renounce her Australian citizenship to keep her job and resolve any doubts about
her trustworthiness, but has taken no overt action to renounce her Australian citizenship. (Tr. 17-27,
29, 30-33, 35, 37; Exhibits 1, 2)
Applicant obtained an Australian passport in 1992.  It expired in 2002, and Applicant retains
the expired passport.  She used her U.S. passport for travel in the Pacific region for work with her
former husband, and pleasure trips from 1974 to 2002, and after then.  Her boyfriend suggested she
get an Australian passport and she did.  Then they traveled to England in December 1992, and she
used it for that trip, which included travel through the English Channel Tunnel to France.  She used
that passport to travel to Singapore in 1996.  Applicant did use her Australian passport to depart
Australia and her U.S. passport on her return on one trip.  Applicant would never live in Australia
again, but might visit there again to see her friends.  Applicant has neither her U.S. nor her
Australian passports because they expired and she burned them some time after June 2006 when she
submitted copies of both passports to the Government in answer to written interrogatories. (Tr. 20-
24, 31, 33 38; Exhibits 2-5)
Applicant claims she did not read carefully her statement to the Government investigator
before she signed it on May 25, 2005.  She did not write it, the investigator did, and she reviewed
it before signing it.  Applicant declared above her signature that “This document is true and complete
to the best of my knowledge and belief and is made of my own free will. . .”  The statements about
retaining her Australian citizenship and returning there to live again, she claims are inaccurate.  She
said her “heart rather than her head” talked for her.  Now she claims her future does not include
“moving around the world.”  Her present assertions were made at the hearing.  Statements at the
bottom of page three and the top of page four concerning no associations with “saboteurs, spies,
revolutionist secret agents” are not terms commonly used by someone with a high school education
as Applicant has, therefore, they were written by someone else. (Tr. 18, 19, 36; Exhibit 2)
Applicant’s uncle testified as to her trustworthiness and character as he knows them.  He has
known Applicant all her life.  He is the younger brother of Applicant’s late stepfather. (Tr. 40-49)
Taking notice of historical facts, Australia has a parliamentary government with free elections
and civil rights based on English common law.  It is part of the British Commonwealth of Nations,
former British colonies who are independent countries.  Australia has been a strong and consistent
ally of the U.S. since at least 1914.  The U.S. and Australia are members of the ANZUS treaty pact
for self defense in the Southwest Pacific region, formed after World War II.  Australia is a member
of the international coalition fighting with the U.S. in Iraq presently.  The U.S. and Australia fought
together against Japanese aggression during World War II in the Pacific Ocean.  Australia does not
conduct industrial, political, economic, or military espionage against the U.S.
5
POLICIES
As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to . . . control access to information
bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position . . . that will give that person access to such information.” Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988).  The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his
designee to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that
it is clearly consistent the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information with Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960).  By direction of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Counterintelligence and Security, adjudications of cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense
Security Service or the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) for a trustworthiness determination
shall be conducted under the provisions of the Directive.  Eligibility for a position of trust is
predicated upon the applicant meeting the guidelines contained in the Directive and a finding it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so. See Directive ¶ 2.3.  An applicant “has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue his trustworthiness determination.” See Directive ¶ E3.1.15
The adjudication process is based on the whole person concept.  Enclosure 2 of the Directive
sets forth personnel security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating
conditions (MC) under each guideline that must be carefully considered in making the overall
common sense determination required.  The decision to deny an individual eligibility to occupy a
position of trust is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  See Exec. Or.
10865 § 7.  It is merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a such a determination.
In evaluating the trustworthiness of an applicant, the administrative judge must also assess
the adjudicative process factors listed in ¶ 6.3 of the Directive.  Those assessments include:  (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, and
the extent of knowledgeable participation; (3) how recent and frequent the behavior was; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6)
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood
of continuation or recurrence (See Directive, Section E2.2.1. of Enclosure 2).  Because each case
presents its own unique facts and circumstances, it should not be assumed that the factors exhaust
the realm of human experience or that the factors apply equally in every case.  Moreover, although
adverse information concerning a single condition may not be sufficient for an unfavorable
determination, the individual may be disqualified if available information reflects a recent or
recurring pattern of questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or other behavior specified in the
Guidelines.
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the personal
or professional history of the applicant that disqualify, or may disqualify, the applicant from being
eligible to occupy a position of trust.  The Directive presumes a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the disqualifying conditions listed in the guidelines and an
applicant’s trustworthiness suitability.  See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).
All that is required is proof of facts and circumstances that indicate an applicant is at risk for
mishandling classified information, or that an applicant does not demonstrate the high degree of
6
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness required of persons handling classified information.  ISCR
Case No. 00-0277, 2001 DOHA LEXIS 335 at **6-8 (App. Bd. 2001).  Once the Government has
established a prima facie case by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate
burden of demonstrating that is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his
trustworthiness determination. ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. 2002).  “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will be resolved
in favor of the national security.” Directive ¶ E2.2.2
Based upon a consideration of the evidence as a whole, I find the following adjudicative
guideline most pertinent to an evaluation of the facts of this case:
Guideline C: Foreign Preference: The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to
indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
E2.A3.1.1
Applicable also is the Memorandum of August 16, 2000, entitled “Guidance of DoD Central
Adjudication Facilities (CAF) Clarifying the Application of Foreign Preference Adjudicative
Guidelines,” by the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications and
Intelligence (ASDC3I), commonly known as the “Money Memo..  This memorandum guidance
states that 
possession and/or use of a foreign passport may be a disqualifying condition.  It contains no
mitigating factor related to the applicant’s personal convenience, safety, requirements of
foreign law, or the identify of the foreign country.  The only applicable mitigating factor
addresses the official approval of the United States Government for the possession or use.
The security concerns underlying this guideline are that the possession and use of a foreign
passport in preference to a U.S. passport raised doubt as to whether the person’s allegiance
to the United States is paramount and it could also facilitate foreign travel unverifiable by
the United States.  Therefore, consistent application of the guideline requires that any
clearance be denied or revoked unless the applicant surrenders the foreign passport or obtains
official approval for is use from the appropriate agency of the United States Government.
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all
available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that  . . .
assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.”
(Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1)  Appendix 8 of the Regulation sets forth the adjudicative policy, as well as
the disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) associated with each guideline.
DoD contractor personnel are afforded the adjudication procedures contained in the Directive.
(Regulation ¶ C8.2.1)
CONCLUSIONS
Guideline C - Foreign Preference:  Applicant went off on an adventure in 1974.  She
traveled from her home to Australia, liked it there, and decided to stay.  That adventure lasted until
2000, when she realized that she should return to the U.S. to be with her stepfather and other family
members.  All the time she was in Australia she maintained her U.S. citizenship and a passport.  In
7
1990 she believed she could obtain dual citizenship with Australia because of change in U.S. policy.
I believe her explanation that she read about the change in policy in a publication, and proceeded to
take advantage of that new policy.  So she obtained that citizenship to make it easier for her to travel
from Australia and return there as part of her work. She always loved the U.S., but obviously liked
Australia enough to remain there for 26 years.  But she has lived in the U.S. for the past seven years,
a total of 41 of her 66 years of life.  Now she is caught between these two countries in her desire to
obtain a favorable trustworthiness determination so she can retain her job.
Based on the total facts adduced at the hearing and in the documents, I conclude the
Government made a case for applying Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 1 (The exercise of dual
citizenship E2.A3.1.2.1), DC 2 (Possession and/or use of a foreign passport E2.A3.1.2.2), DC 5
(Residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements E2.A3.1.2.5), and DC 8 (Voting
in foreign elections E2.A3.1.2.8).  Applicant did not surrender her Australian passport to the
Australian consul or embassy, as the Money Memo requires.  She burned both it and her expired
U.S. passport sometime between June 2006 and the hearing date.
On the other side of the foreign preference issue, Applicant showed MC 4 (Individual has
expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship E2.A3.1.3.4) should apply.  She now declares
she will renounce her Australian citizenship.  She has returned to the U.S.  Applicant burned her
Australian passport.  She credibly showed at the hearing she had no desire to go traveling again.  I
believe she did burn it out of ignorance as to the proper procedures for disposing of it, which would
be to return it to the Australian Government with a renunciation of her citizenship.  Therefore, she
does not possess it nor can she use it.
The issue is whether the total evidence shows Applicant has a preference for Australia over
the U.S.  I conclude she does not have such a current preference.  Her preference based on her
statements, her voluntary return to live and work in the U.S. in 2000, her present age, is for the U.S.
Australia was a Shangri-la for Applicant that has now faded in the face of her age, desire to be with
her family, and her true love for the U.S.  She did not obtain Australian citizenship in the first 16
years of living there.  If she had taken Australian citizenship after living there a minimum period of
time, and renounced her U.S. citizenship at that time, that series of actions would indicate a
preference to abandon the U.S. and prefer Australia.  She waited to take out Australian citizenship
until she honestly thought the U.S. Government would allow her legally to obtain dual citizenship.
If the U.S. Government had never allowed dual citizenship, then she would not have taken
Australian citizenship.  She acted solely on that basis, I conclude.
Whole Person Analysis
“The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a" trustworthiness decision. Directive
E2.2.1.  “Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.” Id.  In evaluating Applicant’s case,
I have considered the adjudicative process factors listed in the Directive ¶ E2.2.1.
Looking at the factors involved in the “whole person concept,” Applicant lived in Australia
for 26 years, and took out citizenship there and a passport in 1990 and 1992, respectively.  She was
an adult when she did it, based on the information she claims she had.  She liked Australia, so chose
8
to live there while maintaining her U.S. citizenship.  Now she has returned to the U.S. to live
permanently.  There is no likelihood Australian officials would coerce, pressure or exploit Applicant
for information on the military health care system or its participants.  She took out Australian
citizenship on the understanding the U.S. had no objection to it, and because she lived there for
years, as others might live in European countries, for example, and not be influenced by those
governments.  My common sense determination is that Applicant cannot be influenced by Australia,
a strong U.S. ally.  She is trustworthy, and, neither she nor Australia are a threat to the U.S.  This
analysis is in addition to the conclusions I made in the prior guideline section.  
Applicant did not, and does not, prefer Australia over the U.S.  Her prior statement to the
investigator is now diminished in persuasiveness because she has had two years to think about her
intentions and life.  Her testimony at the hearing I conclude is more persuasive and credible about
her actions and future intentions.  Therefore, I conclude the foreign preference and “whole person
analysis” for Applicant.  
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
Paragraph 1.  Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for assignment to sensitive duties.  Her
application for eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position is granted.
9
Philip S. Howe
Administrative Judge
