KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline J; Guideline H
DIGEST: There is a substantial amount of record evidence which undercuts the Judge’s
conclusions regarding mitigation.  The Judge’s ultimate conclusion that Applicant has met his
burden of persuasion is not sustainable on this record.  Favorable decision reversed
CASENO: 06-12901
DATE: 07/31/2007
DATE: July 31, 2007
In Re:
--------
SSN: -------
Applicant for ADP I/II/III Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-12901
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Edmunds, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a
trustworthiness determination.  On August 17, 2006, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR)
advising Applicant of the basis for that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline
G (Alcohol Consumption), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
2
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On December 29, 2006, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Shari Dam
granted Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness determination.  Department Counsel filed a timely
appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30
Department Counsel asserted the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s conclusion
that Applicant had mitigated the Guidelines G, J, and H trustworthiness concerns is arbitrary,
capricious, and contrary to law; and whether the Judge’s favorable decision is erroneous in that she
failed to analyze the case in light of the evidence viewed as a whole.  Finding error, we reverse the
decision of the Judge.    
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  Facts
The Judge made the following relevant findings:
Applicant is 22 years old with two years of college.  He and his girlfriend have a five-month-
old daughter.   He and his younger brother live with their parents.  
             Applicant’s criminal history began in 1998, when he was 14 years old and was charged with
making Annoying Phone Calls to a classmate. He subsequently began consuming alcohol and
marijuana, which lead to ten separate arrests for related criminal conduct. 
In July 2000, he was arrested and charged with having consumed alcohol after having been
stopped for speeding. He pled No Contest to the misdemeanor, was fined $113, and ordered to
undergo an alcohol assessment.  His driver's license was suspended for three months.  He was 16
years old. 
In May 2002, he was arrested and charged with Underage Drinking and Possession of
Marijuana after being stopped by the police who found liquor in the car.  He was found guilty and
fined. 
In July 2002, he was arrested and charged with Underage Drinking and Possession of
Alcohol.  He was found guilty and fined $286. 
In August 2002, he and some friends were arrested and charged with Underage Drinking at
a campground. He pled No Contest and was fined $349. A month later he was charged with
Disorderly Conduct and Underage Drinking,  after being involved in a physical altercation.  He was
fined a total of $324 on both charges.  He was 18 years old at the time of those arrests in 2002. 
In July 2003, he and his friends were arrested for Underage Drinking at a birthday party.  He
was found guilty and paid a $102 fine.
Pursuant to a court order, Applicant entered an outpatient substance abuse program in
October 2003. While in treatment for two months, he participated in classes and individual therapy,
3
and was prohibited from consuming alcohol. He received a diagnosis of Alcohol Abuse and a
recommendation to abstain from alcohol consumption while in treatment. 
In January 2004, one month after leaving treatment, he and his friends left a restaurant
without paying their bill. The police were called and he was charged with Theft-Defraud Innkeeper
and fined $305. He had been drinking before the incident.
 
In February 2004, he consumed alcohol and was involved in another fight.  He was arrested
and charged with Underage Alcohol Possession and Disorderly Conduct. He paid a $452 fine. 
In April 2004, he was fined $705 after he pled guilty to Operating Motor Vehicle While
Intoxicated, Operating with a Prohibited Blood Alcohol Content (BAC), and Speeding. His BAC
was .19.  He had been drinking to celebrate his 20  birthday when the police stopped him in the earlyth
morning. His license was suspended for nine months.
Two months later, in August 2004, he consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication and
became embroiled in a serious physical altercation. He was stabbed several times, resulting in a
period of hospitalization.  He subsequently pled guilty to Disorderly Conduct and received a deferred
prosecution sentence. He was ordered to perform 50 hours of community service and undergo
another alcohol and drug assessment.  He was 20 years old. Applicant believes that the incident
altered his life and is the reason he no longer consumes alcohol. While recovering in the hospital,
he realized he needed to change his life or he would die.  
In accordance with his plea agreement, Applicant entered another substance abuse program
in May 2005. While in treatment, he participated in eight individual psychotherapy sessions, attended
classes and had three consecutive negative urine drug screens.  In November 2005, he was
discharged with a diagnosis of alcohol dependence and cannabis abuse (both in early full remission).
According to the Discharge Summary,  Applicant admitted that he used marijuana three times
in the early months of treatment, but also "reported two months of abstinence from marijuana at his
last individual session." The Summary noted that "he appeared internally committed to long term
abstinence from alcohol due to the problems alcohol has caused in his life in the past."  It indicated
the successful completion of the treatment plan goals and a good prognosis. The program counselor
recommended that he "continue his abstinence from alcohol and to follow his harm reduction plan
regarding marijuana . . . and continue to increase his sober support system." 
Applicant no longer  associates with his previous friends. Since leaving treatment, he has not
participated in any form of a program supportive of sobriety, such as Alcoholics Anonymous.
Applicant credits such events as the stabbing incident and the birth of his daughter with his change
4
of attitude in favor of sobriety.  Applicant has received good performance evaluations from his place
of employment.
  
B.  Discussion
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of fact is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence–such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as
adequate to support such a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  Directive
¶  E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative agency’s findings
from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S.
607, 620-21 (1966).  In evaluating the Judge’s findings, we are required to give deference to the
Judge’s credibility determinations.  Directive  ¶  E3.1.32.1.  
Department Counsel does not challenge the Judge’s findings.  Therefore, they are not at issue
in this appeal. 
 
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
Appeal Board may reverse the Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a trustworthiness
determination if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See Directive  ¶¶  E3.1.32.3 and
E3.1.33.3.  Once the government presents evidence raising trustworthiness concerns, the burden
shifts to the applicant to establish any appropriate mitigating conditions.  See Directive  ¶  E3.1.15.
“The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn
simply on a finding that one or more of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their
application requires the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See
ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).  
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are arbitrary or capricious, the Board
will review the Judge's decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails
to articulate a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of
judgment; it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision
that runs contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere
difference of opinion.  In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are contrary to law,
the Board will consider whether they are contrary to provisions of Executive Order 10865, the
Directive, or other applicable federal law.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2,
2006).
Directive ¶  E2.A7.1.3.2.1
Directive ¶   E2.A7.1.3.3.2
Directive ¶  E2.A10.1.3.6.3
See Tr. at 26.  “I was 20 at the time.  This was again after use of alcohol.  Late at night we went to a...restaurant,4
ate our food and ditched, didn’t pay.”  
See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No. 02-29373 at 4  (App. Bd. Mar. 2, 2005).   5
Tr. at 32. 6
Tr. at 26.  7
Tr. at 33. 8
5
In resolving the case in Applicant’s favor, the Judge found several conditions that she
concluded mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by the Government’s evidence: that
Applicant’s alcohol troubles are not recent  and that Applicant has evidenced changes in behavior1
that are “supportive of sobriety”  (Guideline G); that Applicant has demonstrated an “intent not to2
abuse any drugs in the future” (Guideline H); and “clear evidence of successful rehabilitation”3
(Guideline J).  In her whole person analysis, the Judge noted Applicant’s youth at the time of his
misconduct, the “life altering” quality of the stabbing incident and her evaluation of Applicant’s
maturity.  Additionally, she considered “[Applicant’s] candid testimony about his irresponsible
alcohol consumption and marijuana use for approximately five years, and his abstinence from
marijuana over the last year and alcohol consumption over the past two years.”  Decision at 6.    
On the other hand, we note a substantial amount of record evidence which undermines the
Judge’s conclusions regarding mitigation.  For example, Applicant was convicted of defrauding an
innkeeper by failing to pay his bill, yet the Judge’s analysis does not discuss this aspect of the case.4
Although she is presumed to have considered all the evidence,   a theft conviction, which entails5
moral turpitude, is sufficiently relevant to Applicant’s trustworthiness as to merit explicit
examination, and failure to do so impairs the reasonableness of the Judge’s decision.  Likewise the
extent of Applicant’s alcohol consumption is troublesome.  For example, on one incident of  alcohol-
induced fighting Applicant had consumed “six to ten beers;”  he had consumed alcohol on the6
occasion when he failed to pay his restaurant bill;  and when he operated a vehicle while intoxicated7
he had drunk “over ten . . . Jack and cokes.”   That Applicant consumed alcohol in substantial8
amounts, that the latter two incidents mentioned above occurred after he had completed his first
alcohol rehabilitation program, that alcohol resulted in ten arrests, and that Applicant has not
followed up his second rehabilitation program through AA attendance weakens his case that his
commitment to sobriety is permanent.   
The Judge’s conclusions regarding mitigation are also undermined by  the fact that Applicant
continued to use marijuana even while undergoing his second rehabilitation program.  Applicant
Exhibit B, the discharge summary from this program, mentions three “relapses” into marijuana use
during the course of his treatment and observes that Applicant “still had a pro cannabis belief system
which supported continued marijuana use after counseling.”  AE B at 1.  
6
The Board notes that the transcript contains following colloquy between Applicant and the
Judge:
Q: And your date of sobriety is what...?
A: ...August 22  of ‘04.nd
Q: How did I know you’re not still drinking or using marijuana?
A: I – I’m–I’m not.  I don’t know...I’ve changed my life a lot since then.  Tr. at 27.  
In this testimony Applicant appears to assert that he has refrained from using alcohol or
marijuana since August 22, 2004, the date upon which he was stabbed in an alcohol fueled
altercation.  However, this statement is contradicted by Applicant’s own evidence that he used
marijuana during the rehabilitation program in 2005.  This apparent contradiction casts serious doubt
as to whether Applicant was truthful during his testimony, which clearly goes to the essence of a
trustworthiness determination.  The Judge does not discuss it in her analysis of the case, although
she alludes to it when she cites his having abstained from marijuana only “during his later phase of
his outpatient program.”  Decision at 6.  
After considering the Judge’s decision, the briefs of the parties, and the record as a whole we
conclude that, as regards Guidelines H and J, the decision fails to consider relevant evidence in its
application of the mitigating conditions as well as in the whole person analysis.  See ISCR Case No.
03-22861 at 2-3(App. Bd. June 2, 2006).  Therefore, as regards these guidelines, the decision is
arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.   Given the extent of Applicant’s misconduct, the statement
in AE B to the effect that Applicant was favorably disposed toward marijuana use (his “pro cannabis
belief system”) even after his second rehabilitation program, and the absence of record evidence
explaining the apparent contradiction between Applicant’s testimony and AE B, the Judge’s holding
that Applicant had met his burden of persuasion is not sustainable on this record.  Therefore, remand
is not an appropriate remedy.           
Order
7
The Judge’s decision granting Applicant a trustworthiness determination is REVERSED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed; Michael D. Hipple              
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                     
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
