KEYWORD: Financial
DIGEST: Applicant is 54 years old, married with children.  He is a retired Air Force veteran.  He
suffered financial difficulties due to job losses, reduced income, and lack of sufficient education.
He had several delinquent debts resulting from his experiences.  He has now repaid those debts, and
is working to obtain payoff information on the last debt.  He mitigated the financial considerations
trustworthiness concerns.  Eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position is granted.
CASENO: 06-16189.h1
DATE: 07/17/2007
DATE:  July 17, 2007
In re:
-------------------------- 
SSN:  -----------
Applicant for ADP I/II/III Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-16189
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
PHILIP S. HOWE
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant is 54 years old, married with children.  He is a retired Air Force veteran.  He
suffered financial difficulties due to job losses, reduced income, and lack of sufficient education.
He had several delinquent debts resulting from his experiences.  He has now repaid those debts, and
is working to obtain payoff information on the last debt.  He mitigated the financial considerations
trustworthiness concerns.  Eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position is granted.
Adjudication of trustworthiness cases for ADP I, II, and III positions are resolved using the provisions of DoD1
Directive 5220.6 (Directive), pursuant to the memorandum from Carol A. Haave, Deputy Under Secretary of Defense
for Counterintelligence and Security to DOHA Director, Adjudication of Trustworthiness Cases (Nov. 19, 2004).
Pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended2
and modified, and the Directive.
2
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a
position of trust for Applicant .  On November 29, 2006, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons1 2
(SOR) detailing the basis for its decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive issued on
December 29, 2005, and implemented by the Department of Defense, effective September 1, 2006.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 19, 2007, and elected to have a hearing before
an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2007.  On June 6, 2007, I convened
a hearing to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue
a trustworthiness determination for Applicant.  The Government and the Applicant submitted
exhibits that were admitted into evidence.  Applicant submitted additional exhibits within the two
weeks allowed at the hearing, marked Exhibits H to M, which I admitted into the record without
objection from the Government.  DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 25, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant's admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated as findings of fact.  After a
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and full consideration of that evidence,
I make the following additional findings of fact:
Applicant is 54 years old, married, and has two children.  He works for a defense contractor
in the health care benefits business.  He retired from the Air Force in 1992 and receives a monthly
pension.  After his military retirement, he had three civilian jobs, all of which ended in layoffs not
due to any fault of Applicant.  When laid off from work, Applicant obtained part-time or temporary
work to support his family.  As a result of the layoffs, Applicant and his wife filed Chapter 7
bankruptcy in November 1997.  His debts were discharged in bankruptcy in March 1998 (SOR
¶1.a.). (Tr. 34, 36, 38, 51, 52, 73-76; Exhibits 1, 2-4)
Applicant obtained a college degree in health care management in 2000.  He took out student
loans to pay for that degree.  He is now repaying those loans at $150 per month.  With that degree,
he was able to obtain employment in the job he now has.  His income is approximately $49,000
annually. (Tr. 36, 38, 52; Exhibit 1)
Applicant moved to his present location in June 2004.  He could not sell his house at his prior
location until October 2004, thereby causing him to spend money on the mortgage and rent in his
new location for six months.  His wife, a nurse, was injured on the job in 2005 and not able to work
for four months.  She currently commutes to another city for a nursing job, working on a contractual
basis.  She started that job in June 2007, after not working since February 2007, for medical reasons
3
and a layoff. Her income dropped from $68,000 to $48,000 annually after her move from their
former state of residence. (Tr. 34, 36-41, 44, 67; Exhibits I, J)
Applicant incurred several debts that were not repaid in a timely manner.  They have now
been repaid using the $5,000 profit from his house sale, and an inheritance his wife received from
her late mother.  Applicant pays cash for any purchases now, and uses two debit cards linked to his
bank accounts for the payment of debts and current purchases.  He also has a contract with a credit
counselor. (Tr. 39, 41, 42, 50, 58, 59)
Applicant owed $193 for a water bill at his previous residence that he sold in October 2004
(SOR ¶1.b).  The attorney handling the real estate closing was supposed to pay that debt from the
sale proceeds.  That debt was paid February 1, 2002. (Tr. 24, 52, 53, 68-70; Exhibits E, 2-4)
Applicant owed $188 on a cable television debt (SOR ¶1.c).  That debt was paid by check
on June 5, 2007, in the amount of $290. (Tr. 24; Exhibit D, Answer)
Applicant owed $2,886 to a creditor (SOR ¶1.d).  This debt was paid in full on or before
March 26, 2007. (Tr. 22; Exhibits C, 2-4)
Applicant owed a bank $216 (SOR ¶1.e).  Applicant paid a settlement amount of $179.57
in May or June 2007.  That debt is now paid in full. (Tr. 18; Exhibits A, 2-4)
Applicant owed another bank $579 (SOR ¶1.f).  That debt was paid by deduction from
Applicant’s bank account in April 2007, in the amount of $625.29. (Tr. 20, 54, 55, 64; Exhibits B,
L, 2-4)
Applicant owed a creditor $9,381 on a repossessed car (SOR ¶1.g).  Applicant’s son had the
car and was supposed to make the payments, but did not.  Applicant’s wife paid $2,000 on the
account, but the car was repossessed anyway in February 2007.  Applicant has not been contacted
by the creditor for any balance owed, but he will contact the creditor to verify any amount owed and
arrange a payment plan.  He hired an attorney to help him obtain information from the creditor to
resolve this debt. (Tr. 27-32, 34, 38, 65, 71, 72; Exhibits B, O, P, 2-4, Answer)
Applicant owes $9,348 on his student loans (SOR ¶1.h).  He is now paying $150 monthly
on that debt.  This loan was in forbearance mode from May 7, 2006, to May 6, 2007. (Tr. 32, 34, 60,
75; Exhibits 2-4, Answer )
Applicant owes $786 to a furniture company (SOR ¶1.i).  He paid that debt in two
installments, first $500 in January 2007, then $285.87 from another bank account in February 2007.
The debt is fully paid. (Tr. 25, 26, 53, 64; Exhibits F,G, K, 2-4, Answer)
Applicant did not know of these unpaid debts because his wife managed the household
money.  She has done this since they were married.  She did not tell him about their financial
shortfalls because she was embarrassed about it.  She did not want him to worry about it as he
worked to support the family.  She now pays the student loan and car loan payments by a direct pay
arrangement from Applicant’s military retirement pay.  They have a budget now that they use
showing a positive cash flow of income over expenses.  Her explanation is credible, sincere, and
4
persuasive about Applicant’s lack of knowledge of the unpaid bills. (Tr. 42, 44-49, 58, 73-76;
Exhibit H)
POLICIES
As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to . . . control access to information
bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to
occupy a position . . . that will give that person access to such information.” Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988).  The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his
designee to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that
it is clearly consistent the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information with Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960).  By direction of the Under Secretary of Defense for
Counterintelligence and Security, adjudications of cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense
Security Service or the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) for a trustworthiness determination
shall be conducted under the provisions of the Directive.  Eligibility for a position of trust is
predicated upon the applicant meeting the guidelines contained in the Directive and a finding it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so. See Directive ¶ 2.3.  An applicant “has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue his trustworthiness determination.” See Directive ¶ E3.1.15
The adjudication process is based on the whole person concept.  Enclosure 2 of the Directive
sets forth personnel security guidelines, as well as the disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating
conditions (MC) under each guideline that must be carefully considered in making the overall
common sense determination required.  The decision to deny an individual eligibility to occupy a
position of trust is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  See Exec. Or.
10865 § 7.  It is merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a such a determination.
In evaluating the trustworthiness of an applicant, the administrative judge must also assess
the adjudicative process factors listed in ¶ 6.3 of the Directive.  Those assessments include:  (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, and
the extent of knowledgeable participation; (3) how recent and frequent the behavior was; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6)
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood
of continuation or recurrence (See Directive, Section E2.2.1. of Enclosure 2).  Because each case
presents its own unique facts and circumstances, it should not be assumed that the factors exhaust
the realm of human experience or that the factors apply equally in every case.  Moreover, although
adverse information concerning a single condition may not be sufficient for an unfavorable
determination, the individual may be disqualified if available information reflects a recent or
recurring pattern of questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or other behavior specified in the
Guidelines.
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the personal
or professional history of the applicant that disqualify, or may disqualify, the applicant from being
eligible to occupy a position of trust.  The Directive presumes a nexus or rational connection
5
between proven conduct under any of the disqualifying conditions listed in the guidelines and an
applicant’s trustworthiness suitability.  See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).
All that is required is proof of facts and circumstances that indicate an applicant is at risk for
mishandling classified information, or that an applicant does not demonstrate the high degree of
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness required of persons handling classified information.  ISCR
Case No. 00-0277, 2001 DOHA LEXIS 335 at **6-8 (App. Bd. 2001).  Once the Government has
established a prima facie case by substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate
burden of demonstrating that is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his
trustworthiness determination. ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. 2002).  “Any doubt as to
whether access to classified information is clearly consistent with national security will be resolved
in favor of the national security.” Directive ¶ E2.2.2
Based upon a consideration of the evidence as a whole, I find the following adjudicative
guideline most pertinent to an evaluation of the facts of this case:
Guideline F: Financial Considerations: The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which could raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual
who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including espionage.  Affluence
that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all
available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that  . . .
assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.”
(Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1)  Appendix 8 of the Regulation sets forth the adjudicative policy, as well as
the disqualifying conditions (DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) associated with each guideline.
DoD contractor personnel are afforded the adjudication procedures contained in the Directive.
(Regulation ¶ C8.2.1)
CONCLUSIONS
Guideline F: Applicant’s delinquent debts totaled $23,577.  He filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy
in November 1997 because of his unpaid and delinquent debts that had accumulated to that time.
Applicant has a difficult time managing his money in the context of his low-paying jobs and frequent
layoffs in the 1990s after he retired from the Air Force.  The disqualifying conditions applicable are
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition ¶19.a. (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),
and ¶19.c. (a history of not meeting financial obligations).
Applicant suffered several job losses after his retirement from the Air Force.  He kept
working at whatever job he could find to support his family.  After his Chapter 7 bankruptcy,
Applicant got a college degree and now has a better paying job.  He had further financial difficulties
moving to the location of his current job in that he could not sell his former residence promptly and
6
had to pay that mortgage and his rent in his new location.  Now, with that house sold, he applied his
net gain from the sale to his debt repayments.  His wife contributed her inheritance to paying the
debts.  They have a plan for repaying debts, and the only one not currently being addressed is the
auto loan, on which they are working to contact the creditor and arrange payment.  The Financial
Considerations Mitigating Conditions applicable are ¶20.b (the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances), and ¶20.d (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts).  Applicant has taken responsible and good-faith
efforts to control his spending and repay his debts.
Whole Person Analysis  “The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period
of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a”
trustworthiness decision. Directive ¶2.  “Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.” Id.  In
evaluating Applicant’s case, I have considered the adjudicative process factors listed in the Directive
¶2.
Applicant’s financial difficulties extend back into the 1990s.  They were serious, but caused
by external employment circumstances.  He had three jobs he lost through corporate layoffs.  He kept
working to support his family at any job he could find.  He got more education to better prepare
himself for the marketplace.  His wife kept the family finances and did not share the information
about their recent financial situation with him to prevent him from worrying about it as he strived
to find employment and support the family.  He was, therefore, not fully knowledgeable about the
current status of his delinquent debts.  The financial problems are past, not recent or current, because
he has a higher income now and his wife is working again after her 2004 injuries healed.  There are
behavioral changes, in that Applicant pays cash or uses a debit card for all purchases.  He and his
wife undertook to use the net gain on their house sale and her inheritance to pay their debts instead
of spending it on other purchases, thereby acting responsibly.  There is no likelihood of a recurrence
of their previous financial situation based on their budget and present incomes, and therefore, no
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress.  Lastly, I conclude Applicant is very credible
in his explanations of his past financial difficulty and his efforts to repay his debts. 
I conclude the Financial Considerations trustworthiness concern for Applicant.  I also
conclude the “whole person concept” evaluation for Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
Paragraph 1.  Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
7
Subparagraph 1.a. to 1.i.: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for assignment to sensitive duties.  His
application for eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position is granted.
Philip S. Howe
Administrative Judge
