KEYWORD: Criminal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant, a 31-year-old customer service representative for a defense contractor, was
arrested and convicted of assault, drug use, drug possession with intent to sell, possession of drug
paraphernalia, and probation violations from 1993 to 2002.  He presented insufficient information
to show he has been successfully rehabilitated.  Eligibility is denied. 
CASENO: 06-22121.h1
DATE: 07/30/2007
DATE:  July 30, 2007
In Re:
-------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 06-22121
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
THOMAS M. CREAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
Applicant, a 31-year-old customer service representative for a defense contractor, was
arrested and convicted of assault, drug use, drug possession with intent to sell, possession of drug
paraphernalia, and probation violations from 1993 to 2002.  He presented insufficient information
Item 4.1
2
to show he has been successfully rehabilitated.  Eligibility is denied.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On February 1, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearing and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement
of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its decision to deny an application for a position of public
trust for Applicant.  The action was taken under Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R,
Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation), and Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive), using the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), issued by the
President on December 29, 2005, and implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1,
2006.  The revised guidelines were provided to Applicant and he was aware that the case would be
adjudicated under those guidelines.  Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 15,
2007.  The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct).  Applicant
answered the SOR in writing on February 23, 2007, admitting all eight factual allegations under
Guideline J with an explanation for his conduct.  He elected to have the matter decided on the
written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on May 10, 2007.  Applicant
received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on May 16, 2007, and was provided the
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying
conditions.  He did not provide any additional information.  The case was assigned to me on July 19,
2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 31-year-old college student working part time in customer service for a defense
contractor.  He is married with two children.  Applicant submitted a questionnaire for a public trust
position on October 17, 2005.1
Applicant was arrested for second and third degree assault, and unlawful use of a weapon in
December 1993 after an incident with his step-father.  He was convicted of only third degree assault,
and sentenced to two years probation.  Applicant was charged with and fined for speeding in April
1996, and in May 1997.  Applicant was charged with and convicted of possession of a controlled
substance, approximately 35 grams of marijuana, with intent to distribute in January 1998.  He was
sentenced to five years supervised probation.  Applicant was charged with and convicted of
possession of marijuana in August 1999, and sentenced to seven years incarceration.  This conviction
was overturned on appeal.  In March 2000, Applicant violated his probation by testing positive for
use of a controlled substance.  In December 2001, he was charged with possession of drug
paraphernalia.  In March 2002, Applicant was charged with and convicted of distribution of a
controlled substance.  He was sentenced to seven years incarceration, and served almost two years
Item 3.2
Item 5.3
Item 3, at 3.4
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.6
AG ¶ 30.7
3
in 
prison.  Applicant admitted to all of these offenses  and the information was confirmed by criminal2
justice reports.3
Applicant stated his conduct in the past was irresponsible.  He felt the decisions he made
were, in part, caused by his environment, and he is ashamed of the decisions.  Upon his release from
prison, he relocated to another state to be away from the previous bad environment.  He has become
a productive citizen and is now a full time student in a technical college and working part time.  He
is now more responsible in his actions and decision making.4
POLICIES
The President has “the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . .
that will give that person access to such information.”   To be eligible to occupy an Information5
Systems Position designated ADP II/III, an applicant must meet the security guidelines contained in
the Regulation.  The standard that must be met is that based on all available information, the person’s
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly
consistent with the interests of national security.6
The Regulation sets out the adjudicative guidelines for making trustworthiness determinations,
and lists the disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions for each guideline.  The adjudicative
guideline at issue in this case is:
Guideline J - Criminal Conduct: A security concern exists because criminal actions creates
doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls
into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.7
Conditions that could raise an eligibility concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those
which would mitigate eligibility concerns, pertaining to the adjudicative guideline, are set forth and
discussed in the conclusions section below.
The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a position of public trust.  An
AG ¶ 2(a).8
DoD 5200.2-R, ¶ C8.2.1.9
Directive ¶ E3.1.14.10
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002); see Directive ¶ E3.1.15.11
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). 12
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (quoting DISCR Case No. 92-1106 (App. Bd. Oct. 7,13
1993))
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see Directive ¶ E2.2.2.14
See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7.15
4
administrative judge must apply the “whole person concept,” and consider and carefully weigh the
available, reliable information about the person.  An administrative judge should consider: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the applicant’s
age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the voluntariness of participation; (6) the presence or
absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
of recurrence.8
DoD contractor personnel are afforded the rights to the procedures contained in the DoD
Directive before any final unfavorable eligibility determination may be made.   Initially, the9
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts in the SOR that disqualify or may
disqualify the Applicant from being eligible for a position of public trust.   Thereafter, Applicant is10
responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts.   An applicant has11
the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to occupy
a position of public trust.   “[T]he Directive presumes there is a nexus or rational connection between12
proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability.”   Any13
doubt as to whether eligibility for a position of public trust is clearly consistent with national security
will be resolved in favor of the national security.   Each eligibility decision must be fair, impartial,14
and a commonsense decision based on the relevant and material facts and circumstances, the whole
person concept, and the factors listed in new adjudicative guidelines.  A person granted a position of
public trust enters into a special relationship with the government.  The government must be able to
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants such a position.
The decision to deny an individual a public trust position is not necessarily a determination as to the
loyalty of the applicant.   It is merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines15
established for eligibility for a public trust position.
CONCLUSIONS
There is a statutory prohibition to granting a security clearance for an Applicant convicted in a State court of16
a crime, sentenced to a prison term exceeding one year, and incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than one
year.  10 U.S.C. 986.  Since the statutory provision pertains to granting of security clearances and not to eligibility for
positions of public trust, the statutory provision is not applicable in this case.  However, the new adjudicative guidelines
include the prohibition as a disqualifying condition.  AG ¶ 31(f).  The new adjudicative guidelines were made applicable
to determination of eligibility for public trust positions.  The provision in ¶ 31(f) was added to the adjudicative guidelines
initially promulgated by the President by DoD because of 10 U.S.C. 986 and its applicability to DoD adjudications.
Since the DoD adjudicative guidelines were never published for review and comment in the Federal Register, it is unclear
whether the provisions of ¶ 31(f) can pertain to eligibility for public trust position determinations..  Since this
disqualifying condition is not alleged in the SOR or addressed in the FORM, its applicability to eligibility for public trust
positions determinations need not be resolved and will not be further discussed in this decision.  
5
I carefully considered all of the facts in evidence and the legal standards discussed above.  I
reach the following conclusions regarding the allegations in the SOR.
Applicant’s convictions for assault, drug use, drug possession with the intent to sell,
possession of drug paraphernalia, and violation of probation within a ten year period of time raises
Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (CC DC) ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses.)   In this case, a series of serious crimes, drug possession with the intent to sell, drug use,16
possession of drug paraphernalia and violations of probation have been established.  The third degree
assault in 1993 and the speeding offenses by themselves do not amount to serious crimes.  But these
acts, taken in conjunction with the serious crimes committed by Applicant, establish a pattern that
contributes to the raising of security concerns.  
The Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions (CC MC) have been considered, and only CC
MC ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, it happened under such
unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and CC MC ¶ 31(d) (there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation, including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity,
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive
community involvement) have some applicability.  Applicant used marijuana from at least 1998 until
2002.  He was released form prison in approximately 2004, and stated he has not used drugs since that
time.  He presented no evidence of attendance at any counseling or rehabilitation programs.  His drug
use was voluntary and not under any unusual circumstances.  Applicant presented no information
from which to conclude that his drug use is unlikely to recur.  There is only limited information on
rehabilitation.  There is a passage of only about four years since he was incarcerated for drug use.
Rehabilitation information consists of the facts he is now married, has children, and is holding a
steady job.  This limited information is offset by his previous voluntary drug use, his other crimes,
and I violation of probation.  Insufficient times has elapsed since his last criminal act, and there is
only limited evidence of successful rehabilitation, to conclude he has been rehabilitated and should
be granted eligibility for a position of public trust.  Applicant has not met his burden of establishing
that he is rehabilitated and his past criminal actions do not indicate a security concern.  I find against
Applicant for criminal conduct.
I carefully considered all of the circumstances in light of the “whole person” concept.  I
conclude Applicant is not eligible for a position of public trust.
6
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as required by Section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. thru 1.h.: Against Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national security to grant or continue eligibility for assignment to sensitive duties
for Applicant.  Eligibility is denied.
Thomas M. Crean
Administrative Judge
