KEYWORD: Alcohol
DIGEST: Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Applicant was arrested in
February 2005, and charged with driving under the influence (DUI), and pled guilty to the lesser
charge of reckless driving. He was arrested again for DUI in April 2005, and subsequently convicted.
Applicant was on probation through early July 2007. Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns raised by his alcohol consumption. Clearance is denied.
CASENO: 06-25687.h1
DATE: 07/30/2007
DATE:  July 30, 2007
In re:
----------------------
SSN: --------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-25687
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
EDWARD W. LOUGHRAN
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Julie R. Edmunds, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Applicant was arrested in
February 2005, and charged with driving under the influence (DUI), and pled guilty to the lesser
charge of reckless driving. He was arrested again for DUI in April 2005, and subsequently convicted.
Applicant was on probation through early July 2007. Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns raised by his alcohol consumption. Clearance is denied.
Pursuant to Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended1
and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program  (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive).
Items 3 and 4.2
Item 3.3
Items 3 and 4.4
Item 5 at 3.5
Items 3-5, 7.6
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a
security clearance for Applicant. On January 25, 2007, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons  (SOR)1
detailing the basis for its decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol
Consumption) of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) issued on December 29, 2005, and
implemented by the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. Applicant
answered the SOR in writing on February 13, 2007, and elected to have the case decided on the
written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case
on May 2, 2007. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to
Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute,
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant received the FORM on May 8, 2007.
His response was due June 7, 2007. As of July 17, 2007, he had not responded. The case was
assigned to me on July 19, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for the same
employer since 1980, except for a two-year stint with another company. Applicant is divorced with
two children. He holds a bachelor of science degree. Applicant served in the U.S. Army National
Guard, the Air National Guard, and the Air Force Reserve, attaining the rank of First Lieutenant.2
Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of intoxication, from
approximately 1977 to April 2005.3
Applicant was arrested in July 1978, and charged with driving under the influence (DUI). The
charge was dismissed without an adjudication of guilt. Applicant stated that his “blood alcohol was
under the legal limit and the Judge dropped the charges.”4
Applicant was arrested in February 2005, and charged with DUI. Applicant admitted his
blood alcohol content (BAC) was above the legal limit.  Applicant pled guilty to the lesser charge5
of reckless driving in November 2005. He was sentenced to pay a $1,350 fine.6
Items 3-6.7
Id.8
Item 3.9
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).10
Id. at 527.11
Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960). 12
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).13
4
While pending his court date on the above charge, Applicant was arrested again on April 21,
2005, for DUI, reckless driving, failure to maintain lane, and following too closely. Through a
negotiated plea, Applicant pled guilty on July 5, 2006, to DUI, and the other offenses were merged
into that charge. Applicant was sentenced to a $300 fine and 12 months in the county jail. He was
credited with one day for time served, and the remainder of 11 months and 29 days was served on
probation. Terms of his probation included that Applicant attend a risk reduction program and at
least three Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings per week for six months, provide 40 hours of
community service within six months, pay a probation fee of $32 per month, not drink any alcohol
or take any drugs without a prescription, and submit to random alcohol and drug testing at
Applicant’s expense. Applicant’s probation was scheduled to become non-reporting without fees
after six months, upon completion of all special conditions, and provided Applicant had not violated
probation.7
Applicant kept his employer’s security personnel fully apprised of the status of his two arrests
in 2005. Applicant started attending AA meetings in about April 2005, long before he was ordered
by the court.  In his response to the SOR in February 2007, Applicant stated his probation officer8
told him his case was closed. He stated he had not consumed alcohol since his April 2005 arrest, was
still attending AA meetings, and intended to continue to do so.  Because Applicant elected to have9
his case decided on the written record and did not submit any information in response to the FORM,
there is no information about Applicant’s status since February 2007.
POLICIES
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  As Commander in Chief, the President has10
“the authority to . . . control access to information bearing on national security and to determine
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person
access to such information.”  The President authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to11
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  An applicant has the ultimate burden of12
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her
security clearance. The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant13
should be allowed access to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such
Id.; Directive, ¶ E2.2.2.14
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7.15
5
sensitive information.  The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily a14
determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the applicant has not
met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a
clearance.  15
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines set forth potentially disqualifying conditions (DC) and
mitigating conditions (MC) under each guideline. Additionally, each security clearance decision
must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based on the relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole-person concept, along with the adjudicative process factors listed in the
Directive and AG ¶ 2(a).
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those
which would mitigate security concerns, are set forth and discussed in the conclusions section below.
CONCLUSIONS
I have carefully considered all the facts in evidence and the legal standards discussed above.
I reach the following conclusions regarding the allegations in the SOR.
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the
failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness.
The potential Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions (AC DC) in this case are AC
DC 22(a) (alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence,
fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent), and AC DC 22(c)
(habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether
the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent). 
Applicant’s two alcohol-related charges in 2005 establish AC DC 22(a). Applicant admitted
he consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of intoxication, from approximately 1977
to April 2005. No further evidence was submitted as to how much and how often he drank. This
admission is insufficient to support a finding that Applicant’s drinking was “habitual,” or constituted
“binge” drinking. AC DC 22(c) is not established.
Applicant was arrested for DUI in 1978. The charge was dismissed without a guilty finding.
Applicant stated the charge was dismissed because his BAC was below the legal limit. No other
evidence was submitted. The arrest alone, without a guilty finding or other evidence, is insufficient
to support a finding against Applicant. SOR ¶ 1.b. is concluded for Applicant. 
6
SOR ¶ 1.e. alleges that Applicant “attended AA meetings from about April 2005 to at least
October 2006.” This is true, but seeking assistance for his drinking issues through AA is a positive
development. I do not find that attending AA meetings supports the application of any disqualifying
condition. SOR ¶ 1.e. is concluded for Applicant. 
There are three potential Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions (AC MC) in this case,
AC MC 23(a) (so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), AC MC 23(b) (the individual acknowledges
his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if
an alcohol abuser)), and AC MC 23(d) (the individual has successfully completed inpatient or
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear
and established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program).
Applicant’s last arrest for DUI was in April 2005, while pending adjudication of a February
2005 DUI arrest. Applicant stated in February 2007, that he had not consumed alcohol since his
April 2005 arrest, he was still attending AA meetings, and intended to continue to do so. Applicant
was on probation at that time, and continued on probation until early July 2007. He could not drink
while on probation, and was required to attend AA meetings through January 2007. I have no
information from Applicant since February 2007. Applicant stated his probation officer told him that
his case was closed. He still had to complete the non-reporting half of his probation. There is no
information whether Applicant  successfully completed his probation without drinking, or that he
has remained abstinent since his probation ended. Because of his incidents of poor judgment, and
lack of recent information, I am unable to make an affirmative finding that Applicant’s alcohol
incidents are unlikely to recur, and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment. AC MC 23(a) does not apply. 
Applicant acknowledged his issues of alcohol abuse. He provided evidence of actions taken
to overcome his problem, i.e., AA meetings and abstention from alcohol. Applicant did not drink
from April 2005, through at least February 2007. Applicant has established a pattern of abstinence.
I find AC MC 23(b) is applicable, but Applicant does not merit as much consideration under this
mitigating condition because of the relatively short duration of the pattern of abstinence, the
abstinence occurred while Applicant was pending adjudication of his charges, or on probation, and
Applicant did not submit evidence that he has remained abstinent the last six months.
Applicant attended a risk reduction program as part of his sentence. There was no other
evidence submitted about what that involved in the program, so I cannot conclude that Applicant
completed alcohol counseling or rehabilitation. There was no diagnosis in this case of alcohol
dependence or alcohol abuse, nor was there a favorable prognosis. AC MC 23(d) is not applicable.
Whole Person Analysis
The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk. Available, reliable
7
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in
reaching a determination. In evaluating Applicant’s case, I have considered the adjudicative process
factors listed in the Directive and AG ¶ 2(a). I have also considered all the evidence, and every
finding of fact and conclusion discussed above. 
I have considered Applicant’s military service and his stable employment record. Applicant
had two alcohol-related arrests in 2005, and subsequent convictions. His second DUI arrest occurred
while he was waiting for his other charge to go to court. To Applicant’s credit, he did not attempt
to hide his arrests, but kept his employer’s security officials appraised of his circumstances.
Applicant stated in February 2007, that he complied with his court requirements, had not consumed
alcohol since April 2005, and continued to regularly attend AA meetings. I have no information from
Applicant since February 2007. He remained on probation through early July 2007. Applicant’s
second DUI, shortly after his other DUI, reveals alcohol issues, and it also reveals questionable
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is Applicant’s burden to mitigate the security concerns
raised by his alcohol issues. He has done nothing to establish what he has done the last six months.
Applicant has not been incident-free long enough to show the presence of rehabilitation. Without
an extended pattern of incident-free conduct, during a period in which Applicant is unrestrained by
the conditions of probation, it is too early to conclude this pattern will not continue. The likelihood
of continuation or recurrence of incidents of questionable judgment remains significant. 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating all the evidence
in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns
based on his alcohol consumption.
FORMAL FINDINGS
The following are my conclusions as to each allegation in the SOR:
Paragraph 1.  Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
8
Edward W. Loughran
Administrative Judge
