KEYWORD: Financial
DIGEST: Applicant is a high regarded member of a defense contractor who has a  history of
delinquent debts, which he accumulated during a lengthy military deployment between 1996 and
1997.  Applicant has received counseling and initiated substantial successful efforts before the
issuance of the SOR to restore his credit.  Of the two debts listed as delinquent in the SOR, one is
disputed and the other is barred by the relevant statute of limitations.  Both debts have since been
removed from Applicant’s latest credit report, which contains no listed delinquent debts.  Based on
Applicant’s  financial counseling, repayment efforts he has demonstrated to date, and engendered
whole person trust, he mitigates security concerns associated with his past history of delinquent
debts.  Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 06-26388.h1
DATE: 07/19/2007
DATE:  July 19, 2007
In re:
--------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-26388
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
ROGER C. WESLEY
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Rita C. O’Brien, Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Eric Adams, Esq.
SYNOPSIS
2
Applicant is a high regarded member of a defense contractor who has a  history of delinquent
debts, which he accumulated during a lengthy military deployment between 1996 and 1997.
Applicant has received counseling and initiated substantial successful efforts before the issuance of
the SOR to restore his credit.  Of the two debts listed as delinquent in the SOR, one is disputed and
the other is barred by the relevant statute of limitations.  Both debts have since been removed from
Applicant’s latest credit report, which contains no listed delinquent debts.  Based on Applicant’s
financial counseling, repayment efforts he has demonstrated to date, and engendered whole person
trust, he mitigates security concerns associated with his past history of delinquent debts.  Clearance
is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On February 9, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to
Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could
not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral
to an administrative judge to determine whether clearance should be granted, continued, denied or
revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 26, 2007, and requested a hearing.  The case
was assigned to me on March 28, 2007, and was scheduled for hearing on June 5, 2007.  A hearing
was convened on June 5, 2007, for the purpose of considering whether it would be clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  At
hearing, the Government's case consisted of no witnesses and two  exhibits; Applicant relied on one
witness (himself) and five exhibits.  The transcript (R.T.) was received on June 14, 2007.
STATEMENT OF FACTS
Applicant is a 42-year-old program integrator for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance.  The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant are incorporated herein
by reference and adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
While on military deployment during the 1996-1997 time frame, Applicant accrued debts
with two of his creditors that he was not able to take care of.  Before leaving for deployment, he gave
his mother $10,000.00 to cover her expenses in his absence.  His mother had lost her job, and his
stepfather’s company was preparing to go on strike (R.T., at 20-21).  During his deployment he was
overpaid on his housing allowance and had no backup sources to cover the overpayments in lieu of
pay deductions.  So, in the interim while he was awaiting his return to full payment status he got
behind with several of his creditors (R.T., at 22-23).  When he returned from deployment in 1999,
he found several accounts in delinquent status (including his bank debt with the predecessor of L)
(R.T., at 24).
In hopes of consolidating his debts, Applicant applied for an AE account in 1998.  But before
he could obtain an answer from AE, he was redeployed (R.T., at 24-25).  When he returned from
deployment in early 1999 he learned that AE had approved his account request and transferred the
3
balances from his other accounts into this new account, creating a consolidated account (R.T., at 25-
26).   Since 1998, Applicant has not created any new delinquent debts (R.T., at 26).
Applicant retired from active duty in September 2004 (ex. 1; R.T., at 27).  Just before his
official retirement, he went to work for his current employer (i.e., in August 2004).  Shortly after he
joined his current employer’s staff, he initiated efforts to restore his credit.  He considered
bankruptcy but eventually accepted his attorney’s advice and signed up for consumer counseling and
debt consolidation with Consumer Credit Counseling Service (CCCS) (R.T., at 30-31).  After paying
over $6,000.00 to $8,000.00 a year to CCCS over the course of three years (1999 to 20002) to pay
off his debts, he experienced problems with the counseling service and  switched firms (R.T., at 32-
33). 
Through the efforts of the new consolidation firm he engaged (a law firm), Applicant was
able to pay off his bank debt for about $3,900.00 in 2003 (R.T., at 52-54, 64-65).  Before he paid this
debt, though, the bank assigned its debt to a collection agency, who later it sold the debt to L (R.T.,
at 56-57).  Applicant’s efforts to obtain his payment documentation from the law firm (which has
since gone out of business) have been unsuccessful. This law firm apparently filed a bankruptcy
petition in Applicant’s behalf without notifying him.  Applicant was able to able to enlist the
trustee’s assistance in withdrawing this unauthorized petition.  
Upon seeing the L account appear in his December 2005 credit report (ex. 2), Applicant
disputed the debt with the credit reporting agencies.  Acting on Applicant’s dispute of the L debt,
the credit reporting agencies have since removed the L debt (in approximately 2006) from their
records (see ex. A; R.T., at 36-38, 58, 67-69).  
Applicant makes no claim of satisfying the listed AE debt.  But he did make payments to
CCCS for satisfying his known creditors, including AE (see ex. C; R.T., at 59-60), and is able
document settling one of his AE accounts (see ex. E). Neither CCCS nor the law firm he
subsequently engage, however, apparently paid this AE debt (R.T., at 60-61).  Since over seven years
have elapsed since the AE debt became delinquent, he claims application of the governing statute
of limitation (R.T., at 62), while still expressing an intent to eventually pay off this debt.
Because Applicant’s listed AE debt is barred by the governing statute of limitations, he is
reluctant to reaffirm this AE debt anew and enter into repayment arrangements.  To do so could
trigger the beginning of a new statute of limitations period (R.T., at 40-41). So, rather than begin
paying on the AE account, he is accumulating funds with which he hopes to use in making a lump-
sum settlement offer to AE.  He hopes to generate something between $10,000.00 and $15,000.00
from his earnings and retirement, and then contact an attorney about reaching a settlement with AE
(R.T., at 41-45, 71-72).  In the meantime, the AE debt is no longer reported on his latest credit
reports (see ex. A).  Although, the AE debt was not deleted from Applicant’s credit report until
sometime in 2006, Applicant is uncertain whether the removal of the AE account had anything to
do with the running of any applicable statutes of limitation in his state.  
Aside from the two debts covered in the SOR (i.e., the AE and L debts), Applicant is current
with all of his accounts listed in his credit report.  Since restoring his credit, he has been able to buy
a house and reports a very good credit score of 727 (see ex. A; R.T., at 39-40).  He reports an annual
income of around $76,000.00 and a military retirement of $25,000.00 (R.T., at 48).  He currently has
4
about $6,000.00 in savings (put aside to pay his AE debt), a 401(k) retirement account valued at
$23,000.00, and no other stocks and investments (R.T., at 49-51, 73-76).  In addition to paying on
a mortgage he recently secured on his home (R.T., at 76-77),  he continues to help his  mother with
her expenses: He sends her between $300.00 and $500.00 a month (R.T., at 28-29).
Applicant has excellent character references and credit references.  He is current with all of
his remaining creditors.  His supervisor credits him with excellent performance evaluations and work
ethics (see ex. B).  Applicant’ former military associates also characterize him as reliable and
trustworthy (ex. B).
POLICIES
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision
making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines require the judge to consider all of the
"Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying
Conditions), if any, and all of the "Mitigating Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a
security clearance should be granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge
to assess these factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative
Guidelines, judges must take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and
mitigation set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2 of the Directive, which are
intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial common sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy factors
are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead
to financial crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an
applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly
consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive requires Administrative Judges to make
a common sense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of
an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those
inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the
Judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
5
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted fact[s] alleged
in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts proven have a material bearing
to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a security clearance.  The required showing of
material bearing, however, does not require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the
applicant has actually mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a
security clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of persuasion shifts to the applicant for the purpose of establishing his
or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or mitigation of the
Government's case.
  CONCLUSIONS
Applicant is a program integrator with two delinquent debts he accumulated some years ago:
one during a military deployment between 1996 and 1997, and another associated with a post-
deployment effort to consolidate his debts.  One of the debts (associated with L) he paid, and then
disputed the ensuing claim of a creditor assignee.  The other debt (the AE debt) is since barred by
the applicable statute of limitations. Although Applicant presents an overall positive credit history
with a high credit score, the previously reported delinquent debts were significantly substantial to
raise Government security concerns. 
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the Regulation
where the individual applicant is so financially overextended that he or she is at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Applicant’s accumulation of delinquent debts and his failure
to document payments of the two debts in issue (i.e., his AE and L debts warrant the application of
two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for financial
considerations: DC 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and DC 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations).
 Both his AE and L debts are extenuated to some extent, and MC 20 (b) (the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under th circumstances) has some applicability given his
mother’s/stepfather’s situation before he deployed in 1996 and his overpayment problems he
experienced on deployment.
To his credit, Applicant initiated credit counseling with CCCS following his military
discharge and paid off most of his debts through the program before he experienced disagreements
with the counseling service and switched firms.  Through the efforts of the law firm that handled his
debts before going out of business, Applicant addressed one of the two listed debts.  This debt was
subsequently assigned to a credit collection agency (L), which Applicant disputed.  His most recent
credit report reflects the removal of both of his listed debts and current status of all of his remaining
listed debts.  Based on his counseling and repayment efforts to date, he may take advantage of two
of the mitigating conditions (MC) of the financial considerations guideline: MC 20 (c) (the person
6
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the
problem is being resolved or is under control) and MC 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. 
MC 20 (e) (the individual has reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the
dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue) also has  application to the facts of this
case.  True, Applicant does not dispute the bank debt as one of his creation: He disputes L’s
ownership of the debt that he assures he satisfied before the debt was resold  to L.  While the Appeal
Board has never defined the meaning of the term “legitimacy” in MC 20(e), the term can reasonably
be construed to include not just disputes over the origins of the debt, but subsequent assignments as
well, and possibly even enforcement issues (such as statutes of limitations).
At the very least, MC 20(e) is capable of embracing debt ownership questions (such as L’s
disputed assignment).   Reasonable grounds for Applicant’s disputing the L debt is documented  by
the debt’s removal from Applicant’s most recent credit report
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial responsibilities,
among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.   Financial stability in a person cleared
to access classified information is required precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of
the clearance.  While the principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties
is vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases
(as here) and bring into play security concerns covered by the financial consideration guideline.
Here, Applicant satisfies that one of his debts was disputed (the L debt), and the other is barred by
his State’s relevant statute of limitations.
While statutes of limitation in general are considered important policy tools for discouraging
plaintiffs from pursuing stale claims and promoting finality in litigation, they have never been
equated with good-faith efforts to repay overdue creditors.  See, e.g.,  ISCR Case No. 02-30304, at
3 (App. Bd. April 2004)(quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020, at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 2001).  And so,
reliance on his State’s statute of limitations bar to excuse payment of his AE debt is not by itself
dispositive of security concerns.  However, the AE debt appears to be the only remaining debt on
Applicant’s credit report that represents an acknowledged undischarged debt.  The debt, as such, is
isolated and one that is not likely to recur.  Applicant may invoke MC 20(a) (the behavior happened
so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) under
the circumstances of his case.
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s debt
accumulations, his efforts to seek counseling and  restore his credit, and his overall demonstration
of solid performance evaluations and demonstrated trustworthiness, Applicant mitigates security
concerns related to his past debt delinquencies and judgment lapses associated therein.  Favorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline F.
In reaching my recommended decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E2.2.2 factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
7
FORMAL FINDINGS
 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the context of
the FINDINGS OF FACT, CONCLUSIONS, CONDITIONS, and the factors listed above, this
Administrative Judge makes the following FORMAL FINDINGS:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL): FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.a: FOR APPLICANT
Sub-para. 1.b: FOR APPLICANT
DE CISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.  Clearance is granted.
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
