KEYWORD: Drugs; Personal Conduct
DIGEST: Applicant is a 45-year-old deputy program manager employed by a federal contractor.  He
smoked marijuana six times in 2001.  After obtaining a security clearance, in 2004, he smoked
marijuana once.  The drug use is not recent, he no longer associates with other persons involved, and
he signed a statement of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future.  He successfully mitigated the
security concerns about drug involvement.  He also gave one false answer on a security clearance
application in 2003.  His actions were negligent, but not deliberate, and the government failed to
make its case about personal conduct.  Clearance is granted.
CASENO: 06-22755.h1
DATE: 07/20/2007
DATE:  July 20, 2007
In re:
------------------------
SSN:  -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-22755
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
CHRISTOPHER GRAHAM
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Robert R. Sparks, Esq.
SYNOPSIS
2
Applicant is a 45-year-old deputy program manager employed by a federal contractor.  He
smoked marijuana six times in 2001.  After obtaining a security clearance, in 2004, he smoked
marijuana once.  The drug use is not recent, he no longer associates with other persons involved, and
he signed a statement of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future.  He successfully mitigated the
security concerns about drug involvement.  He also gave one false answer on a security clearance
application in 2003.  His actions were negligent, but not deliberate, and the government failed to
make its case about personal conduct.  Clearance is granted.
Government Exhibit 1 (Security Clearance Application, dated April 12, 2005).1
Tr. at 13, 39.2
Id. at 15.3
Id. at 13.4
3
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On April 12, 2005, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86).   The1
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant or continue a security clearance
for Applicant.  As required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2,
1992, as amended, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on December 22, 2006, detailing
the basis for its decision – security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Directive.  The President issued revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) on December 30, 2005.  DoD implemented them on September 1, 2006.  Pending
official amendment/reissue of DoD Directive 5220.6, the AG are to be used in all cases when the
SOR is dated on or after September 1, 2006.  Because the SOR was issued after September 1, 2006,
DoD policy requires that this case proceed under the revised guidelines.
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 12, 2007, and elected to have a hearing
before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on February 27, 2007, and a Notice of
Hearing was dated on March 14, 2007.  I convened a hearing on April 4, 2007, to consider whether
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to issue Applicant a security clearance.  The
government offered four exhibits, marked as Exhibits 1-4.  Applicant offered fifteen exhibits,
marked as Exhibits A-K and M-P.  The government objected to Exhibit D, which was overruled.
All other exhibits were admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 12,
2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant admitted the allegations contained in the SOR.  The admissions are incorporated
herein as findings of fact.  After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and
upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is a 45-year-old deputy program manager employed by a federal contractor.   He2
is married and has three children.   He has a masters in business administration (MBA) in3
management.   He has no prior military service and was granted a security clearance in 2003.4 5
Applicant was employed in the financial industry for 19 years prior to the events of
September 11, 2001.  In November 2001, his employer laid off 400 people, including Applicant.
The company’s offices were destroyed in the World Trade Center collapse.  He also lost a close
friend, and his mother was hospitalized with a nervous breakdown.  During this time, he used
Id. at 14-17.6
Id. at 18-20.7
Id. at 26.8
Id. at 56-58.9
Id. at 27-32.10
 Applicant’s Exhibit I (Statement of Intent, dated January 12, 2007) at 1; Tr. at 38-39.11
4
marijuana approximately 6 times, due to the stress.  There were other friends who had also lost jobs
and lost friends in the tragic events.  This group of friends would socialize and on occasion smoke
marijuana.  This lasted between one and two months.  He moved when he found employment, and
has not seen these people since 2001.   6
He found work in October 2002, and his employer required a drug test.  He passed the test.
In March 2003, he accepted employment, with his current employer, and again passed a drug test,
which was a condition of employment.   He was granted a security clearance on July 18, 2003.7
In November 2004, Applicant and his wife were on a camping trip with some couples that
they recently met.  One evening after the children were in bed, applicant was sitting around the
campfire talking with some of the men.  At some point, someone lit up a marijuana cigarette and
started passing it around.  Without thinking, Applicant took a couple puffs and passed it on.  At that
point, his wife told him what he had just done.  He immediately left the area, and he and his wife
retired for the evening.  There was no evidence prior to that evening, nor did he expect, that this
group would be smoking marijuana.  After that trip, Applicant his wife disengaged from the people,
and only see them sometimes at school events.  
On April 14, 2003, applicant executed a security clearance application (SF 86), and he
answered “No” to the following question: “Question 27.  Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug
Activity - Illegal Use of Drugs  Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have
you illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish,
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates,
domestic law alone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenic (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?”
He failed to disclose his marijuana use in the late fall of 2001.  
In 2005, Applicant submitted an application with a federal government agency, and took and
passed a drug screen.   He was required to complete a SF 86.  In filling out the form, he noticed for8
the first time that question 27 asked about drug use for the last seven years.  He realized he had
misread the SF 86 he completed in 2003.  Most employee applications in the financial community
generally went back only for a 12 month period.   He had no knowledge of the security clearance9
process.  In the 2005 application, he correctly listed his marijuana usage in 2001 and 2004.   10
Applicant took full responsibility for his mistakes.  He signed a statement of intent with
automatic revocation of clearance for any future violation of Guideline H (drug involvement.)   If11
Tr. at 60-61.12
Id. at 35-37.13
Id. at 66-69.14
Guidelines ¶ 2(c).15
5
he were exposed to illegal drug use anywhere, he would remove himself from the situation.   When12
he received the SOR, he reported it to his employer’s ethics committee, which referred him to the
director of security.  Applicant talked to the director of security and followed his advice regarding
the process.13
The vice president and division manager of Applicant’s employer testified that he was
surprised when Applicant told him about the SOR.  He said it was out of character, and he advised
him to work through the system as hard as he could and be as straightforward and honest as he had
been.  He believed the incidents were lapses of judgment, he saw no change in character from the
person that he hired, and felt that there was no discrepancy between the person he hired and in the
person that had been working for him.  Applicant’s performance had significantly increased.  He
wanted Applicant to continue to work for him.  The witness has held a security clearance since 1966,
and he believed that Applicant should be granted a clearance.14
POLICIES
In an evaluation of an applicant’s security suitability, an administrative judge must consider
the “Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information”
(Guidelines).  In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines are
divided into disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to determine an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible ironclad rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge should apply these guidelines in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. Guidelines ¶ 2.  An administrative
judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision.  Because the
entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept,” an administrative judge should consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.15
Specifically, an administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at Guidelines ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency
and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5)
extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Guidelines ¶ 2(b).16
“Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might  accept as adequate to support a
17
conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006)
(citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing
two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial
evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a
scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4  Cir. 1994).th
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence18  
as a whole, both favorable and unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent
provisions of the Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶
E3.1.15.”  ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006). 
Executive Order 10865, § 7. 19
6
Since the protection of the national security is the paramount consideration, the final decision
in each case is arrived at by applying the standard that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being
considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”   In16
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on
mere speculation or conjecture.
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial evidence.”   The17
Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a case which demonstrates,
in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant
or continue an applicant’s access to classified information.  Once the government has produced
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence
and prove a mitigating condition.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15 provides, “The applicant is responsible for
presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] has the ultimate burden of persuasion
as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  The burden of disproving a mitigating condition
never shifts to the government.18
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with
the government predicated upon trust and confidence.  It is a relationship that transcends normal duty
hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well.  It is because of this special relationship the
government must be able to repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to
whom it grants access to classified information.  Decisions under this Directive and the guidelines
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
The scope of an administrative judge’s decision is limited.  Nothing in this decision should
be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied
determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism.  19
7
CONCLUSIONS
Guideline H—Drug Involvement
Guidelines ¶ 24. The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair
judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules, and regulations.
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from
approved medical direction.
Guidelines ¶ 25. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying
include:
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); and
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
Applicant admitted smoking marijuana six times in 2001, and one time in 2004.  Applicant
admitted that he smoked marijuana one time, while holding a security clearance.
Guidelines ¶ 26. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;(2 and him ) changing or avoiding
the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.
Applicant’s marijuana use in 2001 is understandable considering the circumstances of dealing
with the collapse of the World Trade Center, the loss of his job, the loss of his best friend, and the
hospitalization of his mother.  Several other acquaintances had similar problems.  It’s plausible to
see Applicant sitting around with these persons, consoling each other by sharing alcohol and an
occasional joint.  He no longer associates with these people.  It occurred five years ago and is not
recent.  The other use in 2004 was an aberrational event.  Applicant got caught up in the moment
around the campfire when someone passed a joint.  He took two puffs, passed it along, and at that
point, his wife interrupted him and asked him what he was thinking about.  He realized his mistake,
withdrew, and they have had no further social contact with these people.  Applicant stated his intent
not to use drugs in the future, and signed a statement of intent that provides automatic revocation of
8
his clearance for any drug violation.  I find that Guidelines ¶ 26 (a), (b) (1,3,and 4) apply and I
conclude guideline H for Applicant.
Guideline E—Personal Conduct
Guidelines ¶ 15. The Concern. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  Of special
interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process
or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Guidelines ¶ 16. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying
include:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations,
determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.
Applicant admitted that he answered Question 27. incorrectly on the 2003 security clearance
application.  He explained that in his 19 year history with financial industry, it’s a question about
drugs appeared on an employment application, it normally only ask for drug use in the past 12
months.  He admitted he did not read the form carefully, and he was commuting several hundred
miles between his old and new jobs.  I characterize his conduct as negligent, but not deliberate, and
therefore the government has failed to make its case under guideline E.
If, assuming arguendo, that the government did make its case, then the following mitigating
conditions apply to mitigate the security concerns:
Guidelines ¶ 17. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or
falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or
it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or occurs under
circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or
willingness to comply with rules and regulations.
Applicant corrected his mistake regarding question 27 on his 2005 security clearance
application.  He answered questions truthfully to DSS investigators, he self-reported to his
company’s ethics committee.  Based on the testimony of his division manager, his employer believes
Directive ¶ E.2.2.1.20
Id.21
Id.22
9
that the offenses did not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.
He has acknowledged the behavior and the stressors and circumstances of the 2001 marijuana use
no longer exist.  He no longer associates with the persons that provided the marijuana in 2004.  Such
behavior is unlikely to recur.  
Whole Person Analysis
“The adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make
an affirmative determination that the person is eligible for a security clearance.”   “Available,20
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be
considered in reaching a determination.”   In evaluating Applicant’s case, in addition to the21
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I also considered the “whole person” concept in evaluating
Applicant’s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national interests.   I considered his age (45),22
his education which includes a MBA, his employment, and what might motivate him to be less than
truthful.  Applicant supplied a false answer on a security clearance application.  This is problematic
because candor with the government about a person’s negatives is the crux of a trustworthiness
determination.  If a person discloses the adverse information about himself, then he may be trusted
with confidential or classified information.  Applicant was unfamiliar with the security clearance
process.  He had spent 19 years in the financial industry where the only questions about drug use
asked for the prior 12 month period.  It is reasonable to believe that given the impact of 9/11 and the
loss of one’s job, a group might join to together to drown their sorrows with beer and a few joints
get passed around.
Likewise, he’s sitting around the campfire on a camping trip, engrossed in discussion, and
someone passes a joint.  Without thinking, he takes two puffs, passes it on, and then his wife brings
him back to reality.  He no longer associates with these people, and he signed a statement of intent
not to use drugs in the future.  I am confident this aberrational behavior will not happen again.  He
has become a vital part of his company’s team as demonstrated by his division program manager’s
testimony.  The totality of the record raises no reasonable and persistent doubts about Applicant's
ability to protect classified information and to exercise the requisite good judgment and discretion
expected of one in whom the government entrusts its interests.  I conclude it is  clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required
by E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1. Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
10
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
DECISION
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.  Clearance is granted.
Christopher Graham
Administrative Judge
