KEYWORD: Financial
DIGEST: Between 2001 and 2005, Applicant accrued $12,000 of delinquent debt. Her financial
problems were caused by lost income resulting from her husband’s employment downturn, and
medical bills related to her daughter’s serious illness. Since her husband found a steady job in
November 2006, she has made substantial good-faith efforts to rehabilitate her finances. The
likelihood of recurrence of her past problems is minimal. Clearance is granted. 
CASENO: 06-24688.h1
DATE: 07/30/2007
DATE:  July 29, 2007
In re:
-------------------
SSN: -----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 06-24688
DECISION OF ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE
MARC E. CURRY
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
SYNOPSIS
2
Between 2001 and 2005, Applicant accrued $12,000 of delinquent debt. Her financial
problems were caused by lost income resulting from her husband’s employment downturn, and
medical bills related to her daughter’s serious illness. Since her husband found a steady job in
November 2006, she has made substantial good-faith efforts to rehabilitate her finances. The
likelihood of recurrence of her past problems is minimal. Clearance is granted.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
On April 11, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) explaining why it was not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant or continue a security clearance. This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, dated
February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992, as amended. She
answered the SOR on May 11, 2007, admitting the allegations and requesting a hearing. She waived
her right to 15 days minimum notice of hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on May 31, 2007. That day, DOHA issued a notice of hearing
scheduling the hearing for June 12, 2007. During the hearing, I received five government exhibits,
seven Applicant exhibits, and Applicant’s testimony. At Applicant’s request, I left the record open
for her to submit additional exhibits. Within the time allotted, she submitted five additional exhibits
received as H through L. DOHA received the transcript on July 6, 2007.
FINDINGS OF FACT 
The SOR admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. In addition, I make the
following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 31-year-old married woman with two children, ages eleven and nine. She has
a high school education. For the past six years she has worked as an accounting clerk for a company
that, among other things, provides food services for the armed forces. Specifically, she “is
responsible for electronically forwarding dining facility and warehouse orders and receipts  . . . to
[her company’s] vendors” (Exhibit D, Supervisor’s Reference Letter, dated June 5, 2007). Applicant
is an exceptional employee who is highly dedicated to her job (see generally, Exhibits D through F,
Supervisors’ Reference Letters, dated June 5, 2007, June 4, 2007, and June 4, 2007, respectively).
Applicant’s husband is an Army veteran. When he left active duty in 2001, he had trouble
finding a steady civilian job. For the next five years, he experienced frequent periods of layoffs or
underemployment. 
The family began to struggle financially. At or about the same time, one of Applicant’s
children began to experience serious health problems requiring extensive evaluation and treatment.
Unable to afford health insurance, Applicant fell behind on her debts.
By 2005, Applicant had accrued approximately $12,000 of delinquent debt. None of the debts
were accrued as the result of frivolous purchases. Approximately $7,900 consist of her daughter’s
Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.h are duplicates.1
Subparagraphs 1.v and 1.r are duplicates.2
3
medical bills (subparagraphs 1.f, 1.g, 1.k, 1.o through1. t, and 1.v). The remainder include delinquent
car insurance payments (1.a, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i), several utilities, including cable and television
services, (subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.h), a deficiency remaining from a repossession (1.u), and
two credit cards (subparagraphs 1.w and 1.x).
Applicant had a line of credit with a $307 balance that also grew delinquent during this
period (subparagraph 1.n). She paid it in 2003 using her 2002 tax return (Tr. 33).
By November 2006, her husband gained a steady, well-paying job, and the family’s financial
situation began to improve. In January 2007, she began satisfying subparagraph 1.c, a cell phone
account (Exhibit K, Letter from Creditor to Applicant, dated June 13, 2007). She has been making
steady payments since that time, and it is no longer delinquent (Tr. 33).
At or about the time Applicant began satisfying the cell phone delinquency, she began to pay
one of her delinquent utility bills (subparagraph 1.b). It is no longer delinquent (Exhibit J, Detailed
Statement History of Utility Company, January 26, 2007 through May 25, 2007).
In February 2007, Applicant retained a financial counselor who helped her develop a budget
and a debt payment plan. Under the plan, Applicant pays the credit counseling company $315 each
month whereupon the company then makes individual payments to each creditor. The plan includes
the debts listed in subparagraphs 1.a, 1.d, 1.e,  1.i, 1.r,  1.s through 1.u, 1.w, and 1.x. Applicant has1 2
been making payments since March 2007.
The debts listed in subparagraphs 1.f, 1.g, 1.j, 1.k through 1.m, 1.o, 1.p, and 1.q are not
included in the payment plan. With respect to subparagraphs 1.f, 1.g, and 1.o, the government
alleged the respective amounts of the delinquencies, but did not identify the creditors to whom they
were owed. Also, none of the debts not included in the payment plan were listed in the credit report
the financial counselor used when she helped Applicant to develop it (Exhibit 2, Credit Bureau
Report, dated February 20, 2007, as included in Answers to Interrogatories, dated February 22, 2007,
at 7). Subparagraphs 1.j, 1.l, and 1.m are collectively less than $450. Subparagraphs 1.p, 1.q and 1.k
are owed to the same medical facility. The financial counseling agency will add any newly
discovered delinquencies to the plan, and adjust the monthly amount due to reflect the additional
balance. (Tr. 53).
Applicant and her husband have maintained health insurance since January 2007 (Tr. 31, 41).
Currently, they have approximately $1100 of monthly income remaining after expenses have been
paid (Tr. 38-39; Exhibit H, Applicant’s Budget, dated June 14, 2007).
POLICIES
The adjudicative guidelines, as revised December 29, 2005, and implemented September 1,
2006, apply to the analysis of this case. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, they are divided into those that may be considered in deciding whether to deny or revoke
4
an individual’s eligibility for access to classified information (disqualifying conditions) and those
that may be considered in deciding whether to grant an individual’s eligibility for access to classified
information (mitigating conditions).
Because the entire process is a scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept,” all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, should be considered in making a meaningful decision. Specifically these are: (1) the
nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances; (2) the frequency and recency
of the conduct; (3) the age of the applicant; (4) the motivation of the applicant, and the extent to
which the conduct was negligent, willful, voluntary, or undertaken with knowledge of the
consequences; (5) the absence or presence of rehabilitation; and (6) the probability that the
circumstances or conduct will continue or recur in the future.
The following adjudicative guideline is raised:
Guideline F - Financial Considerations: Failure or inability to live within one’s
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control,
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
Conditions pertaining to this adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, as well as those which could mitigate security concerns, are set forth and discussed
in the conclusions below.
Since the protection of national security is the paramount consideration, the final decision
in each case must be reached by applying the standard that the issuance of the clearance is “clearly
consistent with the national interest” (See generally, Directive, Sec. 2.3, Sec. 2.5.3, Sec. 3.2, and Sec.
4.2). In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are based on the evidence
contained in the record.
The Government is responsible for presenting evidence to establish facts in the SOR that
have been controverted. The applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by the Government, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.
CONCLUSIONS
Applicant’s history of financial problems triggers the application of Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, FC DC 19(c):
a history of not meeting financial obligations, and FC DC 19(e): consistent spending beyond one’s
means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-
to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
Applicant’s financial problems began when her husband left the military and experienced
difficulties finding steady, well-paying employment. At the same time, one of her children began
struggling with a serious health problem that generated costly medical bills which she was unable
5
to pay, in part, because her husband’s employment problems had rendered her unable to afford health
insurance coverage. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) 20(b): the conditions
that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances, applies.
In January 2007, shortly after her husband gained a good job, they purchased insurance
coverage, and began paying their delinquencies. With the help of a financial counselor, Applicant
developed a payment plan. Several of her delinquencies are consolidated in the plan, and she has
been making payments since March 2007.
A number of delinquencies were not included in the payment plan. Three of them, however,
are owed to creditors that the government did not identify in the SOR. The remainder were not listed
in the credit report the counselor used to develop the plan. Applicant’s credit counselor anticipated
that the list of delinquencies that she consolidated into the payment plan may have been incomplete.
Moreover, Applicant currently has ample after-expense income remaining to incorporate them into
her payment plan, as the counselor recommended.
FC MC 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control, and FC MC 20(d):
the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,
apply. Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security concern.
Whole Person Concept
Applicant accrued approximately $12,000 of delinquent debt in four years. This occurred
because of her husband’s employment struggles, and her daughter’s health concerns. Moreover, none
of the delinquencies constituted frivolous purchases. Her finances improved as her husband’s
employment situation stabilized. Since then, she has developed a budget, consulted a counselor, and
adhered to a payment plan. The income remaining after her debts have been paid renders the
likelihood of a recurrence of her financial problems minimal. This evidence of rehabilitation, in
conjunction with Applicant’s strong character, as demonstrated by her impressive work credentials,
and the credibility displayed at the hearing, compel me to conclude that her past financial problems
are no longer a security risk. Clearance is granted.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Paragraph 1 – Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.y: For Applicant
6
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. Clearance is
granted.
Marc E. Curry
Administrative Judge
