1
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 04-04579
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On October 23, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline
E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 17, 2007. He
answered the SOR in writing through counsel on November 26, 2007, and requested a
hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on December 27,
2007. I received the case assignment on January 4, 2008. I granted Applicant’s request
for a delay until February 2008, in order for his counsel to be available. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on January 17, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on
February 13, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6 which were
Tr. 45.1
AE C (Awards and Certificates 1-21).2
There are different months and years in several documents for this marriage. At the hearing, Applicant3
stated January 22, 1981.
AE B4
AE B (Final Decree of Divorce).5
One document states August 30 not August 24.6
Tr. 75.7
2
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits
A through E, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on
February 22, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated November 17, 2007, Applicant admitted the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a of the SOR, with explanations. He also provided
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. After graduating
from high school in 1975, he attended college on scholarships for several years. He
joined the U.S. Navy in 1978 and retired as a chief warrant officer in 2000. During his
military service he held a security clearance.1
While in the Navy, he received numerous awards, medals, commendations, and
certificates. He was a superb seaman and mechanic. He earned the respect of junior
and senior leadership. He was highly recommended for any position of leadership.2
Applicant married his first wife in January 1981  and believed he was divorced on3
August 13, 1992. The hearing for the divorce was July 30, 1992.  However, the divorce4
decree was not actually signed until September 9, 1992. This created many problems
for Applicant.  5
On August 24, 1992,  Applicant married a second time. He called his divorce6
attorney to see if the divorce was final. Applicant asserts that he was told “yes” that he
was divorced. However, unbeknownst to him, he was not officially divorced from his first
wife.  Applicant had a difficult and tumultuous second marriage. His second wife filed for7
divorce in 1999. At that time, Applicant was preparing to retire from the Navy. In fact, he
retired in 2000. 
Tr. 104.8
TR. 109.9
GE 2 (Security Application 2003).10
3
Applicant was preparing to marry his third wife. He married her on September 18,
1999. During this time, Applicant had to process many retirement papers, including
information on dependents and beneficiaries. He needed to produce divorce decrees,
and other documents. It was during this time that he learned that the second marriage
was not vaild (void ab inititio) because he married before he was actually divorced from
his first wife. His attorney then told him he needed to get a decree of annulment or have
the second marriage declared void. The Navy required this documentation to proceed
with the retirement process. Applicant decided after a time to forge a signature on the
annulment paperwork. He signed the name of the state judge and then submitted the
paper to the Navy - the date on that decree was September 10, 1999.
Applicant’s second wife was not happy with the annulment. She initiated a civil
suit against Applicant. She learned that she would have no dependent benefits and
alerted the Navy. The Naval Criminal Investigative Service (NCIS) investigated
Applicant for possible fraud, forgery, bigamy and orders violations charges.  Applicant8
received no punishment from the Navy and retired on February 1, 2000.
In February 2001, Applicant completed a security clearance application. During
the investigation, Applicant learned that the FBI report indicated that he had an arrest
for forgery in January 2000.  He did not take the job with the agency because he was9
offered another position with a government contractor.
In 2003, Applicant completed another security clearance application. He
commented on the form about the incident in January 2000.  Applicant started his10
current employment in February 2000 and has a security clearance. He has completed
several important projects for the company.
Applicant’s current position is a challenging and demanding one. His colleagues
and supervisors applaud him for his leadership and his integrity. He is open, honest,
and loves his job. He receives high praise from his current employer.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2©,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
5
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying; including:
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative; and
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the persons’
professional, or community standing.
             The Government established security concerns over Applicant’s misconduct in
December 1999. He submitted an annulment decree to the Navy with a forged signature
of a state judge. His submission of a false document is a violation of the Uniform Military
Justice Code (UCMJ). He admitted that he signed the name of a judicial official on the
annulment decree so that he could complete the required paperwork for the retirement
process. Thus, I find his action alleged in SOR ¶1 establishes ¶16(b) and 16(e).
Paragraph 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthful;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
6
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
Applicant has admitted the conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1. The offense is not minor.
He signed the name of a state judge on an official document and submitted it to the
Navy. The offense has not recurred, and Applicant now recognizes the security and
employment impact of such conduct. It does not cast doubt on his current  reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment because it is unlikely to recur. Applicant has
“acknowledged the behavior” and recognized the negative consequences of such
conduct. Based primarily on the lack of misconduct after 1999, I conclude he has
matured and such behavior is unlikely to recur. Finally, he has reduced or eliminated
“vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress” by not  He expressed remorse for
this misconduct and presented character evidence to establish that this misconduct was
out of character. Thus, ¶ 17(c) is applicable. ¶ 17(d) and 17(e) are partially applicable.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Paragraphs 31(a) and 31(c) set forth two conditions that could raise a security
concern and may be disqualifying, “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,”
and “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”
The offense, as listed in SOR 2.a (submission of a false document constitutes a
violation of the UCMJ. The fact that Applicant was not disciplined nor were charges or
conviction resulted is not dispositive under paragraph 31(c), which notes a possible
security concern without formal prosecution of the offense. I therefore conclude that
paragraph 31(a) applies to SOR ¶ 2.a.
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
7
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
AG ¶¶ 32 (a) and (d) apply. There is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including the
passage of about nine years. He expressed remorse. He has an outstanding
employment record, military service and a great recommendation from his current
employer. Applicant has had a security clearance for almost 30 years. His post-offense
behavior is sufficient to fully mitigate the act of misconduct in this case. 
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
The Government established security concerns over Applicant’s military personal
misconduct in December 1999. He submitted an annulment decree to the Navy with a
forged signature of a state judge. His submission of a false document is a violation of
the UCMJ. He admitted that he signed the name of a judicial official on the annulment
decree so that he could complete the required paperwork for the retirement process.
Thus, I find his action alleged in SOR ¶ 16(b) and 16(e).
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served more than 20
years in the U.S. Navy garnering many awards and citations. He has an outstanding
employment record and maintained a security clearance for many years. He is praised
8
for his trustworthiness and leadership skills. He is now working overseas for a defense
contractor and received high praise for his work. He has many character references
from retired military personnel.
Applicant regrets submitting a false document. He has no other misconduct or
offense since that time. He has been recommended for a security clearance by those
knowledgeable in the field. 
Based on Applicant’s credible testimony and review of him as a whole person, I
find in his favor. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal conduct
and criminal conduct. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
