DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )        ISCR Case No. 06-04787
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 25 October 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline B.  Applicant answered the SOR 141November 2007, and requested a1
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 7 January 2008, and I convened a hearing 11
February 2008. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 20 February 2008.
 
At hearing, Department Counsel indicated that the government would not pursue allegation 1.a. because2
his research revealed that the criminal record allegedly falsified involved misdemeanor crimes not required
to be disclosed. Accordingly, I have stricken allegation 1.a.
The document itself states “DATE SUBJECT SIGNED THE FORM: 2004/01/28.” However an EPSQ3
automatically generates this date when the form is printed, regardless of when the form is actually signed.
.My conclusions are further confirmed by Applicant’s testimony at hearing that he completed several4
clearance applications during his first year or so with his employer, and thought he had provided updated
information on those applications. Further, Applicant’s sworn statement shows his obvious confusion
about why the 2004 trips to Ukraine did not appear on his clearance application.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR paragraph 1 allegations. Accordingly, I incorporate
his admissions as findings of fact. He denied the SOR paragraph 2 allegations. He is a
53-year-old senior principal engineer employed by a defense contractor since
November 2003. He seeks to retain the security clearance he obtained in January 1994.
Applicant allegedly falsified a January 2005 clearance application (G.E. 1) by
failing to disclose that he was living with a foreign national (SOR 1.b.) and failing to
disclose three additional trips to Ukraine in 2004 (SOR 1.c.).  He also allegedly falsified2
a May 2007 sworn statement (G.E. 2) by claiming that his first trips to Ukraine began in
February 2004 (SOR 1.c.). G.E. 1 fails to establish the alleged falsifications for the
simple reason that it is a composite of two distinct documents, neither of which is
demonstrably false. The first six pages of the exhibit is a complete SF 86 (EPSQ
version 2.2) whose first page indicates that it was generated  (and possibly signed) 283
January 2004. On that date, the form accurately reflects Applicant’s two trips to Ukraine
in 2003, and the foreign national had not yet moved in with him. The first six pages
includes a complete signature block which is unsigned. The seventh page of the exhibit
is a signature page from a different SF 86, that is numbered “Page: 8,” contains different
information than the unsigned signature page numbered “Page: 6,” was signed by
Applicant on 3 January 2005, and faxed by Applicant’s employer at 0301 on 3 January
2005, as page 001 of the facsimile. Thus, G.E. 1 consists of six pages of information
that was correct in January 2004, but not certified by the Applicant, and the Applicant’s
January 2005 certification of an eight-page document, the contents of whose  first seven
pages are unknown. Applicant’s sworn statement does not support any finding of
falsification, largely because it records a discussion in which both the Applicant and the
investigator were working on the incorrect assumption that G.E. 1 was a complete
document. Consequently, the government’s evidence fails to overcome Applicant’s
denial of SOR 1.b. and 1.c.4
    The government’s allegation that Applicant falsified his May 2007 sworn
statement by claiming that his first trips to Ukraine were in 2004 is similarly misguided.
The only sensible reading of his sworn statement is as his discussion with the
investigator about the information allegedly omitted by the Applicant on his clearance
application, the reasons for the omissions, and providing the missing information.
At least one of these trips was required by INS to ensure the marriage was legitimate and not a visa scam. The5
November 2004 trip was when his fiancé immigrated to the U.S.
3
Applicant never stated that his first trip “ever” to Ukraine was February 2004. Indeed,
such a statement would be silly to an investigator apparently working from G.E. 1, which
clearly had the 2003 travel.
Applicant is a U.S. citizen, born, raised, and educated in the U.S. He traveled to
Ukraine in August 2003, October 2003, and February 2004 for pleasure. Later in 2004,
Applicant, through an internet marriage agency, began corresponding with a Ukrainian
national by e-mail and regular mail. In May 2004 and three times between August 2004
and November 2004, Applicant traveled to Ukraine to visit with this prospective bride
and her family.  She immigrated to the U.S. in December 2004, and married Applicant in5
February 2005. She went to school in the U.S. and obtained certification as a physical
therapy assistant. She has not traveled to Ukraine since immigrating to the U.S.
Applicant’s wife is a legal permanent resident of the U.S. and intends to become
a U.S. citizen. She has applied for citizenship but is not yet eligible because of
residence requirements. Her parents are resident citizens of Ukraine, with no
connections to the Ukrainian government. Neither speaks any English, and Applicant
speaks neither Ukranian or Russian. Her father manages a bread factory; her mother is
a housewife. Her sister is a resident citizen of Ukraine, with no connections to the
Ukranian government. She also speaks no English. She is a housewife. Applicant has
little direct contact with his in-laws because of this language barrier.
Ukraine has a parliamentary-presidential type of government since its
independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, and is undergoing profound political and
economic change as it moves toward a market economy and multiparty democracy.
However, Ukraine has significant human rights problems. Torture, arbitrary detention of
persons critical of the government, and warrantless violations of privacy are illegal but
common. Ukraine has good relations with the U.S., and its primary foreign policy goal is
Euro-Atlantic integration, including membership in the World Trade Organization, the
European Union, and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Ukraine also participates
in six United Nation peacekeeping missions and has a small number of troops serving in
supporting roles with Coalition forces in Iraq. Ukraine has peaceful and constructive
relations with its neighbors. Relations with Russia are difficult and complex, however,
due to differing foreign policy priorities in the region, energy dependence, payment
arrears, disagreement over stationing of Russian military forces, and some boundary
disputes. It is not a known collector of U.S. intelligence information, and is not known to
target its expatriate citizens to obtain information.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 6.7
4
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial common sense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guideline is Guideline B. 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.6
Analysis
Under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), an applicant’s foreign contacts and
interests may raise security concerns if the individual 1) has divided loyalties or foreign
financial interests, 2) may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way contrary to U.S. interests, or 3) is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Foreign influence adjudications can and
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located—including, but not limited to, whether the country is known
to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.  Evaluation of an individual’s qualifications for access to protected information7
requires careful assessment of both the foreign entity’s willingness and ability to target
protected information, and to target ex-patriots who are U.S. citizens to obtain that
information, and the individual’s susceptibility to influence, whether negative or positive.
More specifically, an individual’s contacts with foreign family members (or other foreign
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 7.(a).8
5
entities or persons) raise security concerns only if those contacts create a heightened
risk or foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.8
In this case, the government failed to establish a case for disqualification under
Guideline B. Considering first the country involved, Ukraine and the U.S. enjoy good
foreign relations. It has not been demonstrated that the Ukranian government is actively
engaged in the collection of U.S. intelligence, or that it targets its expatriate citizens
such that would make Applicant or his in-laws likely targets for coercion, duress, or
influence.
Considering Applicant’s circumstances, the government produced no evidence
that there was a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion because of Applicant’s limited family contacts in with his in-laws.
None of Applicant’s in-laws have any direct connection to the Ukranian government,
and Applicant’s contacts with them are so limited that they do not raise a concern over
protecting classified information. Under these circumstances, I conclude that it is
unlikely Applicant can be pressured based on his in-laws in Ukraine. Accordingly, I
resolve Guideline B for Applicant.
The government failed to prove its falsification case under Guideline E. The
allegations covered by Guideline E were unsubstantiated. Accordingly, I resolve
Guideline E for Applicant.
Formal Findings
   Paragraph 1. Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph a: For Applicant
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
Subparagraph e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Stricken
Subparagraph b: For Applicant
Subparagraph c: For Applicant
Subparagraph d: For Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
