 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                             ) ISCR Case No. 06-19030 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Allen Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted Security Clearance Applications (SF 86) on April 8, and July 
1, 2004. On May 2, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security concerns under 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 4, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on August 22, 2007. The 
Notice of Hearing was issued on August 24, 2007, convening a hearing on September 
26, 2007. On September 5, 2007, Applicant requested a postponement to a date not 
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
earlier than October 24, 2007. I granted a delay and rescheduled the hearing for 
October 16, 2007 (Tr. 23). The hearing was convened as rescheduled.  
 
The Government presented two witnesses and 49 exhibits, marked GE 1-49. 
GEs 1-41 are substantive exhibits. GEs 12, 14, 15, 16, and 18 were admitted over 
Applicant’s objection. GE 42 (comprised of eight documents) was considered for 
administrative notice purposes. GEs 44-47 were admitted over Applicant’s objections for 
the limited purpose of rebuttal. I gave GEs 44-47 little or no weight since they are agent 
summaries of interviews conducted by government investigators and neither the 
interviewees nor the interviewer testified at the hearing. I gave GE 49 no weight since it 
is an opinion/conclusive memorandum.  
 
Applicant testified on his own behalf, and presented two witnesses and 12 
exhibits, marked AE A-L. (Most of these exhibits are comprised of numerous tabs with 
several documents under each tab. The following documents were admitted over 
Department Counsel’s objections: (1) AE A, two page document entitled “[Applicant’s] 
Legal Defense Fund;” (2) AE B, at Tab 8, a letter dated Aug. 23, 1993 and its attached 
affidavit; (3) AE C, at Tab 12, a two page unsigned, handwritten letter, addressed “To 
whom it may concern;” (4) AE C, at Tab 13, a letter dated Nov. 12, 1990, and a letter 
signed by [J.L.B]; and, (5) AE C, at Tab 16, Applicant’s letter dated May 25, 1991. The 
following documents were not admitted: (1) AE B, Tab 4, to the first two pages 
(unsigned, undated notes allegedly prepared by then Applicant’s trial attorney); (2) AE 
B, at Tab 7, the polygraph results; (3) AE C, at Tab 14, a one page document entitled 
“In the High Court of Justice Chancery Division;” (4) AE D, Tab 17, the last one-page 
document signed by [J.G.]. 
 
I kept the record open until October 31, 2007, to allow Applicant time to submit 
additional matters. He timely submitted AE K and L. AE L was admitted over the 
Government’s objection. (AE L is comprised of the second half of his five inch binder of 
documents which were provided to me at the hearing, but not identified for the record. It 
begins at the yellow tab identified as “Detailed Rebuttal – Import/Export Case”). The 
record closed on October 31, 2007. Applicant submitted Appellate Exhibit 4 on 
November 10, 2007, and it was not considered. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
October 31, 2007. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, dated June 4, 2007, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegation in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, with explanations. He denied all the remaining SOR 
allegations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of all evidence of record, including his demeanor and testimony, I make the 
following additional findings of fact.  
  Applicant is a 62-year-old aeronautical engineer. He received a Bachelor of 
Science degree in Aeronautical and Astronautical Engineering in 1968. He completed 
his Master’s of Science degree in Mechanical Engineering in 1973, and his Master’s in 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
Business Administration in 1975. He started his doctorate studies but stopped short of 
completing his thesis due to work considerations. He does not have a Ph.D. (Tr. 10-11).  
 
After college, Applicant worked for several defense contractors and received 
access to classified information at the secret level from around 1968 to 1984, and from 
1987 to 1990. Applicant married his wife in 1966, and they have three adult daughters, 
ages 36, 33, and 23. 
 
In 1984, Applicant was enticed to leave an important position with a major 
aerospace defense contractor to accept an attractive employment offer from a large 
international corporation (IC) (a privately held, foreign corporation with a headquarters 
in the United States), which was also a major U.S. defense contractor (Tr. 164-165). IC 
was primarily engaged in the design, manufacture, sales and brokering of sales of 
medium to high technology, electronic military equipment and systems for domestic and 
international customers.  
 
When Applicant was hired in 1984, IC’s president/owner told him that IC was 
working covertly but legally in a highly classified program with a government agency to 
supply a foreign country (FC) with defense components (Tr. 165).2 Applicant was 
directed to keep secret his knowledge of the export program and that he would have 
neither access to nor involvement on that part of IC’s business. Applicant claimed that 
on several occasions he met with and was debriefed by government agents concerning 
the FC. Because of these meetings, Applicant believed IC had secret U.S. government 
authorization to import/export to FC defense components (Tr. 170-173).  
 
From 1984 to 1986, Applicant was the Vice President of an IC subsidiary (ICT), 
and the President of ICT from 1986 to March 1987. He was demoted in March 1987, but 
continued to work for IC. In his capacities at ICT, Applicant supervised the international 
marketing of weapons as well as weapons programs for IC and headed a missile 
program. This program contemplated the sale to another foreign country (FC2) of an FC 
anti-armor missile upgraded with U.S. components and technology. The missile 
program was to be portrayed publicly as the sale by IC of a European developed missile 
system. There is no evidence as to whether Applicant or his company ever applied for 
the required licenses. IC was to receive a 35% commission on a contract expected to 
be valued at $300 to $500 million.  
 
Applicant’s Criminal Trial in U.S. District Court and Appeal 
 
Applicant knew that the import or export of defense articles and services to and 
from FC required a U.S. government license or written authorization (GE 29).3 In 1985, 
2  AE B, Tab 1 (letters dated December 1992 and January 1993, from IC’s owner and director 
corroborate Applicant’s testimony). 
  
3  In the 1960s, the United States prohibited the sale of items for use in combat or training by the 
military or police to FC. In the late 1970s, U.S. law prohibited the import or export of military articles 
without a license or written authorization. In the mid 1980s, an Executive Order barred the importation 
 
4 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant asked two government agencies to sponsor the importation of FC’ missiles 
into the United States, but both agencies refused (Tr. 268-272).4 Applicant and IC did 
not request the permits and licenses required to import the missile dummies. Instead, 
Applicant attempted to avoid the U.S. law provisions by importing the missile dummies 
through another country. 
 
Prior to shipping the missiles to the United States, Applicant consulted with 
government experts and several lawyers (Tr. 283), who advised him that if there was a 
“value-added” to the missiles in a country different than FC, the missiles then would be 
legally considered as originating from the country where the additional value was added 
(Tr. 268-269, 283).5  
 
FC’s missile dummies were shipped to another country (FC2), where they were 
substantially modified (value was added).6 In 1986, Applicant imported FC’s missile 
dummies and parts for the purpose of conducting platform fit and safety tests (Tr. 165) 
as if FC2 was the country of origin. Applicant established the validity of the “value-
added” concept through statements made by a former Commissioner for the U.S. 
Customs Service and a former Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF) 
Director (AE B, Tab 4). 
 
Applicant testified he never intended to violate U.S. law and that he was innocent 
of the conspiracy charges. He had a good-faith belief that the missiles were properly 
classified as originating from FC2, and as such, the importation of the missiles was not 
in violation of U.S. law. 
 
Concerning the exportation of missile components (munitions parts) to FC, 
Applicant claimed he was never involved with that aspect of IC’s operation (Tr. 277), 
and that had a good-faith belief that IC had U.S. government authorization to do so. He 
based his good-faith belief on representations made to Applicant by his boss (the 
President of IC (G), and the leader of the alleged conspiracy, about IC’s work with a 
government agency, and IC having U.S. government’s approval for the exportation of 
parts to FC (Tr. 170-173). G also provided Applicant a letter stating that Applicant had 
no knowledge of, and was not involved in any of the offenses for which he (G) was 
convicted, that G never discussed any of the conspiracy issues with Applicant, and that 
 
into the United States of defense articles and services originating from FC. In October 1986, additional 
U.S. law prohibited the import of defense articles and manufacturing data from FC, and the export of 
defense articles and technology to FC. 
 
4  See AE B, Tab 2; and Detailed Rebuttal documents, TAB 19, last page. 
 
5  See AE B, Tab 4. The value added concept provides that: “when multiple countries have 
provided components for an article that is to be imported into the United States, if the last country of 
export has substantially transformed (an increase of 35% in labor and material costs to the pre-
transformation value of an object) the article in question, then that country and the manufacturer in that 
country are properly designated as the country of import and manufacturer for Customs purposes.”  
 
6  Tr. 289, AE B, Tab 4. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant’s position did not require him to be involved with the conspiracy (AE B, Tab 1). 
Applicant also presented a letter from IC’s Vice-President (convicted conspirator) stating 
Applicant had no knowledge of and was not involved in the conspiracy to violate U.S. 
law (Tr. 305; AE B, Tab 6, summary of interview dated Nov. 16, 1999). 
 
Applicant was acquitted of the conspiracy to provide missile flight technical 
information to FC corporations. Applicant had ordered the wind tunnel testing of FC’s 
missile dummies. However, he had specifically instructed subordinates not to disclose 
technical data to FC personnel and not to allow FC personnel to participate in the 
testing (Tr. 300-305, AE B, Tab 6; GE 30). Another IC employee confessed to providing 
FC with the results of wind tunnel testing conducted in the United States (Tr. 297, AE B, 
Tab 5, [B’s] statement, dated Nov. 18, 1992). 
 
In October 1989 and April 1990, Applicant started cooperating with government 
prosecutors investigating IC’s conspiracies (Tr. 496).7 At the time of these interviews, 
Applicant believed he was a cooperating witness in the conspiracy to violate U.S. law 
and fraud investigations and did not expect to be indicted (GE 42)8.  
 
During the same period, however, Applicant was audited and became the subject 
of a tax fraud/evasion investigation concerning his income tax returns for tax years 
1984-1987. Applicant did not ask for immunity to provide information or testimony 
concerning IC’s conspiracy to avoid U.S. laws or fraud investigation. However, he asked 
for immunity concerning any possible tax fraud/evasion charges in exchange for his 
testimony in the IC conspiracy and fraud prosecution. 
 
In 1991, Applicant was indicted and charged with three conspiracy counts. In 
December 1992, Applicant was convicted of the first count which alleged a conspiracy 
to violate U.S. law by aiding FC to evade U.S. law by exporting U.S. missile 
components to FC, and by aiding in the illegal importing of dummy missiles from FC to 
the United States for testing and evaluation. Count two was dismissed by the 
government before trial. Applicant was acquitted of count three - the illegal exportation 
to FC of technical data and information derived from U.S.-based flight testing of missiles 
originally produced in FC. In July 1998, Applicant was sentenced and later served 
approximately 24 months’ incarceration. 
 
In August 2002, Applicant’s conviction was vacated and set aside because of 
ineffective assistance of counsel. His trial attorney failed to investigate, interview, and 
call witnesses favorable to Applicant’s defense at trial. The government elected not to 
prosecute him again.  
 
7  IC had created numerous fictitious (shell) companies for the purpose of inflating the number of 
contracts and sales, and making IC look larger and more profitable than it was (Tr. 433-434). Applicant 
was not involved in these fraud allegations. His evidence suggests he refused to participate in the fraud. 
 
8  See United States v. Jasin, NO. CR. A. 91-602-08 (E.D.Pa.) at 35-40 (August 8, 2002). 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant started working for a defense contractor in April 2003. He was granted 
interim access to classified information at the secret level in April 2004. His access was 
withdrawn in May 2007 pending the adjudication of the security concerns outlined on 
the current SOR (Tr. 571). 
 
Allegations of Tax Fraud 
 
Applicant was charged in August 1995 with a count of tax evasion in violation of 
26 U.S.C. § 7201 and one count of filing a false tax return in violation of 26 U.S.C. § 
7206(1) (SOR ¶ 1(b)). Both counts were dismissed by the government in November 
1995, because the statute of limitations had lapsed. Applicant alleged these charges 
were brought against him by federal prosecutors as leverage to force him to testify 
against IC personnel involved in the conspiracy to violate U.S. law and corporate fraud, 
and to force him to plead guilty of the conspiracy charges (Tr. 180, 277) . 
 
SOR ¶ 2(a) also alleged Applicant intentionally filed fraudulent income tax returns 
for tax years 1984 to 1987. The Government’s evidence established that from 1984 to 
1987, Applicant received yearly income between approximately $150,000 and 
$300,000, filed his income tax returns, and paid no income tax for tax years 1984 to 
1987.  
 
The Government contended that during the alleged tax years, Applicant evaded 
paying taxes by filing false Schedules Cs (depreciation) and Es (business deductions) 
with his income tax returns; that Applicant falsely claimed to be involved in real estate 
ventures and construction business using several fictitious companies to deduct 
personal expenditures for the remodeling and/or renovation of his residence and to 
avoid the payment of taxes. Specifically, the Government tried to establish that 
Applicant falsely included in his Schedule C depreciation expenses for a vehicle (Jeep) 
owned and depreciated by his employer and given to Applicant for his use and that he 
depreciated three additional vehicles he owned by claiming they were used by him and 
his family to conduct business for his fictitious companies. 
 
After reviewing several Internal Revenue Service (IRS) audit reports challenging 
Applicant’s tax filings for 1984-1987, and excerpts of Applicant’s tax returns for the 
same years, the Government’s expert witness could not determine from these 
documents whether Applicant illegally avoided paying taxes or whether he filed 
fraudulent income tax returns (Tr. 100-113). However, the Government’s witness opined 
that if Applicant’s companies were fictitious and/or if Applicant depreciated vehicles that 
did not belong to him, then any income tax returns claiming business expenses incurred 
by the fictitious companies and/or the depreciation of vehicles or things used in the 
business of the company were fraudulent.  
 
Applicant claimed that his state law allowed him to do business using fictitious 
company names.9 He stated he speculated in real estate on his spare time with the help 
9  AE C, Tab 11. 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
of several of his family members, including his parents, wife, daughters, and his 
daughter’s friends (Tr. 309, 458-459). He claimed the vehicles he depreciated were 
used by him and his family to search for possible investment properties (Tr. 471-476). 
Applicant introduced several statements of people who knew him and that lived close to 
his residence, to show he was involved in the construction business and real state 
investment. He presented some evidence to corroborate his assertions (Tr. 318; AE C, 
Tab 11, 13). 
 
Applicant claimed that from 1985 to 1987, he considered his residence an 
investment property, and that he had his residence for sale on several occasions. He 
introduce pictures of his residence with posted “For Sale” signs, to show he attempted 
to sell it. He explained that as the director of an international company (ICT), he always 
expected to relocate either to London or Washington, D.C. (Tr. 315-316).10  
 
Applicant purchased his residence in April 1985 (GE 8), and has lived in it since 
then. Applicant’s residence is located on a corner lot. He used two different addresses 
to identify the same property. He used one address to identify his home of residence. 
He used the second address (the cross street address) to identify the address of 
several of his fictitious companies, his rental property, and the place where he stored 
construction materials for his businesses (Tr. 449, 467).  
 
In his 1984-1987 income tax returns, Applicant depreciated his residence, as if it 
was a rental or investment property, using the cross street address to distinguish his 
rental property from his residence. Applicant explained he had divided his residence into 
two separate living structures, and that he rented one side of his residence to his 
brother (Tr. 468). In the same return, he claimed mortgage interests paid, presumably 
for the rented property. He could not explain how he arrived at the mortgage interest 
claimed in his income tax returns (Tr. 448).  
 
Except for two real estate contracts Applicant signed made in July 1984 and 
March 1985 (GE 6 and 7, respectively) for the purchase of lots of land to build a house, 
and the purchase of his residence, Applicant presented little evidence to show that 
during the period in question he owned, rented, or entered into any contracts for the 
purchase of real estate property. During the same period, Applicant performed 
extensive renovations and repairs on his residence while living on it (Tr. 450-456). 
Except for his testimony, Applicant presented no evidence to show he divided his 
residence into two dwellings. He presented no business records, employee records, or 
documentation of expenses for his fictitious companies. His evidence is insufficient to 
show that any of his fictitious companies conducted any bona fine business activity to 
support his depreciations and deductions.  
 
10  Included in AE C, Tab 12, are statements corroborating Applicant’s testimony that IC was 
looking into establishing an office in Washington, D.C. However, IC, the parent corporation of Applicant’s 
company, was headquartered and located in the same county and state where Applicant purchased his 
home. Applicant lived five miles away from his place of work. 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
Regarding the Jeep he depreciated, Applicant claimed he originally purchased 
the Jeep, that his employer reimbursed him the value of the vehicle (they promised him 
a company car), and that later he bought the vehicle back from his employer. He 
claimed he paid his employer using a personal check. Applicant presented no 
documentary evidence to corroborate his claims (Tr. 460-461). 
 
The attorney who represented Applicant in the August 1995 tax evasion/fraud 
charges testified at Applicant’s hearing. He claimed informing federal prosecutors that 
the stature of limitations had lapsed before the government filed the tax charges, to no 
avail. After the income tax charges were dismissed, the government opened a civil 
investigation and audited Applicant’s income tax returns for tax years 1984 through 
1997. After the completion of the investigation, no further tax liability, interests, or 
penalties were assessed against Applicant, and no additional civil or criminal charges 
were filed against him for tax law violations (Tr. 409-423, AE K, letter dated Oct. 29, 
2007). 
 
Under the IRS Code, there is no statute of limitations for filing a false or 
fraudulent return with the intent to evade tax liability. Although the criminal charges 
against Applicant were dropped because of the expiration of the statute of limitations, 
the government could have assessed civil tax liability against Applicant if they could 
have established he filed false or fraudulent returns to avoid tax liability.11 Applicant has 
always filed income tax returns. 
 
Concerning SOR ¶ 2(b), Applicant denied he engaged in expense account fraud 
while working for IC, or for IC’s successor corporation (FI).12 Applicant claimed he was 
removed as President of ICT because he refused “to cook” ICT’s books, and to give a 
foreign country equipment that it was not authorized under U.S. law (Tr. 368-369). 
Applicant explained that when FI took over IC’s organization, FI refused to honor 
Applicant’s employment contract and cancelled Applicant’s employment benefits 
package. Applicant sued FI for breach of contract, and around February 1990 FI 
counterclaimed by accusing Applicant of expense account fraud to force him to 
withdraw his suit (Tr. 485).  
 
In general, the expense account fraud allegations were that Applicant submitted 
fraudulent receipts to justify travel and/or business expenses he did not incur or were 
not authorized. Applicant established his job entailed working classified 
compartmentalized activities which sometimes involved foreign nationals. For security 
reasons, IC did not allow its employees to identify customers by name, country of origin, 
or the project in which they were involved in their business expense reports. Instead, 
employees were asked to keep separate diaries for review by supervisors, and to use 
fictitious names to conceal identities (Tr. 359-368; AE D, Tab 18). To recover for 
expenses incurred during his classified business trips, Applicant substituted personal 
11  Internal Revenue Code §§ 6501(c)(1), (2), and (3) (1986); Treasury Reg. § 301.651(c)-1. 
 
12  IC was acquired by FI, another foreign corporation doing business in the United States. 
 
9 
 
 
receipts for the actual receipts of expenses incurred during classified business meetings 
(Tr. 482, 511).  
 
Applicant’s evidence showed the alleged fraudulent trips and business expenses 
were valid business trips and the expenses were authorized by his supervisors (AE D, 
Tab 18, 19). The evidence of record is not sufficient to establish by substantial evidence 
that Applicant did engage in expense account fraud.  
 
Falsification Allegations 
 
SOR ¶¶ 2c (1), (2), and (3), and ¶ 2d alleged Applicant falsified his answers to 
questions 40 and 21 of his April/July 2004 SF 86. Question 40 asked whether in the last 
seven years he had been a party to any public civil court actions not listed elsewhere in 
his application. Applicant disclosed one civil action he brought against his trial attorney, 
but failed to disclose that his former employer (FI), filed a civil action against him in 
October 1988 which went on until at least September 2002. He also failed to disclose a 
1996 civil action filed against him by an investment company which was closed in May 
1997, and a civil action he filed against an investment company in October 1996, which 
was dismissed in December 1997.  
 
Question 21 of Applicant’s April/July 2004 security clearance application asked 
whether he had ever been charged with or convicted of any felony offenses. The 
question required Applicant to disclose information regardless of whether the record in 
his case had been sealed or otherwise stricken from the record. Applicant disclosed his 
1991 charges and conviction for the conspiracy to violate U.S. laws, but failed to 
disclose he was charged with income tax evasion and fraud in August 1995. 
 
While completing his 2004 SF 86, Applicant was uncertain about how to answer 
the questions because his conspiracy conviction was vacated and set aside, and the tax 
charges were dismissed. Applicant sought legal advice from the attorney (a former 
Assistant U.S. Attorney) currently representing him on a malpractice suit against his 
former trial lawyer. Applicant’s attorney advised him that: (1) his conspiracy conviction 
did not exist, and that he did not have to disclose it; (2) he did not have to disclose the 
three civil actions in question because the initial actions for these suits were filed 
outside of the period asked in the questions; (3) he did not have to disclose his 1995 
charges for tax evasion and fraud because they were dismissed, and as such they were 
a “nullity” and did not exist (AE E, Tab 21, Tr. 392-406). Applicant followed his 
attorney’s advice and did not disclose the information (Tr. 515-516).  
 
SOR ¶ 2e alleged that in September 2006, Applicant made a false statement to 
the DOHA adjudicator handling his case by sending the adjudicator an e-mail stating 
that “[he] have never been accused of wrongdoing during [his] life in the 45 years before 
or the 16 years after this dispute.” The government contended Applicant’s statement 
was false because it made reference only to his 1991 conspiracy charges, and failed to 
disclose his former employer’s 1990 expense account fraud allegation.  
 
 
10 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant’s e-mail in its pertinent paragraph reads as follows: “I believe it useful 
for you to know that all these issues are related to an alleged import violation in the 
1985 timeframe (20 years ago!). It was a dispute that went on for many years resulting 
in my family and I being subjected to horrendous pressure by prosecutors because I 
would not give them a plea bargain. I could not agree to plead guilty to something I did 
not do. In the end, after a very difficult and long struggle, my innocence was recognized 
by the court. I was exonerated. The conviction was overturned and the indictment was 
dismissed. Please be aware that I have never been accused of wrongdoing during my 
life in the 45 years before or the 16 years after this dispute.” (GE 41). 
Applicant considered the 1990 expense account fraud allegations, the 1991 
conspiracy charges, and the August 1995 tax fraud/evasion charges, part and parcel of 
what he referred in his e-mail as “these issues” and “this dispute.” He was referring to 
everything that happened during the period he worked for IC (Tr. 384-385). I find that 
the conspiracy charges, the tax evasion/fraud charges, and the expense account fraud 
allegations are temporally interrelated, are connected to Applicant’s employment to IC, 
and involved substantially the same prosecutors.13  
 
DOHA’s adjudicator had several telephone conversations with Applicant prior to 
receiving the e-mail in question (Tr. 151-152). During those telephone conversations, 
Applicant discussed his tax indictment and some other litigation that the adjudicator 
could not recall during his testimony. The adjudicator testified it was possible that during 
one of those conversations Applicant mentioned to him the expense account fraud 
allegations. Having observed Applicant’s demeanor and testimony for two days, I 
noticed he provides elaborate and lengthy responses to questions. It would be easy for 
the adjudicator to miss the nuances and details of his explanations. I do not believe the 
e-mail was submitted with the deliberate intent to mislead the adjudicator. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant testified he always intended to do everything legally (Tr. 
287). He had access to classified information from 1968 to 1984, from 1987 to 1990. 
From April 2003 to May 2007, he held interim access to classified information. There is 
no evidence he has been involved in any security violations. He averred that except for 
the incidents alleged in the SOR, he has had an impeccable record.  
 
Applicant’s references are impressive.14 His witnesses included, two former 
Assistant U.S. Attorneys, and he presented statements by people who have held senior 
positions in the U.S. government such as a Secretary of State and White House Chief of 
Staff, a senior director of an important government agency, a rear admiral and associate 
administrator of an important government agency, and a general officer. Some of his 
13  See United States v. Jasin, No. CR.A. 91-602 at 35-40 (E.D. Pa.) Aug. 8, 2002. Considering 
this decision together with Applicant’s evidence it seems as if the tax charges were filed as leverage to 
secure Applicant’s testimony. 
 
14  AE B, Tab 5, letter dated August 23, 1993; AE C, Tab 14, affidavit dated Sep. 30, 2007; AE D, 
Tab 17, letter dated October 3, 2007; Tab 18, letter dated November 1, 1993; AE F, Tab 22 and 23; and  
AE H (character letters). 
 
 
11 
 
 
                                                          
references have known Applicant for over 20 years. They described his on and off duty 
performance both before and after the incidents alleged in the SOR.  
 
Applicant was described as a patriot, invariably honest, completely trustworthy, 
and of high integrity. His references and friends assess him as loyal, conscientious, and 
responsible. He has an excellent reputation as an extremely hard-working and 
accomplished business man, dedicated father and husband, and U.S. citizen. 
Applicant’s references consider him a highly qualified senior manager with unique skills 
who has made invaluable contributions to his employers and his country. His witnesses 
and documentary evidence recommend him for a security clearance without 
reservations.  
 
For many years, Applicant has also been involved in community and 
philanthropic work including, flying search-and-rescue missions as a volunteer pilot for 
the Civil Air Patrol, and providing disaster relief with the American Red Cross, the 
Christian Relief Effort, and Lend A-Hand organizations (Tr. 387, AE G). 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.15 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). The 
adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, 
which are to be considered in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”16 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
15  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
16  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
12 
 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the security concern is that criminal activity creates doubt 
about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 Applicant’s 1991 three count indictment on a conspiracy to violate U.S. laws, his 
1992 conspiracy conviction for illegally importing prohibited items from a foreign country 
(FC), and his 1995 charges for filing false income tax returns and tax evasion raise 
security concerns under Criminal Conduct disqualifying condition AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation 
or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally 
charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
 In 1992, Applicant was convicted of one conspiracy count, acquitted of another 
count, and the third count was dismissed prior to trial. In 2002, his 1992 conspiracy 
conviction was vacated and set aside because of ineffective assistance of counsel. 
Additionally, in October 1995, the August 1995 income tax fraud and evasion charges 
were dismissed.  
 
13 
 
 
                                                          
 
 Applicant averred he never intended to violate U.S. law.17 He claimed he is 
innocent of the conspiracy charges for several reasons: (1) He had a good-faith belief 
that IC has working on the importation of the items with the approval of a U.S. agency 
(based on his boss’ assertions); (2) his meetings with government agents concerning 
FC corroborated his boss’ assertions; and, (3) the legal counsel and advice he received 
from government export experts and corporate counsel indicating IC was using legal 
methods to import the items without the required license (value-added concept). 
Applicant established he relied on incorrect legal advice he received from his 
government export experts and several corporate legal counsels, his value-added 
scheme involved a lawful method of circumventing U.S. law.18 
 
 Concerning the 1995 tax evasion and false income tax return charges, the 
evidence established that from 1984 to 1987, Applicant received yearly income between 
approximately $150,000 and $300,000, filed his income tax returns, and paid no income 
tax. The Government’s evidence raised serious questions about Applicant’s business 
and accounting practices, including the questionable depreciation of his residence, a 
vehicle apparently owned by Applicant’s employer, and business deductions and 
depreciations for fictitious companies he was operating from his home. The rental of half 
of his residence, the storing of construction materials for his businesses at his home of 
residence, and the depreciation of three other vehicles he owned also raised income tax 
concerns. 
 
 Applicant presented little evidence to corroborate his claims that he had bona 
fide business activity to support his business depreciations, and deductions i.e., he 
presented no business records, employee records, documentation of expenses for his 
fictitious companies, or business transacted during the alleged period. Furthermore, he 
presented no evidence to corroborate his claim that he divided his residence into two 
different dwellings, or that he rented half of his residence. Some of the supporting 
information he never created, other evidence he could not be located because the tax 
allegations were 20 years old and he could not find it. 
 
 Applicant strongly denied filing false income tax returns to evade tax liability. His 
1995 income tax related charges were dismissed because the statute of limitations had 
lapsed. Federal prosecutors then opened a civil investigation and audited Applicant’s 
income tax returns from 1984 to around 1997. After the investigation was completed, no 
further tax liability, interests, or penalties were assessed against Applicant, and no 
additional civil or criminal charges were filed for tax violations. Department Counsel’s 
tax expert witness testified at the hearing that he could not conclude from the 
documentary evidence presented that Applicant had filed fraudulent income tax returns 
with the intent to avoid tax liability. There is no statute of limitations for filing false or 
 17  Applicant knew U.S. law prohibited the importation of defense items from FC without United 
States authorization, and there is no evidence that he ever asked for the required U.S. license to import 
the items.  
 
18  See page 4. 
 
14 
 
 
                                                          
fraudulent income tax returns with the intent to evade tax liability. The government’s 
1984-1997 civil investigation/audit apparently found insufficient evidence of false or 
fraudulent tax returns or tax evasion.19 Applicant has consistently filed his income tax 
returns, and there is no evidence of any further questionable tax behavior. Considering 
the record as a whole, I find Applicant did not commit the offenses. 
 
 Moreover, I find any remaining criminal conduct security concerns mitigated 
under AG 32(a): “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;” AG 32(c): 
“evidence that the person did not commit the offense;” and AG 32(d): “there is evidence 
of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without 
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, 
good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” 
 
 Applicant’s questionable behavior occurred 20 years ago and there is no 
evidence of additional criminal activity. Applicant’s behavior related to the conspiracy to 
violate U.S. laws happened under such unusual circumstances that I find it is unlikely to 
recur. His questionable income tax returns, business and accounting practices are also 
temporally remote. Available evidence suggests that since 1984-1987, Applicant has 
filed his income tax returns properly, and has not engaged in similar questionable 
behavior. Based on Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I believe he has learned his 
lesson from his past mistakes, and similar questionable behavior is unlikely.  
 
 Applicant’s impressive references commented favorably on his employment 
record and unconditionally recommend he receive access to classified information. He 
has also shown constructive community involvement. On balance, Applicant has 
mitigated the criminal conduct security concern. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the security concern is that conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. AG & 15.  
 
 SOR ¶ 2a alleged Applicant intentionally filed fraudulent income tax returns to 
avoid tax liability for tax years 1984-1987. This allegation was considered and 
adjudicated together with the 1995 tax fraud and evasion charges discussed above 
under the criminal conduct guideline, and incorporated herein.  
 
 As previously discussed, the Government’s evidence raised serious questions 
about Applicant’s business and accounting practices, including the questionable 
19  I considered in my analysis that there could have been many reasons why the IRS elected not 
to proceed on a civil action against Applicant, and that in a security clearance adjudication the standard of 
proof is “substantial evidence.” 
 
15 
 
 
depreciation of his residence, a vehicle apparently owned by Applicant’s employer, and 
business deductions and depreciations for fictitious companies he was operating from 
his residence, the rental of half of his residence, the storing of construction materials for 
his businesses at his home of residence, and the depreciation of three other vehicles he 
owned. 
 
 Applicant presented little documentary evidence to corroborate his claims that he 
had bona fide business activity to support his business depreciations, and deductions. 
He explained some of the supporting information he never created (business records), 
other records were not produced because the tax allegations were 20 years old and he 
could not find the documents.  
 
 After federal prosecutors dismissed the 1995 income tax related charges (the 
statute of limitations had lapsed), they opened a civil investigation and audited 
Applicant’s income tax returns from 1984 to around 1997. The civil investigation 
resulted in no further tax liability, interests, or penalties assessed against Applicant, and 
no additional civil or criminal charges were filed for tax violations. Department Counsel’s 
tax expert witness (IRS agent) testified he could not conclude from the documentary 
evidence presented at the hearing that Applicant had filed fraudulent income tax returns 
with the intent to avoid tax liability.  
 
 There is no statute of limitations for filing false or fraudulent income tax returns 
with the intent to evade tax liability. Apparently, the government’s 1984-1997 civil 
investigation/audit found insufficient evidence of false or fraudulent tax returns or tax 
evasion to bring a civil action against Applicant. Applicant has consistently filed his 
income tax returns since 1984-1987, and there is no evidence of any further 
questionable tax behavior. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior raised concerns under AG ¶ 16(c): “credible adverse 
information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse 
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information” and AG ¶ 16(d)(3): “a pattern of rules violations.” 
 
 Considering the record as a whole, I find that AG ¶ 17(c): “the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;” and AG ¶ 17(f): “the 
information was unsubstantiated,” apply. 
 
 Applicant’s questionable income tax returns, business and accounting practices 
occurred 20 years ago and there is no evidence of additional questionable behavior. His 
behavior is so temporally remote that I find it no longer cast doubt on Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment. Available evidence suggests that since 1984-
 
16 
 
 
1987, Applicant has filed his income tax returns properly. Based on Applicant’s 
demeanor and testimony, I believe he has learned his lesson from his past mistakes, 
and similar questionable behavior is unlikely.  
 
 Concerning SOR ¶ 2b, the record evidence shows that in 1990, Applicant’s prior 
employer accused him of expense account fraud after Applicant filed suit for breach of 
employment contract. Applicant explained he was removed as ICT president for 
refusing to cook ICTs’ books and give a foreign country items it was not permitted to 
receive under U.S. law. Applicant’s evidence show that many of the specific incidents 
alleged as unauthorized expenses were approved or sanctioned by IC personnel as 
proper business expenses. Balancing the evidence available, his explanations are 
corroborated by the evidence of record. The evidence did not establish by substantial 
evidence that Applicant engaged in expense account fraud. 
 
 Concerning SOR ¶¶ 2c and 2d, Applicant falsified his SF 86 when he failed to 
disclose in his answer to SF 86 question 40 that he had been party to three civil suits, 
and in his answer to question 21 that he was charged with income tax evasion and 
fraud in 1995. AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire;” applies. 
 
 Applicant conclusively established his omission was caused by the improper 
advice of his legal counsel who was specifically advising him on how to complete the SF 
86. Applicant should not have followed his attorney’s improper advice. Notwithstanding, 
he clearly relied upon his legal counsel’s improper advice, -- a former Assistant U.S. 
Attorney with significant credentials that enhanced the credibility of his erroneous legal 
advice. Mitigating condition AG ¶ 17(b) applies. 
 
 SOR ¶ 2e alleged that in 2006, Applicant made a false statement to the DOHA 
adjudicator handling his case by sending the adjudicator an e-mail stating that “[he] 
have never been accused of wrongdoing during [his] life in the 45 years before or the 16 
years after this dispute.” The Government alleged the statement was false because 
Applicant had been accused in 1990 by his then employer of expense fraud account.  
 
 Applicant explained that when he used the term “this dispute” he meant to 
include all the related incidents that surfaced out of his period of employment for IC. I 
find that the conspiracy charges, the tax evasion/fraud charges, and the expense fraud 
account allegations are temporally interrelated, and connected to Applicant’s 
employment to IC. I also find the conspiracy charges and the tax charges involved 
substantially the same prosecutors, and that the tax charges may have been filed as 
leverage to secure Applicant’s testimony.  
 
DOHA’s adjudicator had several telephone conversations with Applicant prior to 
receiving the e-mail in question. During those telephone conversations, Applicant 
discussed his tax indictment and some other litigation that the adjudicator could not 
recall during his testimony. The adjudicator testified it was possible that during their 
conversations Applicant mentioned to him the expense account fraud allegations. 
 
17 
 
 
                                                          
Having observed Applicant’s demeanor and testimony for two days, I noticed he 
provides elaborate and lengthy explanations. He likely provided many details about his 
legal problems that are not included in the e-mail. I do not believe the e-mail was 
submitted with the deliberate intent to mislead the adjudicator.20  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, well educated 
man, highly regarded for his business acumen and technical proficiency. He has worked 
for several defense contractors and received access to classified information at the 
secret level for approximately 22 years. Except for the current allegations, most of which 
occurred from 1984 to 1990, there is no evidence Applicant has compromised or 
caused others to compromise classified information.  
 
Applicant’s questionable behavior happened during a four year period 
approximately 20 years ago. Considering his demeanor and testimony, I believe 
Applicant has learned from his mistakes, and the circumstances that led to his 
questionable behavior are unlikely to recur. He is now a more mature and savvy person 
as a result of the legal, economic, and personal difficulties he and his family has 
endured, including the security clearance process. There is no evidence Applicant has 
been involved in additional misconduct or questionable behavior. To the contrary, 
Applicant’s references recommend him for a security clearance without reservations. 
They also lauded his reputation as an extremely hard-working and accomplished 
business man, dedicated father, husband, and patriot. In sum, I find Applicant has 
presented sufficient evidence of rehabilitation.  
 
 20  Arguably, Applicant’s omission could be considered mitigated under AG I7(b) if it was caused by 
the improper advice of Applicant’s legal counsel. See the previous discussion concerning SOR ¶¶ 2c and 
2d. 
 
 
18 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence convinces me of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising from the allegation of his criminal conduct and personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a & 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
