1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------- ------ )       ISCR Case No. 06-25322
SSN:---------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Todd Conorman, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
On October 18, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines J and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
DOHA received Applicant’s SOR answer on December 10, 2007, and requested
a hearing. The case was assigned to me on January 7, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of
hearing on January 24, 2008 scheduling it for February 5, 2008. The case was then
rescheduled for February 6, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
According to Applicant’s counsel and department counsel, both of whom are licensed in the state where the1
crime occurred, a prayer for judgment is an option available for first-time offenders whereupon they can avoid
sentencing, if granted at the judge’s discretion.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. He is a 50-year-old married man
with two adult children. He is currently attending college (Tr. 63). He served in the U.S.
Army from 1975 through his retirement in 2004 when he was honorably discharged at
the rank of command sergeant major. Since retiring, he has worked for a defense
contractor as a transportation liaison for mobilization and demobilization operations on a
military base. He supervises 12 employees.
Applicant is highly respected on the job. His supervisor characterizes his
performance as “superb in every regard” (Recommendation Letter, dated December 5,
2007, as included in Answer at 4). According to a coworker, he exhibits “high standards
of integrity, honesty, responsibility, and commitment” (Exhibit D). He volunteers at
church and participates in various youth mentor programs (Answer at 2).
In 1998, Applicant was arrested and charged with secret peeping. He was tried in
a state court and found guilty (Tr. 65). At his request, the court then granted a prayer for
judgment,  and the case was continued without an entry of guilt or a conviction. Also,1
Applicant was ordered to serve one year of unsupervised probation (Tr. 70). Applicant’s
unit took no punitive actions against him after the incident, and it was not reflected in
that year’s annual performance evaluation (Tr. 41).
In 2003, Applicant removed a computer and stereo equipment from a soldier’s
room on a military base. The soldier reported the theft, and the military police contacted
Applicant. He was charged with burglary and larceny of private property. Before the
court-martial, he returned the property to the soldier (Id.). Applicant pleaded guilty to the
burglary charge, and was found guilty of a lesser charge, wrongful appropriation of
property. He was fined $6,000 (Answer at 1) and re-assigned to another unit. 
Applicant did not take the property with the intention of keeping it. Instead, he
took it to teach the soldier a lesson about leaving her room unlocked (Exhibit 3 at 2). He
acknowledged, in hindsight, that “it was a dumb thing to do,” but reasoned it would have
more impact on the soldier for her to notice her property was missing “versus telling
[her] that she had them unsecured.” The soldier was not in his chain of command.
Applicant completed a security clearance application in June 2005. He answered
“no” to Question 25 (Your Police Record - Military Court In the last 7 years, have you
been subject to court martial or other disciplinary proceedings under the Uniform Code
of Military Justice?). His clerk prepared the rough draft of the application (Tr. 16). It was
an extremely busy time when she completed the draft application because a major troop
redeployment was occurring at the same time another company was assuming their
contract (Tr. 16 - Clerk’s testimony). She had to complete draft applications for 11 other
3
employees simultaneously (Tr. 18 - Clerk’s testimony). Before inputting Applicant’s
family and employment history into the computer, she double-checked it with him. She
did not ask him about any derogatory criminal information because she “just didn’t think
that anything like that had ever been in [Applicant’s] past, or anything,” (Tr. 18) and she
“assume[d] that he would check it over and make any corrections if it wasn’t right” (Tr.
25).
Applicant testified that he “sort of glanced through” the application but did not
check it thoroughly before executing it (Tr. 32). In his Answer, Applicant stated “I admit
to willfully omitting information regarding court-martial proceedings while a member of
the U.S. Army” because “this was an extremely embarrassing time in my military career”
(Answer at 1). He omitted the information “in an attempt to obtain a security clearance”
(Answer at 2).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security. Under Directive ¶
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is responsible for presenting
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The Applicant has the ultimate burden
of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision. 
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
4
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information” (AG ¶15). Applicant’s omission of his court-martial from his 2005 security
clearance application raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission,
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire,
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” applies. In Applicant’s
Answer, he admitted unequivocally to falsifying the security clearance application, and
he provided an explanation for the falsification. Consequently, I do not believe his
testimony that the omission was unintentional.
In reaching this conclusion, I considered Applicant’s clerk’s testimony. Although
she testified credibly, it had little probative value in light of Applicant’s admission in his
Answer. AG ¶ 16(a) applies without mitigation. 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness” (AG ¶ 30). Also, “by its very nature, it calls into question
a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations” (Id.). Here,
Applicant’s 1998 criminal charge, his 2003 court-martial, and his security clearance
falsification raise the issue of whether AG ¶ 31(a), “a single, serious crime or multiple
lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted,” apply.
The 1998 offense was remote in time and the 2003 offense happened under
unusual circumstances that are unlikely to recur. Applicant is attending college, has a
good employment record, and is active in his community. However, his 2005
falsification, perpetuated at the hearing, constitutes an additional criminal offense under
18 U.S.C. 1001. By undermining Applicant’s credibility, it casts doubt upon his testimony
regarding the surrounding circumstances of the earlier criminal conduct. I conclude
Applicant has engaged in an unacceptable pattern of recurrent criminal conduct that
outweighs the evidence of rehabilitation. None of the mitigating conditions apply, and his
criminal conduct remains a security concern.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
5
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
I considered the whole person factors in my evaluation of the Criminal Conduct
section of the Decision. I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the criminal conduct and
personal conduct security concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
_________________
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
