 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-07270 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted an electronic questionnaire for investigations processing (e-
QIP) on October 6, 2006. On October 31, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, for Applicant. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 23, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
December 11, 2007. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on 
December 20, 2007. On December 28, 2007, DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
scheduling the hearing for February 12, 2008. The case was transferred to me on 
January 28, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 12, 2008. The 
government offered Exhibits (Gov Ex) 1 through 4, which were admitted without 
 
2 
 
 
objection. Applicant’s counsel called Applicant and submitted one exhibit which was 
marked as AE A and admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr) on February 21, 2008. The record closed on that date. Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 During preliminary matters, the Government formally withdrew the Guideline J, 
Criminal Conduct allegations. (Tr at 6.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated August 30, 2007, with respect to ¶ 1.a, 
Applicant admitted that an investigation took place but denies being aware of owing the 
US government $795.56. He admits to the factual allegations in ¶ 1.b with explanation. 
 
 Applicant is a 61-year-old senior project manager employed by a Department of 
Defense contractor seeking to maintain a security clearance. He has worked for his 
current employer since August 2006. From 1964 to 1968, he served on active duty in 
the United States Navy.  In 1969, he was hired as a civilian employee with a 
Department of Defense agency. He has held a security clearance since 1969. He is 
married and has two adult sons. (Tr at 15-18, 61-62; Gov 1.)   
 
In July/August 1998, Applicant was investigated for allegedly filing false local 
travel claims.  The investigation revealed that Applicant was filing local travel claims for 
travel to and from his work site to various contractor sites.  It was believed that 
Applicant was actually traveling to the contractor sites from his home. This was not 
reflected on his travel claims.  The distance from his home to the contractor sites is less 
than his normal commute. Because the distance was less than his normal commute he 
could not claim mileage.  (Gov 3.) 
 
 A security badge is required in order to get into Applicant’s office. A review of the 
badge swipe records for August, September and October 1997, revealed Applicant was 
not at the office on the dates he claimed to travel to and from the office to other 
contractor sites. Between November 18, 1996 to October 18, 1997, Applicant filed 13 
local travel claims. The total amount claimed was $6,041.51. Of that amount, only 
$767.90 was allowable. Applicant received $5,273,61 that he was not entitled to 
receive. (Gov 3.)  
 
Applicant claims that his actual travel was from a contractor site facility that was 
about a half mile from his office. When he filed the travel claim, he used his office as 
reference as opposed to the contractor site.  He had no documentation to verify this.  
He also was advised in 1992 or 1993 by an employee who processed travel claims in 
his former office that he could claim for local travel. (Tr at 35-36, 47-48; Gov 3 at 4.) His 
old office merged with his new office as a result of the base realignment and closure  
 
3 
 
 
process. (Tr at 27.) He was not aware that his filing for local travel claims was 
erroneous until he received guidance from the new office in conjunction with the 1998 
investigation.  
 
Initially, Applicant wanted to fight the allegations but his division chief told him to 
make restitution on the amount he was not authorized to receive and the matter would 
be handled administratively. He repaid the amount of the travel claim he was not 
authorized to receive. (Tr at 34-36.) 
 
In November 2003, an anonymous hotline complaint was filed alleging Applicant 
was arriving to work late and leaving early. Physical surveillance of Applicant’s arrival 
and departure from work was conducted between November 30, 2003, and December 
20, 2003. Applicant’s time cards were reviewed during that same period. It was 
discovered that Applicant was absent from work 19 hours or 22% of his reported work 
time. The investigation concluded that Applicant needed to repay the amount he was 
paid for hours not worked in the amount of $795.96.  On January 9, 2004, Applicant was 
interviewed. The report indicates that Applicant admitted that he was abusing his work 
time by arriving late and leaving early or not bothering to come in at all. The 
investigation report does not include a signed, sworn statement from the Applicant. 
(Gov 4.) 
 
In January 2004, Applicant retired.  Although he was aware of the investigation, 
he was never told that he owed the federal government $795.  There is no evidence that  
attempts were made to collect the debt. Applicant claims that although he was not in the 
office for the full amount of the time claimed on his time cards, part of the time he was 
telecommuting from home.  He would begin his day checking and responding to e-mail 
traffic prior to leaving his home because he had a long commute. On one day, he called 
his secretary to tell her that he would not be in the next day due to the weather but she 
never processed the leave request. He claims that he had permission to telecommute 
from his supervisor. (Tr at 52-58.) Applicant never admitted to abusing his work hours 
as mentioned in the investigative report. He claims the statement in the investigative 
report claiming he admitted to arriving late and leaving early was the investigator’s 
statement.  He claims he made no such admission. (Tr at 59.)    
 
Applicant has worked for his current employer since August 2006. In November 
2006, he received a promotion. (AE E at 8.) He received an outstanding rating in his  
2007 performance report. His manager states that Applicant is a valuable asset to the 
company and to the customer.  The customer has contacted him several times to tell 
him what a great job Applicant has been doing. (AE A at 1-4.)  Applicant has also 
received several awards in the past as well for his work performance. (AE A at 5-7.)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
 
4 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
5 
 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The personal conduct guideline lists several disqualifying conditions. Two 
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions (PC DC) potentially apply in Applicant’s 
case.  They are:  
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
 areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
 single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
 whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
 unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
 regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
 properly safeguard protected information.) 
 
 PC DC ¶ 16(d) (credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
 under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
 adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
 information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
 judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
 comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
 the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
 includes but is not limited to consideration of: (3) a pattern of dishonesty or 
 rule violations; (4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
 employer’s time or resources.)   
 
 Security concerns are raised due to Applicant filing local travel claims for travel 
not authorized to be reimbursed.  He also allegedly submitted false time cards over a 
three week period in December 2003, one month before he retired.  Both of these 
instances consist of a pattern of rule violations. Both also infer an abuse of government 
time and resources.  
 
 The personal conduct security concerns can be mitigated.  I find that Personal 
Conduct Mitigating Condition ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies. The allegations related to the 
false local travel claims occurred in 1998.  There was some confusion about what 
expenses were proper when filing of local travel claims in Applicant’s previous office. 
Once the proper procedures were pointed out to Applicant, he reimbursed the federal 
government for the total amount overpaid on the local travel claims. One cannot 
 
6 
 
 
conclude with certainty that he intended to file false travel claims. The time and 
attendance abuse allegations arose in November/December 2003.  Although the hotline 
report concluded that Applicant abused his time and attendance by coming in late and 
leaving early, no further action was taken to collect the money the investigator 
concluded that Applicant owed.  The investigative report contains no signed, sworn 
statements pertaining to the specific allegations.  Although the investigating officer 
concluded that Applicant owed the government $795, there is no evidence that indicates 
Applicant was notified of this debt and given the opportunity to respond.  The 
government took no formal action to collect the debt.   
 
 Although both of the allegations raised security concerns, more than four years 
have passed since the last incident. Applicant’s current employer states that Applicant 
has done an outstanding job. I conclude that at the present time, Applicant is not a 
security risk. Applicant mitigated the concerns raised under personal conduct.  
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
work history with his current employer, his 42 years of experience as a Department of 
Defense civilian employee, and that more than four years have passed with no 
subsequent issues. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising under personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
                                                     
