 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-06729 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nichole Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William L. Mickey, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) (GE 1) on January 17, 2006. On October 24, 2007, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
Government’s security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1  
  
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 14, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on January 16, 2008. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing that same day. I convened the hearing as scheduled 
on February 5, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted exhibits 
(AE) 1 through 6, which were received without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) on February 11, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all SOR allegations. Her 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, including Applicant’s demeanor, I make the following additional findings of 
fact.  
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old assembly line worker employed by a government 
contractor. She is a high school graduate. She married her spouse 1984, and they were 
divorced in 1996. She has two daughters from this marriage, ages 22 and 20 (GE 1). 
Applicant received support for her daughters until each reached the age of 18. Both of 
her daughters have had babies out of wedlock, ages two and one. Applicant’s 
daughters and their babies live with and are supported by Applicant. The oldest 
daughter receives some child support, works part time, and provides sporadic financial 
contributions to her mother’s household. 
 
From 1991 to 2006, Applicant worked at a retail store, and achieved an assistant 
manager position (Tr. 37-38). During this period, she had some financial problems, but 
she claimed she was able to resolve them (Tr.68-69). She left her assistant manager 
job because she was tired of the shift schedule, and working weekends and holidays 
(Tr. 38). 
 
Applicant began working for her current employer, a defense contractor, in 
January 2006 (Tr. 8). She was granted interim access to classified information from 
around the time of her employment to October 2007. Her access was withdrawn 
pending adjudication of the current SOR. Applicant’s job does not require her to handle 
classified information, but she needs access to secured working areas to perform her 
job. There is no evidence that Applicant has compromised classified information or that 
she has failed to comply with rules and regulations concerning the protection of 
classified information. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included her August 2007 response to DOHA interrogatories (GE 2), and the review of 
credit bureau reports (CBRs) from January 2006 (GE 3), and June 2007 (GE 4). The 
SOR alleges 16 delinquent/charged off accounts totaling approximately $37,750. The 
alleged debts are supported by the government’s evidence. At her hearing, consistent 
with her answers to the SOR and DOHA interrogatories, Applicant confirmed these are 
her debts and they are still outstanding.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant presented little evidence of efforts taken to pay or otherwise resolve 
her debts since the day she acquired them. With the exception of the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a, for which she entered into a judgment payment agreement, Applicant 
presented no documentary evidence of payments made to any creditors. As of the 
hearing date, she had not made her judgment agreement payment for January. She did 
not have the money to make the $125 payment because of the higher cost of utilities 
during winter (Tr. 44). 
 
Applicant raised numerous factors that could be considered mitigating 
circumstances that prevented her from paying her debts, i.e., being a single mother of 
two, inadequate or lack of child support, changing jobs, medical and health problems 
(10 surgeries from 2000-2007), having to support her two adult daughters and their 
babies, and her daughter’s lack of financial contributions to the household. Applicant 
was receiving food coupons from her state welfare services, but with the overtime she 
was making she no longer qualifies for assistance (Tr. 63). Both of her daughters also 
received assistance from the state. Applicant plans to move back in with her parents, 
because she is losing her eyesight and will not be able to take care of her home alone 
(Tr. 61). She presented little or no evidence, other than her testimony, to corroborate 
her claims. 
 
Applicant claimed her financial problems started in January 2006, when she left 
her assistant manager job for her current job (GE 2, Tr. 56). However, the CBRs reflect 
many of her delinquent accounts were open in the early 2000s (GE 3-4). Concerning 
her medical/health problems, Applicant testified she has lost a total of approximately 
seven weeks of work as a result of all her surgeries. She received her full salary while 
on sick leave, and her health care insurance paid for 80% of the medical bills. She did 
not established how her health/medical problems affected her ability to pay her debts. 
Ultimately, she attributed her financial problems to the higher cost of living.  
 
Over 90% of Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are for credit card 
accounts. Approximately 6% of the debts are related to medical bills. Seven of the 
delinquent debts listed could be considered small debts because the total owed per 
debt is less than $1,000. During the last year, Applicant has paid many of her delinquent 
medical bills by making payments to a collection agency (GEs 3-4). Her plan is to pay 
her medical bills first, and then pay the remaining delinquent debts using her 2008 
income tax refund, and by possibly consolidating the debts (Tr. 54). She claimed she 
attempted to consolidate her debts once, but she did not have the money to make the 
payments.  
 
Applicant stated her willingness to pay her delinquent debts, however, at the 
present she cannot afford to do so (Tr. 59). She also claimed she considered filing for 
bankruptcy protection, but was afraid doing so would adversely affect her ability to 
obtain a security clearance (Tr. 60). She presented no evidence, other than her 
testimony to support her claims. Most of Applicant’s delinquent debts are for overdue 
credit cards she used to buy clothes and household appliances (Tr. 45). 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant’s supervisor considers her behavior and performance exemplary. She 
is honest and professional, and has a good disposition. Her supervisor considers her 
dependable and trustworthy. Because of her performance, Applicant will be entitled to 
future pay raises that could assist her to overcome her financial problems. 
Notwithstanding, at the present, her monthly expenses far exceed her monthly income. 
Applicant is not earning enough to pay for her day-to-day living expenses and her debts.  
 
Applicant presented no evidence of any measures she has taken to avoid future 
financial difficulties. She did not seek financial counseling because she believes she 
does not need it (Tr. 77). 
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.2 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”3 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
2  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
3  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that an Applicant’s  
 
“failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” AG ¶ 18. 
 
 Applicant has 16 delinquent debts, including a judgment, that have been charged 
off or in collection for many years, totaling approximately $37,750. AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts”), AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”), and AG ¶ 19(c) (“consistent spending beyond one’s means . . .”), apply in 
this case.  
 
 AG & 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns. After considering all the mitigating conditions (MC), and the record 
evidence as a whole,4 I conclude that none of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant 
presented little evidence of efforts taken to contact creditors, or to resolve any of the 
debts since she acquired them. Nor is there any evidence that she has participated in 
any financial counseling.  
4  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 4 (App. 
Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as a whole. 
 
6 
 
 
 
 I specifically considered AG ¶ 20(b) (“The conditions that resulted in the financial 
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)” and AG ¶ 20(d) (“the individual 
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”), and 
conclude that they apply, but only to a limited extent.  
 
Applicant’s testimony raised mitigating factors that may be considered as 
circumstances beyond her control contributing to her inability to pay her debts, i.e., she 
was a single mother of two, received inadequate or no child support, changed jobs, had 
medical and health problems (10 surgeries from 2000-2007), provided financial support 
her two adult daughters and their babies, and her daughter’s do not contributed to the 
household finances.  
 
These claims demonstrate circumstances beyond her control; however, 
Applicant’s evidence is not sufficient to show she has dealt responsibly with her 
financial obligations. She presented little evidence to show paid debts, settlement 
agreements, documented negotiations, payment plans, budgets, financial 
assistance/counseling before, or after receipt of the SOR.  
 
 Regarding AG ¶ 20(d), I considered Applicant is paying a judgment, and that she 
has been paying another debt collector for some of her medical delinquent debts. 
Notwithstanding, Applicant’s financial history and lack of favorable evidence preclude a 
finding that she has established a track record of financial responsibility. She failed to 
establish that circumstances beyond her control contributed to her inability to pay her 
debts, that she received financial counseling, and that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control (AG ¶ 20(c)). She also failed to show that she properly disputed the 
legitimacy of any of the debts (AG ¶ 20(e)). Based on the available evidence, her 
financial problems are recent, not isolated, ongoing, and are likely to be a concern in the 
future.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a),  
 
“(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
 
7 
 
 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.”        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, hard-working 
woman. She has been successful working as a retail business assistant manager and 
for a defense contractor. She received a solid recommendation from his current 
supervisor as a trustworthy and dependable employee. She is a dedicated mother who 
takes care of her daughters and grandchildren. She has had significant health 
problems. 
 
Overall, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.p:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
