 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-08809 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Virginia M. Gomez, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his alcohol consumption. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
On November 16, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
G, Alcohol Consumption. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 5, 2007, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the government’s written case on January 3, 2008. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
2 
 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on January 14, 2008, responded 
through counsel on February 12, 2008, and submitted Exhibits (Ex.) A through N. 
Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s response. I received the case 
assignment on March 4, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated December 5, 2007, Applicant admitted all the 
factual allegations in the SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He is a college 
graduate. He has been with his current employer since 1995, and his previous company 
from 1988 to 1995. Applicant has worked on the same program and has held a security 
clearance for more than 20 years. He has never been married and has no children.1  
 
 Applicant started drinking alcohol when he was about 17 years old. He stated 
that he would normally drink between about two to four beers about twice a month. In 
his response to the FORM, Applicant described his drinking in college as primarily beer, 
and primarily on the weekends. He stated he generally only drank two beers at a time 
but sometimes would drink as many as four.2 In a handwritten statement provided on 
March 13, 1987, Applicant described his drinking while in college somewhat differently: 
 
Regarding my alcohol usage. While I was a student in the last year of 
college I had anxieties about graduating and my future which led to me 
drinking approximately three nights a week between the period of DEC 85 
and JAN 86. I would drink approximately 4 drinks a night, rum and coke at 
local bars in the [-----] area. Drinking made me feel not [illegible] and I 
would get verbal at times. I always felt bad the next morning. I would have 
drank seven nights a week if I had the money. Upon knowing I was going 
to graduate I curtailed my alcohol drinking because I no longer needed to 
drink into excess anymore. I feel I do not now have an alcohol drinking 
problem and I currently drink one plum brandy, four days a week at the 
most. . .  Regarding my alcohol usage I enjoy taking an alcohol drink in the 
evening to help me relax but I do not get intoxicated nor do I have any 
future intent on doing so.3 
 
 Applicant had two alcohol-related arrests in the 1980s. He was charged with 
public drunkenness in 1982, when he was 24 years old. He stated that he drank about 
two rum and cokes in a bar and felt sick. He went outside to throw up. He was arrested 
while he was getting sick. He completed a diversion program after which the charge 
                                                          
1 Ex. 4, A, M. 
 
2 Ex. 5, A. 
 
3 Ex. 6. 
 
 
3 
 
was dismissed. His next incident occurred in 1986. Applicant was 28 years old at the 
time and in his last year of college. He was again arrested and charged with public 
drunkenness. He pled guilty and was given probation, which he successfully completed. 
In his response to the FORM, he stated that he had been drinking after the last day of 
classes and finally finishing school. He stated he “was arrested when the police found 
[him] arguing with someone outside the dorms on campus.” 4 He described his arrest in 
greater detail in his 1987 statement: 
 
I was drinking in a bar in [-----] and drank about 4 rum and cokes. I don’t 
remember leaving because I must have had periods of blackouts. I do 
remember walking home and I saw a girl on a balcony of an apartment 
house. Upon seeing her I started shouting to her about President Reagan 
being a teflon president and how I felt it was illegal for the United States to 
be involved in Nicaragua. Shortly an [-----] Police unit rolled up and 
arrested me [for] being a public nuisance and being drunk in public.5 
 
 Applicant was arrested on May 29, 2005, and charged with (1) Driving Under the 
Influence (DUI) and (2) Driving Under the Influence with 0.08% or Higher Blood Alcohol. 
He pled guilty on August 24, 2005 to the first charge. Judgment was withheld for 36 
months; he was given 36 months of probation; he was ordered to a First Offender 
Alcohol Program; and he was ordered to pay restitution, a fine, and court costs. The 
second charge was dismissed. In addition to the First Offender Alcohol Program, 
Applicant was required to attend six Alcoholics Anonymous meetings within three 
months. He voluntarily attended 36 meetings. He attended approximately 20 classes 
and completed the First Offender Alcohol Program in October 2005. Applicant, through 
his criminal attorney, petitioned the court on January 25, 2008 to permit him to withdraw 
his guilty plea, or that the finding of guilty be set aside and a plea of not guilty be 
entered and the court dismiss his action. The court had not acted on the petition as of 
February 12, 2008, the date Applicant responded to the FORM.6  
 
 Applicant was vacationing at a cabin when he was arrested. He began watching 
the Indianapolis 500 car race by himself. He started drinking alcohol while watching the 
car race. He estimated that he drank four ten-ounce drinks that contained vodka and 
soda over about a four hour period. At about 3:30 in the afternoon, he decided to drive 
to a nearby lake and take his dog for a walk. He stated that he felt he was competent to 
drive. Applicant struck another car. There was damage to the vehicles but no injuries. 
Police arrived and Applicant was given a field sobriety test and a breathalyzer which 
tested at .27% blood alcohol content (BAC). In his response to the FORM, Applicant 
stated that he never would have driven had he known he was that impaired and he 
clearly underestimated the impact of the amount of alcohol he ingested over the given 
                                                          
4 Ex. 3, 5, 6, A. 
 
5 Ex 6. 
 
6 Ex. 3, 5, 7, A, I, J. The allegation states the arrest was on May 24, 2005. Court records indicate 
the violation occurred on May 24, 2005, but the DMV record submitted as Ex. J indicates Applicant was 
arrested on May 29, 2005. 
 
 
4 
 
time frame. In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated the DUI occurred under the 
“unusual circumstance” of mourning for his deceased father and not being able to enjoy 
the race, a traditional family event. No information was submitted as to when his father 
passed away.7 
 
 Applicant described his drinking to a background investigator on August 10, 
2006. A statement was not provided but the interview was summarized in a Report of 
Investigation (ROI). He was sent Interrogatories containing the ROI and was asked if 
the ROI accurately reflected the information that he provided to the investigator. He 
certified on September 21, 2007 that it did. He was provided an opportunity to add 
additional information regarding the matters discussed during his interview but chose 
not to add anything. Applicant described his alcohol consumption at that time as three to 
four times a week and that on two of the four occasions he would drink more than two 
drinks. He normally drank vodka and soda in a 12-ounce glass with ice, which included 
a couple ounces of alcohol. He stated that he usually drank while alone watching 
television. He did not feel he had a problem with alcohol and he intended to drink in 
moderation and never to drink and drive.8  
 
 In his response to the FORM dated February 8, 2008, Applicant stated that his 
drinking habits became more moderate during the last year. His drinking was down to 
one or two drinks on any particular occasion, once or twice a month. He took 
responsibility for his DUI and his alcohol-related offenses in the 1980s. He stated: 
 
I now understand that I should only consume alcohol in extreme 
moderation and never to the point of intoxication, which means I should 
not drink more than two drinks on any single occasion.9 
 
 Applicant submitted numerous letters from supervisors and co-workers who have 
known him for many years. He is described as a highly competent engineer, who is 
dependable, responsible, reliable, trustworthy, and honest. They are aware of the basis 
of the SOR, but none have ever seen other evidence of an alcohol problem. They 
recommend him for a security clearance. His most recent performance appraisal was 
excellent. His security officer verified that Applicant has held a security clearance for 
many years without a violation.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
                                                          
7 Ex. 3, 5, A. 
 
8 Ex. 5. 
 
9 Ex. A. 
 
10 Ex. B-H, L. 
 
 
5 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:   
     
 
6 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
Applicant’s drinking habits and alcohol-related arrests are sufficient to raise the 
above potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a)-(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
Applicant had two alcohol-related arrests when he was in his 20’s. His DUI in 
2005 is the only alcohol-related incident in more than 20 years. He has not been 
 
7 
 
diagnosed as alcohol dependent or as an alcohol abuser; although his actions clearly 
indicate he has abused alcohol. Applicant acknowledged that his alcohol use caused 
him legal and professional problems. He attended approximately 20 classes and 
completed his First Offender Alcohol Program. He was ordered to attend six Alcoholics 
Anonymous meetings, but he voluntarily attended 36 meetings. He has reduced his 
drinking to one or two drinks, once or twice a month. AG ¶ 23(b) is applicable and AG ¶ 
23(a) is partially applicable. The remaining mitigating conditions are not applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant had two alcohol-related 
arrests in the 1980s and a DUI in May 2005. The DUI was his only alcohol-related 
incident in more than 20 years. Other than the obvious consequences directly 
associated with the DUI, alcohol has not negatively affected his professional career. He 
has worked on the same program and has held a security clearance for more than 20 
years, without a security violation. He is very highly regarded by his supervisors and co-
workers, who are fully aware of his alcohol-related incidents, have never seen any other 
indication of an alcohol problem, and recommend him for a security clearance. 
Applicant continues to drink alcohol, but only in moderation. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his alcohol consumption. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
