 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-03234 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on June 15, 
2006.  On September 24, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision 
deny his application, citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 3, 2007; answered the 
SOR on October 22, 2007; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
DOHA received the request on October 24, 2007. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on November 30, 2007.  The case was assigned to me on December 6, 2007. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 14, 2007, and I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on January 15, 2008. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 10 were 
 
2 
 
 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through G, which were admitted without objection. 
I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until February 1, 2008, to enable 
him to submit additional matters. On February 1, 2008, at Applicant’s telephonic 
request, I granted an extension of time until February 19, 2008.  On February 19, 2008, 
Applicant submitted AX H and I, which were admitted without objection. On the same 
day, Applicant requested another extension of time to obtain and submit additional 
documents, and I granted a final extension until March 3, 2008.  He submitted no 
additional documents.  Department Counsel’s response to AX H and I is attached to the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (HX) I. Applicant’s requests for extensions and my responses 
are attached as HX II.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 23, 
2008. The record closed on March 3, 2008. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 
and 1.f.  His admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in 
my findings of fact.  I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is 41-year-old flight operations analyst for a federal contractor (Tr. 42, 
44). He served in the U.S. Navy from November 1985 to November 2005 and retired as 
a petty officer first class. He was unemployed from the date of his retirement until he 
began working for his current employer in November 2006 (GX 1 at 8; Tr. 44). During 
his Navy service he received numerous decorations and commendations (AX G). He 
received a clearance while in the Navy and has retained it in his current employment. 
He was married in April 1986 and has a 12-year-old son. 
 
 Applicant’s performance evaluations since January 2007 rate him as a “high 
contributor” who is “willing to go the extra mile.” This rating is the second highest on a 
scale of five ratings (AX F).  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began around 1999.  He was assigned to shore 
duty and began working part-time jobs off duty.  Relying on the additional income, he 
began spending more, and he overextended himself (Tr. 68, 74).  He was transferred to 
a mobile training team involving extensive travel, which forced him to quit his second job 
(Tr. 69).  He counted on his wife to handle the bills while he was traveling (Tr. 70).  He 
was unemployed for a year after he retired and lived with his parents while seeking 
employment (Tr. 70-71). After he was hired by his current employer, he lived in an 
apartment away from his family and incurred the expenses of maintaining two homes 
(Tr. 72).  His wife had medical problems that were only partially covered by TRICARE 
(Tr. 72).  He became aware that his financial problems were a security concern when he 
was interviewed by a security investigator in July 2006 (GX 10).  He responded to 
DOHA interrogatories about his financial situation in May 2007 (GX 3). 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In March 2006, Applicant enrolled in a training course for government 
employment.  He dropped out of the course because he did not find it worthwhile.  The 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a arose when he stopped making tuition payments (Tr. 48).  
The debt has been settled (AX I Encl 1; Tr. 49-50). 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b arose when Applicant cosigned a car loan for his 
mother. His mother made payments for about 18 months, began suffering medical 
problems, stopped making payments in May 2002, and voluntarily surrendered the car 
in January 2003.  The car was repossessed and sold. The amount of the debt alleged in 
the SOR is the amount due on the loan, not counting the proceeds of the sale.  
Applicant contacted the creditor and was informed that they were negotiating with his 
mother to resolve the deficiency on the debt (Tr. 53).  He contacted the creditor again 
shortly before retiring from the Navy but was unable to obtain any documentation 
showing how much the creditor received from the sale of the car (Tr. 53-54). At the 
hearing, he admitted the debt but questioned the amount (Tr. 52).  After the hearing, he 
learned the entry had been deleted from his credit report at the request of the creditor 
(AX I at 2 and Encl 2).  The record does not reflect the reason for the deletion. 
 
 Applicant testified at the hearing that the creditor for the credit card debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.c could not find any record of this account, which was about eight years old.  
After the hearing, he provided a written statement that he had negotiated settlement of 
the debt for one-half of the balance and payments of $266.87 for four months beginning 
on February 14, 2008 (AX I at 1). Applicant did not produce documentation of the 
settlement agreement or any payments made. 
 
 Applicant paid off the credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d in May of 2007, using 
back pay for a disability rating (Tr. 57; GX 7 at 6; AX I Encl 3).  He testified he did not 
pay off the debt sooner because it was “out of sight, out of mind” (Tr. 59). 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e was an unsecured personal loan.  It also was paid 
off from Applicant’s back pay for disability (Tr. 61; AX B). 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f arose from a purchase of a computer in 1999.  
Applicant testified the computer was for his son (Tr. 62), but that testimony seems 
implausible because his son would have been only four years old in 1999. The account 
was placed for collection in 2004.  Applicant disputed the credit report entry, but the 
credit bureau informed him in June 2007 that it was correctly reported (AX B). He has 
sent letters requesting a payment plan, but the debt remains unresolved (Tr. 63).   
 
 The credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g became delinquent in 2000.  At the 
hearing, Applicant testified his wife had a credit card from this creditor but he did not.  
He did not know if he was listed as a joint account holder (Tr. 64).  After the hearing, he 
presented evidence the account is paid (AX I Encl 4). 
 
 Applicant testified the creditor for the credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h could 
not find any record of the debt (Tr. 66). After the hearing, Applicant resolved the debt by 
 
4 
 
 
transferring a reduced balance to a new “pre-approved” credit card account, which is 
now listed as current (AX I at Encl 5 and Encl 6). 
 
 Applicant disputed the debt for telephone services alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i.  
Applicant testified he contacted the collection agency, who had no information in their 
records (Tr. 67).  After the hearing, he contacted the original creditor and asked why the 
debt was no longer on his credit reports. Applicant stated he was informed by the 
creditor’s representative that the account probably was satisfied (AX I at 2).   
 
 Applicant received financial counseling from the Navy as part of his preparation 
for retirement.  He has not enrolled in any credit counseling since his retirement (Tr. 83). 
 
 The evidence concerning the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR is summarized 
in the table below. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Tuition $545 Paid AX C; AX I Encl 1 
1.b Car repossession $35,263 Amount disputed; deleted 
from credit report; status is 
unclear 
AX I Encl 2 
1.c Credit card $2,025 Payment plan beginning 
Feb 08; no documentation 
AX I at 1; AX B 
1.d Credit card $371 Paid GX 7 at 6;  
AX I Encl 3 
1.e Loan $2,630 Paid AX B 
1.f Computer $4,565 Unresolved AX I at 1-2 
1.g Credit card $1,673 Paid AX I Encl 4 
1.h Credit card $1,147 Resolved AX I at 2;  
AX I Encl 5 
1.i Telephone $140 Disputed AX I at 2 
 
 Applicant submitted a budget analysis as of January 14, 2008, reflecting monthly 
net income of $4,721, including his military retirement and disability pay.  His monthly 
expenses are $2,431 and his monthly debt payments are $1,377, leaving a net monthly 
remainder of $913. The computation of the net monthly remainder assumes minimum 
monthly payments on all credit card balances. The listed debts do not include the 
installment payments on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. The total outstanding balance 
on all debts is about $21,966, including $9,329 in car loans and credit card balances 
totaling more than $10,000. (AX E). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.  Id. at 527. The 
 
5 
 
 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
The security concern relating to Guideline F is set out in AG & 18 as follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case.  AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@  Applicant has not resolved the debts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f. He admitted the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b in his answer to the SOR and at 
the hearing. The deletion of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b from his credit report is inconclusive, 
because the reason for the deletion is not reflected in the record. He has failed to 
document the payment plan for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c or provide proof of any payments, 
even though the first payment was due before the record closed.  He has been unable 
to negotiate a settlement of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f.  I conclude AG ¶ 19(a) is raised.  
 
AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is raised where there is Aindebtedness 
caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the absence of any evidence of 
willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a realistic plan to pay the debt.@  
Applicant’s spending habits while he was on shore duty and working two jobs suggest 
frivolous or irresponsible spending, satisfying the first prong. However, he has stated his 
intent to pay his debts and has demonstrated his intent by resolving some of his debts. I 
conclude AG ¶ 19(b) is not raised.   
 
AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.@  
Applicant’s financial history raises this disqualifying condition. 
 
AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending beyond one=s means, 
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@  Applicant’s unwise overspending 
while he was working two jobs raises this disqualifying condition. 
 
Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 
7 
 
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong.  It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
The first prong (“so long ago”) is not established, because the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.b, 1.c, and 1.f, are not yet resolved. The second prong (“so infrequent”) is not 
established because of Applicant’s multiple delinquent debts. The evidence regarding 
the third prong (“unlikely to recur”) is inconclusive, because it is too soon to determine 
whether Applicant will revert to the irresponsible spending habits he exhibited while in 
the Navy. His current income and expenses have him living on the financial edge, with 
little flexibility to meet unexpected expenses.  Because none of the first three prongs are 
established, I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established.  Applicant’s mother’s illness that 
caused her to default on her car payments, his year of unemployment, the expense of 
maintaining two households, and his wife’s recent medical problems were conditions 
beyond his control. However, many of his delinquent debts preceded these events.  
Although Applicant contacted the creditor regarding the car repossession, his overall 
attitude toward his delinquent debts was, in his words, “out of sight, out of mind.” It was 
only after he realized his security clearance was in jeopardy that he began aggressively 
resolving his debts. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition also has two prongs that may be either disjunctive or conjunctive.  It 
the person has received counseling, it must also be shown that there are clear 
indications the problem is being resolved or under control.  However, if the person has 
not received counseling, this mitigating condition may still apply if there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or under control.  Applicant received a 
type of financial counseling before he retired from the Navy, but it was more a review of 
his financial status than a program designed to change spending habits.  The debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.f are unresolved, and there is no evidence that Applicant has 
 
8 
 
 
complied with the payment plan for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.c.  I conclude AG ¶ 20(c) is not 
established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@  AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@  ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under 
pressure of qualifying for a security clearance.  Applicant’s recent efforts to resolve his 
delinquent debts followed several years of inaction and indifference, and they were 
triggered by his realization that his clearance was in jeopardy.  I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is 
not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigating by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@  AG ¶ 20(e).  While 
Applicant has not provided “documented proof” to support his disputing of the debts in 
SOR ¶ 1.b, 1.f, and 1.i, his testimony and post-hearing submission are “evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue.”  The dispute regarding SOR ¶ 1.f was decided against 
him. I conclude AG ¶ 20(e) is established, but only for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i. 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served his country for more than 20 years and held a security 
clearance for about eight years, apparently without incident.  However, he overextended 
himself while on active duty, and he still is on the financial edge. Whether he will 
 
9 
 
 
exercise financial discipline and resolve his remaining debts cannot be determined. He 
has not yet established a sound financial track record.   
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
