 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 07-01499 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns raised 
under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On September 1, 2000, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application 
(SF 86). On June 13, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines G, E, and 
J for Applicant. The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On July 3, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On October 23, 2007, 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy on October 30, 2007. Applicant received 
the FORM on November 1, 2007, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. Applicant submitted additional evidence on December 7, 
2007, that I marked, as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. Department Counsel had no objection 
to the documents.  DOHA assigned the case to me on March 10, 2008. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
  Department Counsel included in its FORM a Motion to Amend the SOR by 
adding an additional allegation to Paragraph 3: “3.b. As set forth in subparagraphs 1.a. 
and 1.b., above.”  Applicant did not file an objection to the motion. Said motion is 
granted as to 1.b, but not 1.a, which has been appropriately alleged under Guideline G.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.d, and 2.b. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
He denied the allegations contained in ¶ 2.a., and explained in his Answer that “I was in 
my addiction.” He did not answer ¶ 3.a or the allegation contained in ¶ 3.b of the 
Amended SOR.  
   
 Applicant is 30 years old and unmarried. From August 1998 until May 2000, he 
attended college. In August 2000, he began working as a field service engineer for his 
current employer, a federal contractor. In September 2000, he submitted an SF 86. In 
January 2001, he received a security clearance. (Item 3). 
 
 Applicant started consuming alcohol and using illegal drugs at the age of 18. He 
admitted that from approximately 1996 to May 2006, he consumed alcohol, at times to 
excess and to the point of intoxication. He used marijuana for recreational purposes 
about once a year until October 2005. He purchased and used cocaine about once a 
month from 2001 until 2005. He was never arrested for his illegal drug use and does not 
think he was addicted to the drugs. He never received treatment for his usage or a Drug 
Dependent diagnosis. He admitted the drugs impacted his judgment and reliability. He 
disclosed the extent and nature of his substance abuse during an interview with a 
government investigator in December 2006. (Item 4). 
 
 After consuming four to six beers in a three-hour period in October 2005, 
Applicant drove his car and hit a parked car. He failed a breathalyzer test and was 
admitted to the hospital where his blood alcohol level measured 0.163% and he tested 
positive for marijuana. After receiving 175 stitches to his head, he was released from 
the hospital. He was charged with (1) Driving Under the Influence (DUI): High Rate of 
Alcohol (BAC 0.10-0.16) First Offense; (2) Driving Under the Influence: General 
Impairment/Incapable of Driving Safely First Offense, and (3) Careless Driving. He 
 
3 
 
 
pleaded guilty, and was placed on probation for 12 months. The court ordered him to 
attend alcohol safety awareness classes, and to perform 25 hours of community 
service. His driver’s license was suspended for 30 days. He reported his arrest to his 
supervisor. (Items 4 & 6) 
 
 On May 16, 2006, Applicant felt stressed about his first DUI and the death of his 
mother. He stopped at a local bar where he began drinking beer. He left that bar and 
stopped at another one. Within five hours, he consumed 13-14 beers at several bars. 
On his way home, the police arrested him and took him to the hospital, where his blood 
alcohol level was measured at 0.21. He was charged with DUI-Highest Rate of Alcohol 
(BAC 0.16+) First Offense. He pleaded guilty and was sentenced to two days in jail and 
90 days of work release/house arrest with electronic monitoring that he completed on 
February 11, 2007. He was ordered to complete 50 hours of community service, fined 
$3,000, and placed on probation until November 2007. His driver’s license was 
suspended for 30 months and remains suspended. The sentence for this offense ran 
concurrently with the one imposed in October 2005. (Items 4 & 5).   
 
 On May 18, 2006, Applicant contacted his employer’s assistance program (EAP).  
The EAP counselor referred him to an intensive outpatient program. He was diagnosed 
as Alcohol Dependent.1 He completed the 16 three-hour sessions satisfactorily in June 
2006. The counselor recommended that he participate in additional individual treatment 
with another counselor. Applicant did not follow that recommendation, but continued 
attending AA meetings, which was also recommended. He claims he has maintained his 
sobriety since May 2006. He believes his prognosis is good because he is committed to 
changing his behavior. His supervisor, colleagues and family are aware of his alcohol 
problems. He regrets his misconduct. (Item 4).   
 
 When Applicant completed his SF 86 in September 2000, he did not disclose his 
illegal marijuana use from 1996 to 2000.  He denied that he falsified the SF 86, and 
seemingly attributed the omission to his addiction at the time. (Answer).  
 
 Applicant submitted Performance Evaluations from his employer for the years 
2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006. His supervisor rated him as a “Successful Contributor” for 
the years 2003 to 2005 and as a “Basic Contributor for 2006. (AE A). Although 
Applicant’s supervisor is aware of his alcohol problems, it is not clear that the supervisor 
is aware of the illegal drug issues.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to evaluate 
an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
1 The credentials of the evaluator, who made the diagnosis, are not included in the file. 
 
4 
 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
AG ¶¶ 22(a)-(g) describe seven Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions 
that may be applicable to security concerns raised under this guideline. Based on 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s two DUI convictions and admissions of excessive drinking over ten-years, 
the Government raised two of them: “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as 
driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, 
or other incidents of concern regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;” and, “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to 
the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” AG ¶¶ 22 (a) and (c). 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation. 
Four Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions are potentially applicable under AG ¶¶ 
23 (a)-(d): 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
Only one of the conditions has any application to this case. Insufficient time has 
passed to apply AG ¶ 23(a). Applicant was convicted of two DUI’s within six months of 
one another, and only recently completed his criminal probationary period in November 
2007. His driver’s license remains suspended. AG ¶ 23(b) has some application. 
Applicant admits his alcoholism and has taken steps to address it. However, he did not 
provide any independent documentation to verify his assertion that he has remained 
abstinent since May 2006. There is no evidence in the record to support the application 
of AG ¶ 23(c). Applicant acknowledged that he failed to comply with the treatment plan 
recommended by the EAP counselor, as required by AG ¶ 23(d). 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 AG ¶ 15 sets forth the Government’s personal conduct concern: “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance 
process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.” 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 2(a) that Applicant falsified his SF 86 by 
failing to disclose his use of marijuana from 1996 to 2000, thereby raising a potential 
disqualification under AG ¶ 16(a), which reads “the deliberate omission, concealment, 
or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal 
history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” Although Applicant denied the 
allegation, he attributed the omission to his addiction at the time he completed the SF 
86.  Based on his explanation, I find that he deliberately concealed information from the 
Government. 
 The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 2(b) that Applicant used cocaine and 
marijuana from 2001 to at least 2005, while holding a security clearance that was 
granted to him in January 2001. Applicant’s admissions to those allegations raised a 
Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition under AG ¶ 16(c). The security concern is 
based on “credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, 
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information.”  Applicant’s decision to use illegal drugs 
while holding a security clearance was not alleged under any other guideline, but clearly 
demonstrated his poor judgment and an unwillingness to comply with his employer’s 
rules and regulations under this guideline. 
 Seven Personal Conduct Mitigating Conditions are set forth in AG ¶ 17. They 
include the following: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
 
7 
 
 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
After reviewing all of the conditions, I conclude six of them have no application to 
the two disqualifications. AG ¶ 17(a) cannot apply because Applicant did not disclose 
the information about his drug abuse until December 2006. There is no evidence in the 
record to trigger the application of AG ¶¶ 17(b), (e), (f) and (g). Applicant’s drug use 
while holding a security clearance was not minor or infrequent. He used illegal drugs 
once a month after obtaining a security clearance in January 2001 and continued to use 
them up to October 2005, demonstrating his lack of trustworthiness. Accordingly, AG ¶ 
17(c) does not apply.  Applicant acknowledged his substance abuse problems and 
received some counseling. However, that evidence is insufficient to assure the 
Government that similar problems will not recur in the future, given the extent and 
length of time he abused substances. Hence, AG ¶17 (d) has limited application, and 
the factors listed therein, will be more fully discussed under the whole-person analysis 
section.  
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 AG ¶ 30 articulates the Government’s concern regarding criminal conduct: 
“Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” 
 
8 
 
 
 Based on the evidence, including Applicant’s admissions, the Government 
established a potential security concern under two Criminal Conduct Disqualifying 
Conditions: “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and an “allegation or 
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c).  Applicant was convicted of a 
DUI and deliberately falsified his SF 86, which is a criminal offense under Federal law. 
 There are five Criminal Conduct Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 32. None of 
the conditions mitigate the deliberate falsification allegation contained in ¶ 3.a. 
However, AG ¶ 32 (d) has some application to the allegations set forth in ¶ 3.b of the 
Amended SOR, as “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement.”  Since his conviction, Applicant has participated in some 
rehabilitation and has expressed sincere remorse for his mistakes and substance abuse 
problems. He also provided evidence of a good employment record for the past couple 
years.   
Whole Person Concept 
 
 In addition to evaluating the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each 
guideline, the adjudicative process requires thorough consideration and review of all 
available, reliable information about the applicant, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, to arrive at a balanced decision. The essence of scrutinizing all appropriate 
variables in a case is referred to as the “whole person” analysis. In evaluating the 
conduct of the applicant, the Administrative Judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include: (1) the nature, extent, and 
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 30-year-old man, who 
began voluntarily consuming alcohol and using illegal drugs when he was 18 years old, 
and continued abusing substances into May 2006.  From 2001 to 2005, he frequently 
used illegal drugs while holding a security clearance and apparently unbeknownst to his 
employer.   
 
Applicant asserted that he has maintained sobriety since May 2006 when he 
entered an EAP treatment program and is committed to that sobriety. While those are 
 
9 
 
 
positive steps in addressing his substance abuse problems, they are inadequate to 
mitigate years of serious illegal drug use and alcohol abuse. Absent independent 
corroboration, such as an evaluation from an appropriately credentialed health care 
provider or other sources, documenting Applicant’s assertions that he is drug and 
alcohol free, along with proof of a significant period of abstinence, I believe there is a 
strong likelihood that he will continue to abuse substances in the future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his alcohol consumption, 
personal conduct and criminal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a and 3.b:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
