  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 07-08994
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on October 11, 2007. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline H based on Applicant’s illegal drug involvement.   
In addition, this case is brought under the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines)
approved by the President on December 29, 2005. The Revised Guidelines were then
modified by the Defense Department, effective September 1, 2006. They supersede or
replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all
adjudications and other determinations where an SOR has been issued on September
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20. 3
 Id. 4
2
1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision or amendment. The Revised2
Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the effective date.  
Applicant replied to the SOR on October 30, 2007, and indicated she did not wish
to have a hearing. Her reply or answer consisted of her handwritten responses on the
SOR and a one-page letter. Accordingly, the case will be decided based on the written
record in lieu of a hearing. 
On January 8, 2008, the government submitted its written case consisting of all
relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing. This so-called file
of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant January 11  and it was receivedth
by her January 21 . Applicant did not reply to the FORM within the 30-day periodst
allowed for a reply. The case was assigned to me March 4, 2008. For the reasons
discussed below, this case is decided against Applicant. 
Procedural Rulings
In its FORM, the government included as an item of documentary evidence a
subject interview of Applicant (Exhibit 5). The interview was part of a report of
investigation (ROI) prepared by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management. The ROI
indicates that the Applicant’s subject interview was an unsworn declaration made in May
2007. 
The general rule is that a background ROI may not be received and considered
by an administrative judge.  The exception to the general rule is “[a]n ROI may be3
received with an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise admissible under the
Federal Rules of Evidence.”  4
In past cases, the government has included an ROI in its FORM without an
attempt to authenticate it or offer some other method of getting the evidence to the trier
of fact (for example, stipulation). The ROI was excluded from consideration in those
cases. Here, the government authenticated the ROI through Applicant. In particular, in
September 2007, it issued an interrogatory to Applicant asking her to review the ROI
and state if it accurately reflected the information she provided during the subject
interview (Exhibit 5). Applicant indicated it did not so far as the start date of her
marijuana use was off by one month. Otherwise, Applicant had no disagreement with
the contents of the ROI. Accordingly, without objections, the ROI is admitted as a
business record or a public record or both and it will be considered. 
3
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline H, the SOR alleges Applicant was involved with marijuana,
cocaine, and opium. In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual
allegations. Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following facts are
established by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is seeking to
obtain a security clearance from the Defense Department for the first time. 
Applicant attended college during 1999–2003. She was awarded a bachelor of
arts in international studies in May 2003. From July 2003 to September 2004, she
worked as an assistant manager for a business services company. From October 2004
to July 2006, she worked as a legal assistant for a law firm. She commenced her
current employment as a cost analyst in July 2006. The record is silent concerning
Applicant’s job performance as well as her knowledge, skills, and abilities to perform her
work. 
In December 2006, Applicant completed a security-clearance application (Exhibit
4). In response to the relevant questions, Applicant indicated that (1) she had illegally
used controlled substances within the last seven years, and (2) she had been involved
in the illegal purchase, manufacture, trafficking, production, transfer, shipping, receiving,
or sale of controlled substances within the last seven years. In the explanation section,
she provided the following information about her illegal drug involvement:
• In 2001–2006, she used marijuana occasionally starting in her sophomore year
of college, but she had no intention to use it in the future.
• In 2002–2003, she sold marijuana and often made a profit.
• In 2002, she used cocaine a few times on an experimental basis.
• In 2002, she used opium a few times on an experimental basis.  
In her subject interview of May 2007, she confirmed her use of marijuana,
cocaine, and opium as detailed above (Exhibit 5). She indicated that she or her house
mates purchased all three drugs. Concerning marijuana, she used it five times per week
after class during 2001–2003, but not during the volleyball season. After college in
2004, she shared a marijuana cigarette about six times with a coworker and his spouse.
And in 2005–2006, she and her house mates shared a marijuana cigarette twice a
week. She quit smoking marijuana in May 2006 because it was time to grow up. Also,
she stated that she had no intention to use illegal drugs in the future. 
In her October 2007 reply to the SOR, she admitted to the allegations of illegal
drug involvement. She stated that her past decisions were inexcusable and made
without thinking of the future. She characterized her illegal drug involvement as part of
her college experience, which “was a rebellious time - a time of self-destructiveness and
self-indulgence,” and she acknowledges her decisions and actions were less than wise.
Also, she repeated her intention to no longer use illegal drugs.  
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a5
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.6
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 7
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 8
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.12
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 13
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).14
4
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.5
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an applicant6
to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret
information.  An unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any7
existing security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether8
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting9
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An10
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate11
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme12
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.13
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.14
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.15
 Revised Guidelines at 17–18 (setting forth the drug involvement disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 16
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 17
 Revised Guidelines at 17. 18
5
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination15
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline H for drug involvement,  the security concern is that “use of an16
illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.”  The definition of drug abuse is “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal17
drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.”18
Based on the record evidence as a whole, the following conditions raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying:
• [A]ny drug abuse (see above definition); and 
• [I]llegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
Applicant’s history of illegal drug involvement raises a security concern because it calls
into question her judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. She was, at times, a regular
marijuana user smoking it as frequently as five times per week, and she sold it for profit.
In addition, her representation that her illegal drug involvement was part of her college
experience is not entirely accurate. The record evidence shows that it continued after
she finished college in 2003. Indeed, she continued using marijuana until approximately
May 2006, a few months before starting her employment with a defense contractor. 
The four mitigating conditions under Guideline H have been considered and none
apply in Applicant’s favor. The evidence in her favor is minimal. Given the dearth of
favorable information, the record evidence is insufficient to credit her with mitigation.
And the record evidence is too skimpy to conclude that she presented a convincing
6
case in reform and rehabilitation. Certainly, the clearly-consistent standard requires
more than self-serving statements made in reply to the SOR to meet the ultimate
burden of persuasion, and the evidence in Applicant’s favor is not sufficient.    
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the drug involvement security concern. Applicant did not meet her ultimate
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this
conclusion, the whole-person concept was given due consideration and that analysis
does not support a favorable decision. This case is decided against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
