1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 07-08332
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA), on October 16,
2006. On September 16, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under financial
considerations (Guideline F). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
made effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted his answer to the SOR on October 11, 2007. DOHA issued a
notice of hearing on December 3, 2007, and the hearing was held on December 17,
2007. At the hearing, five exhibits (AE 1 through 5) were admitted in evidence without
objection to support the government’s case. Applicant’s six exhibits (AE A through AF)
were received in evidence without objection. Applicant testified. In the time allowed for
post-hearing submissions, Applicant submitted 37 documents that have also been
 The agreement was signed by an official of State Y bank on January 3, 2008. (AE G)1
2
received in evidence without objection. (AE G through AE I). The exhibits address (1)
Applicant’s deficiency agreement (SOR 1.g., 1.h.) he entered into with State X bank on
December 26, 2007,  (2) performance evaluations and character references, (3) and a1
five-year debt plan, including his plan to pay off the other SOR debts. DOHA received a
copy of the hearing transcript on January 7, 2008. Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
granted. 
Rulings on Procedure
During the hearing, Department Counsel made a motion to amend the SOR by
re-lettering the last two allegations. Applicant had no objection. Pursuant to E3.1.17. of
the Directive, the motion was granted, and the last two allegations of page two of the
SOR were re-lettered to read “1.l.” and “1.m.” (Tr. 35-36)
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleges financial considerations. Applicant admitted SOR 1.a., 1.f., 1.h.,
1.l. and 1.m. He denied SOR 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., 1.g., 1.i., and 1j. Applicant’s interview
in January 2007 (GE 2) and his credit bureau reports reflect that all debts are his
responsibility. He is 59 years old, divorced, and has been employed as a senior cost
engineer with a defense contractor since September 2005. GE 1 reflects that Applicant
was a senior cost engineer (with a security clearance) for a defense contractor in State
Y from October 1974 to February 2000, and from October 2002 to December 2004, with
a second defense contractor. He seeks a security clearance. 
From February 2000 until October 2003, Applicant formed a real estate
partnership with another realtor. He continued to sell real estate part-time for about a
year after he began working for the second defense contractor in October 2002. 
Having made a decision in December 2004 that he needed to take a respite from
the defense contractor field, he resigned his employment with the second defense
contractor, and resumed his real estate career in a foreign country (FC). Before his
resignation, he entered into a purchase agreement with a buyer and State Y bank to
buy his home and another parcel of land. The two parcels of land are listed in SOR 1.g.
and 1.h. respectively. See also GE 2. On one of the parcels of land was a mobile home
that Applicant valued at $10,000.00, and a truck and an office trailer he valued at
$2,000.00, for a total of $12,000.00. 
Applicant entered into a second agreement with State Y bank for money to be
taken out of his private account for the payment of bills, e.g., credit cards and utilities,
while he was in FC selling real estate. 
 Applicant was unable to return to State Y immediately due to his employment obligations in FC. 2
 The judgment includes interest, fees, costs and expenses. (GE 2) 3
3
Within four months of his departure from the second defense contractor to sell
real estate in FC, Applicant was notified by State Y bank in March 2005 that the buyer
had defaulted on the purchase agreement for both properties. After receiving
delinquency notices in April 2005 for nonpayment of several of the SOR debts,
Applicant discovered the bank had exhausted his private account (created by the
second agreement he had with State Y bank) to pay the mortgage following default. 
Applicant returned to State Y in September 2005  to weigh his options (including2
bankruptcy) for his properties, that were about to go into foreclosure. Initially, Applicant
was advised by an attorney not to address the other SOR debts because this action
could constitute a waiver of the bank’s potential liability for withdrawing funds for the
mortgage rather than the other SOR debts. He provided this explanation during the
hearing. (Tr. 40) After learning in late 2005 he had no redress against the bank for
taking funds to pay the mortgage, and concluding he had insufficient funds to pay off the
arrearage on the mortgage (GE 2, e-mails in September 2006 between Applicant and
the bank), the property was foreclosed on. On October 18, 2006, the property securing
the bank’s mortgage went on sale through a public auction. 
The actual sale of Applicant’s property on December 7, 2006 resulted in a
deficiency judgment of $29,717.00.  (Tr. 26) Applicant told the government investigator3
in January 2007 that he did not intend to address the other SOR creditors until he
completed his negotiations with the bank regarding the deficiency judgment. Applicant
and State Y bank presented offers and counter offers until November 28, 2007, when
the bank proposed a compromise that became the stipulated deficiency agreement. (AE
G) Under the terms of the deficiency judgment agreement, Applicant agreed to pay the
bank $300.00 a month for 60 months, with payments beginning in January 2008.
Another term of the agreement is that if Applicant does not make all required payments
on or before the scheduled due dates, “the amount of the deficiency will revert back to
the full amount awarded under the deficiency judgment, plus accrued interest, less any
amounts received from [Applicant].” (AE G)
There are 12 delinquent accounts in the SOR, including the deficiency judgment
agreement. The total sum of the delinquency is $49,300.00. The deficiency judgment
(SOR 1.g. and 1.h., $29,717.00) amounts to more than half of the SOR debt. Almost all
of the debts became overdue between September 2004 and February 2005. Applicant
has incurred no new debt since February 2005 (GE 3), not 2004 as he testified. (Tr. 44)
Save for the government credit card, he has no credit cards currently. He officially
contacted all creditors on November 28, 2007 for delinquent debt information and plans
to pay the outstanding balance on the other debts by June 2008. (Tr. 28; AE G) 
Applicant has been using a budget in handling his finances since January 2007.
(GE 2) The budget reveals a monthly net remainder of $1,265.00. (AE E)
4
Applicant submitted a character questionnaire to seven supervisors and
coworkers (AE F) The questionnaire asks a series of questions about Applicant’s
character on the job. All indicated they recommended him for a position of trust. 
The manager of Applicant’s division stated that Applicant mentioned his financial
problems when he was hired in September 2005. The manager recalled Applicant was
very active in several community projects in finding shelter and food for the homeless
after the hurricane passed through the area in September 2005. Another cost engineer
admires Applicant’s contributions in reestablishing critical connections between his
employer and the local military installations after the hurricane. The Director of a major
local youth organization commended Applicant for organizing renovation efforts in the
community after the hurricane in September 2005. Applicant’s job ratings for the last
two years show he has met performance expectations.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial and common sense decision. According to the AG, the entire process is a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the “whole person
concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2b.
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
5
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Financial Considerations (FC)
Failure to live within one’s means, and inability to pay bills on time places the
individual debtor at risk of committing illegal acts to generate funds. 
Analysis
When the SOR was published in September 2007, Applicant was over
$49,000.00 in debt, with more than 50% of the debt attributed to his defaulted mortgage
and other property. On hindsight, he should have returned to State X to confront his
growing debt much sooner than he did. FC disqualifying condition (DC) 19.a. (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC 19.c. (a history of not meeting financial
obligations) apply. FC DC 19.a. applies due to Applicant’s inability to address the debt.
Applicant’s “unwillingness” to satisfy all but two of the remaining debts is a reasonable
inference that is drawn from his statement in January 2007 that he was unwilling to deal
with the other SOR creditors. However, the reason for his unwillingness was his
concern over how to address the large deficiency judgment of $29,717.00 that was
entered against him in December 2006. FC DC 19.c. applies based on a history, albeit
short, of not paying the delinquent debts. 
The circumstances of this case potentially raise the first four mitigating conditions
(MC) under the FC guideline. FC MC 20.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under the such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment) applies in part. The 12 listed debts fell delinquent in a short time span in 2004
and early 2005, without any additional debt showing up since February 2005. The
deficiency agreement between Applicant and State Y bank is now in place, allowing
Applicant to implement the second portion of his plan to eliminate his remaining,
delinquent creditors by June 2008. 
Applicant receives limited mitigation under FC MC 20.b. (the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) because Applicant had no way of
knowing the purchaser was going to default on the mortgage only four months after the
purchase agreement was signed. However, the timing of the default suggests Applicant
should have devoted more effort in selecting a qualified candidate to purchase the
properties. Notwithstanding the default after only four months, Applicant is entitled to
limited mitigation under FC MC 20. b.
6
FC MC 20. c. (the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications the problem is being resolved or is under
control) applies in part even though Applicant has received no financial counseling. He
located all of his listed creditors, and executed a plan for paying off the deficiency
judgment. Putting the five-year plan in place on January 3, 2008 will allow him to
expedite his second plan to resolve the remaining debts, hopefully by June 2008.
FC MC 20.d. (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debt) also applies on a limited basis due to Applicant’s action in
resolving the deficiency judgment with State Y bank. Rather than succumbing to the
temptation of a bankruptcy discharge of all of his debts, Applicant chose to negotiate
with State Y bank in 2006 until November 28, 2007. He realizes a breach of one of the
terms of the deficiency agreement will mean he will have to pay the original deficiency
judgment of $29,717.00, rather than $18,000.00 under the agreement. The limited
mitigation Applicant receives under all four conditions satisfies his ultimate burden of
persuasion under each factual allegation and the FC guideline. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC)
My finding for Applicant under the FC guideline must still be evaluated in the
context of nine variables known as the whole person concept. In evaluating the
relevance of an individual’s conduct, the administrative judge should consider the
following factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time
of the conduct; (5) the extent to which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence
or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9)
the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. Applicant was 55 years old when he
resigned his job as a cost consultant for a defense contractor, and moved to FC to sell
real estate. He also viewed the career change as a chance to take some time off. It is
obvious the mortgage default and foreclosure on the properties would not have
occurred had he selected a more qualified purchaser. Rather than yielding to the
Chapter 7 route of eliminating the deficiency judgment and his SOR debt delinquencies,
he negotiated with the bank over a year and successfully worked out an agreement that
obligates him for the next five years. In that period, I am confident he will also meet the
remainder of his obligations under the SOR. He is 59 years old with almost 30 years in
the defense contractor industry. He has successfully met his job performance standards
with his current employer since September 2005. He is highly regarded by his
coworkers, supervisors, and friends, for his productivity on the job, as well as his work
to revitalize the community after the hurricane in September 2005. The FC guideline is
resolved in Applicant’s favor. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m. For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
