KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: In this instance it was not unreasonable for the Judge to find mitigation after a period
of over four years of abstinence from marijuana.  Favorable decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-03596.a1
DATE: 03/07/2008
DATE: March 7, 2008
In Re:
-----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-03596
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Kathleen E. Voelker, Esq.
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 10, 2007, DOHA issued a statement of reasons advising Applicant of the basis
“a demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates1
and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation;” Directive, Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 26(b).
2
for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On October 31, 2007, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Christopher Graham granted
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel timely appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
On appeal, Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s
application of Guideline H mitigating conditions and his whole-person analysis are arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  Finding no error, we affirm.  
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact:  Applicant is 26 years old.  He
holds a bachelor’s degree and has completed 70% of the requirements for a master’s degree.
Applicant smoked marijuana 16 times between May 1995 and May 2003, including three times after
he received a security clearance in January 2002.  Applicant has not used marijuana since May 2003.
He has changed his lifestyle since that time and avoids situations and persons that would bring him
into contact with drug use.  Applicant now has a stable relationship with a successful career woman
and is pursuing an advanced degree.  He is focused on his career and his future.  Applicant expressed
remorse and stated his intent not to use drugs in the future.  Three character witnesses testified to his
character and reliability.  
In finding favorably for Applicant under Guideline H, the Judge applied ¶ 26(b) of the
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines in mitigation of the government’s security concerns.   The factual1
findings above cover three of the mitigating conditions in ¶ 26(b).  With reference to the “appropriate
period of abstinence,” the Board has not articulated a “bright-line rule” for a required period of
abstinence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 98-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 1, 1999).  In this instance, it was
not unreasonable for the Judge to find mitigation after a period of over four years of abstinence. The
Judge’s conclusions regarding mitigation are consistent with a reasonable interpretation of the record
evidence and are neither arbitrary, capricious, nor contrary to law.
Likewise, the Judge’s whole-person analysis is supported by the record evidence.  Examining
the Judge’s decision in light of his findings and the record as a whole, the board concludes that he
articulates “a satisfactory explanation for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choices made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs, Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983))(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United
States,371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  We hold that the Judge’s favorable security clearance decision
is neither arbitrary, capricious, nor contrary to law.
Order
The Judge’s favorable security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
3
Signed: Jean E. Smallin  
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Dissenting Opinion of Jeffrey D. Billett, Board Member
I respectfully dissent from my colleagues’ decision to affirm the Judge’s decision in this case.
Because I believe that the Judge’s favorable credibility assessment of Applicant was flawed, and
because I believe that credibility assessment looms large in the Judge’s ultimate disposition of the
case, I vote to remand the case.
In the “Conclusions” portion of his decision, the Judge offered the following: “Applicant
listed his drug use in his security clearance application.  This is positive because candor with the
government about a person’s negatives is the crux of a trustworthiness determination.  If a person
discloses the adverse information about himself, it supports the notion of trustworthiness.”  A
reading of the Judge’s decision as a whole indicates that his acceptance of Applicant’s testimony and
statements about his regrets concerning his past marijuana use, the adjustments he made to avoid his
past lifestyle, and his intent not to use drugs in the future were based, to a significant degree, upon
his favorable credibility assessment of Applicant.  As the preceding quoted language from the
decision indicates, the Judge specifically pointed to the fact that Applicant had been forthright in his
disclosure of his past marijuana use when responding to government inquiries about that use.  This
finding of forthrightness in turn provided the basis for the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant was
entirely credible and trustworthy.  
The Judge’s conclusions notwithstanding, when the detailed evidence in the record is
considered, it indicates that Applicant may have been less than completely forthright when revealing
his marijuana use.  On  a 2002 security clearance application, Applicant revealed only marijuana use
between 1995 and 1998.  In a subsequent security clearance application completed in 2006,
Applicant reveals, for the first time, multiple marijuana uses that took place in 2001.  Additionally,
Applicant eventually admitted to illegally using marijuana a total of 16 times from 1995 to 2003,
4
while he disclosed only a total of 11 marijuana usages on the two security clearance applications he
submitted and in his answers to interrogatories concerning his drug use.
These omissions are more than minor discrepancies, especially in the context of a Judge’s
decision that specifically touts Applicant’s credibility based on his truthfulness in revealing his
marijuana use to the government.  The objective evidence suggests the real possibility that Applicant
was less than truthful with the government, yet the Judge does not mention the omissions or
discrepancies in his decision.  I would remand this case to the Judge and require him to reevaluate
his favorable credibility assessment of Applicant in light of the evidence suggesting a lack of candor,
and then require him to reconsider his overall favorable security clearance decision.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett  
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
