                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-04845 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guidelines H (drug 
involvement), E (Personal Conduct) and J (Criminal Conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 30, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him,1 pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 The SOR alleges security concerns under 
1Item 1 (Statement of Reasons (SOR), dated Oct. 30, 2007). Item I is the source for the facts in 
the remainder of this paragraph unless stated otherwise. 
 
2On Aug. 30, 2006, the Under Secretary of Defense (Intelligence) published a memorandum 
directing application of revised Adjudicative Guideline to all adjudications and other determinations made 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Guidelines H (Drug Involvement), E (Personal Conduct) and J (Criminal Conduct). The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue his security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on November 21, 2007, and elected 
to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of 
the file of relevant material (FORM), dated December 11, 2007, was provided to him on 
January 3, 2008, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.3 Applicant’s response was due on 
February 2, 2008. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to 
me on March 13, 2008. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested amendment of the SOR to add an allegation that 
various false statements on security clearance applications and to a National Security 
Agency (NSA) investigator violate 18 U.S.C. § 1001 (FORM at 2-3) in addition to being 
a Guideline E security concern as articulated in SOR ¶ 2. My copy of the SOR includes 
the requested amendment (Item 1 at SOR ¶ 3.a). Applicant did not object to the 
amendment, and the amendment is approved.  
 
Department Counsel offered supporting documents to show that Applicant’s 
admissions concerning the use of “whippets” involved inhalants (Items 10 and 11). 
Applicant did not object to admission of Items 10 and 11. Items 10 and 11 are admitted. 
I will take administrative notice4 of the information concerning use of whippets in note 8, 
infra.   
 
 
 
 
 
under the Directive and Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program 
(Regulation), dated Jan. 1987, as amended, in which the SOR was issued on or after Sep. 1, 2006. The 
revised Adjudicative Guidelines are applicable to Applicant’s case. 
 
3Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter, is dated Dec. 14, 2007; 
however, Applicant’s receipt is signed, and dated January 3, 2008. The DOHA transmittal letter informed 
Applicant that he had 30 days after Applicant’s receipt to submit information. 
 
4Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative 
proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 
at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for 
administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known or from 
government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen 
types of facts for administrative notice).  
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
Findings of Fact 
 
As to the SOR’s factual allegations, Applicant admitted in his response to the 
SOR all of the SOR’s allegations of illegal drug use in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c. He also 
admitted using drugs while holding a security clearance, SOR ¶ 2.a, and admitted his 
answers to questions on his security clearance applications concerning drug use were 
incorrect as alleged in SOR ¶ 2. However, he said he misinterpreted the questions. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old software engineer.5 In 1995 he received a masters 
degree in electrical engineering. He has no military service. He has never married and 
has no children. He has been employed for the last 17 years primarily as an electrical or 
software engineer.      
 
Drug Use6 
 
Applicant used marijuana from 1985 to 1994 about twice a month, and from 1994 
to December 2003, he used marijuana about three-to-four times per year. He purchased 
the marijuana on about half of the occasions that he used it. He used cocaine about five 
times from 1989 to August 2003. He purchased and used hallucinogenic mushrooms 
about five times from 1989 to 1997. He purchased and used LSD7 about five times from 
1987 to 1993. He purchased and used “whippets”8 twice, and used “whippets” an 
additional eight times without purchasing it from 1991 to 1995.  
 
5Item 4 (Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), dated July 13, 2006, will 
be referred to as a security clearance application in this decision) is the source for the facts in this 
paragraph, unless otherwise stated.  
 
6 Applicant admitted the drug use in this section to a representative of the Associate Directorate 
for Security and Counterintelligence (ADS&CI) on March 18, 2004. See Item 9 at 2, 11. On November 21, 
2007, he reaffirmed the drug use as described to the ADS&CI representative. See Item 2 (Applicant’s 
response to the SOR). Item 9 at 2, 11 and Item 2 are the sources for the facts in the Drug Use subsection 
of this decision, unless stated otherwise.  
  
7 Lysergic acid diethylamide is also commonly known as “LSD.” See Kimbrough v. United States, 
128 S. Ct. 558 (2007). LSD is classified as a Schedule I drug in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970.  
LSD is a potent hallucinogenic substance. See Drug Enforcement Administration website (Available at:   
http://www.fas.org/irp/agency/doj/dea/product/lsd/lsd-4.htm .) 
 
8Abuse of inhalants, such as nitrous oxide, is also referred to as use of “whippets,” and such use 
may, “cause a person to have slurred speech, difficulty maintaining balance, be slow to respond to 
questions, noises and speech, be immune to pain, and lapse into unconsciousness.” See, e.g., Peschko 
v. City of Camden, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 43871 (D.C. N.J. 2006).  See also Items 10 (Drug Enforcement 
Administration, Drugs of Abuse Extract, Chapter 9 (Inhalants) and 11 (National Institute of Drug Abuse, 
InfoFacts – Inhalants, dated May 2006).  The particular chemical Applicant inhaled is not included in the 
record. 
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
Applicant held a Secret clearance from December 1991 until 1997 while 
employed by the U.S. Army. He held a Top Secret clearance with access to Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI) from May 1997 to March 2000, while employed by a 
defense contractor. See Applicant’s Response to SOR ¶ 1.c.  
 
Falsification of Security Clearance Applications and 2003 NSA Interview 
    
 Applicant responded, “No” and failed to disclose or fully disclose his illegal drug 
possession and/or use in response to the following questions on his security clearance 
applications in 1991, 1996, 2003 and 2004: 
 
Question 25 of his application dated October 7, 1991, (Item 5) asked: 
 
25. Illegal Drugs and Alcohol--a. In the last 5 years, have you used, 
possessed, supplied, or manufactured any illegal drugs? When used 
without a prescription, illegal drugs include marijuana, cocaine, . . .  
hallucinogenics (LSD . . . ), [or] stimulants (cocaine . . . ) (NOTE: The 
information you provide in response to this question will not be provided 
for use in any criminal proceedings against you.) (Emphasis in original).  
 
Questions 24a and 24b of his application of December 5, 1996, (Item 6) asked: 
 
24. Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity 
You are required to answer the questions fully and truthfully, and your 
failure to do so could be grounds for an adverse employment decision or 
action against you, but neither your truthful responses nor information 
derived from your responses will be used as evidence against you in any 
subsequent criminal proceeding.   
 
a. Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have 
you illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, 
cocaine, crack cocaine, . . . [or] hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.)? 
 
b. Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance .  .  .  while 
possessing a security clearance . . . ?  
 
Questions 27 and 28 of his applications dated February 2, 2003, and March 18, 
2004, (Item 7) asked: 
 
27. Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity-Illegal Use of Drugs. 
Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you 
illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, 
crack cocaine, . . . [or] hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), . . . ? 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
28. Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity-Use in Sensitive 
Positions Have you EVER illegally used a controlled substance while . . . 
while possessing a security clearance . . . ? 
 
For Question 24 of his application dated May 4, 2006, and on July 13, 2006, 
(Item 4) he responded, "Yes" and disclosed his marijuana use from July 2000 
(estimated) to December 2002, approximately once every two months. Question 24 
asked for illegal drug use for other drugs in addition to marijuana: 
 
24. Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity a. Since the age of 16 or in 
the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any 
controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, . . . 
hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.)? 
 
During an interview with a National Security Agency (NSA) Investigator on 
September 3, 2003, as part of a background investigation pertaining to his eligibility for 
access to SCI information, Applicant denied any prior illegal drug use.9 On July 7, 2004, 
the NSA denied his request for eligibility for access to SCI information. On August 2, 
2004, and September 6, 2004, he appealed the NSA’s unfavorable determination. 
However, his appeals were subsequently denied.  
 
On January 10, 2007, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
interviewed Applicant, and he disclosed that he used marijuana from 2000 to 2002 
approximately once every two months with two friends, who were named in the 
interview.10 He said he ended his drug use in 2002.  Although he did not disclose the 
extent and variety of his drug abuse in the 2007 OPM interview, the summary is unclear 
about whether he was specifically asked about non-marijuana drug use, and marijuana 
use with others after 2002.     
  
On November 21, 2007, Applicant said that he did not disclose his illegal drug 
use because his interpretation at the time he completed his security clearance 
applications was that “using the listed substances in rare recreational circumstances 
was not what I constituted (sic) as ‘use.’ The most important lesson is that, although a 
misinterpretation, I now realize the lack of consideration of my activities and accuracy of 
the answers from the beginning inevitably cast doubt and the appearance of 
falsification.”  
 
 
 
 
9 Item 2 at 3, 5; Item 9 (NSA Clearance Adjudication, July 7, 2004) at 2 is the source for the facts 
in this paragraph.  
 
10 Item 8 at 4-5 is the source for the facts in this paragraph. He affirmed the accuracy of the OPM 
interview (as summarized in the OPM Report of Investigation) in his response to a DOHA interrogatory on 
Aug. 9, 2007. 
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”11 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).12 
11 See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “This is something 
less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the 
evidence does not prevent [a Judge’s] finding from being supported by substantial evidence.” Consolo v. 
Federal Maritime Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966). “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but 
less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
12 “The Administrative Judge [considers] the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and 
unfavorable, evaluate[s] Applicant’s past and current circumstances in light of pertinent provisions of the 
Directive, and decide[s] whether Applicant ha[s] met his burden of persuasion under Directive ¶ E3.1.15.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-10340 at 2 (App. Bd. July 6, 2006).  
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) 
 
Guideline ¶ 24 articulates the Government’s concern concerning drug13 
involvement stating: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Three drug involvement disqualifying conditions could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse,”14 “illegal drug possession,” and 
13Guideline ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana and LSD are Schedule I controlled substances. See Sch. I (c)(9) and I(c)(10), 
respectively.  See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on 
Schedule I). Cocaine is a Schedule II controlled substance.  See Sch. II(a)(4).   
 
14 Guideline ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
“any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.” AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 
25(g). The other five disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 25 are not applicable.  These 
three disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant used a variety of illegal drugs 
from 1985 to December 2003, including marijuana, cocaine, hallucinogenic mushrooms, 
LSD and whippets. He used each of these illegal drugs at least once while holding a 
security clearance. His illegal drug use breached the government’s trust encompassed 
by holding a security clearance and raises especially serious security concerns. 
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence of these three disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation. AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and, 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 26(a) by showing that the 
drug offenses happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.”  ISCR 
Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board 
determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last 
use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”15 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) does not fully apply because Applicant’s last illegal drug use was in 
December 2003, which is still sufficiently recent to remain a concern. His overall illegal 
drug use lasted approximately 18 years, and involved numerous uses of marijuana, and 
several other illegal drugs with a much lesser frequency.16 I am not fully convinced that 
he ended his drug use in December 2003 because he did not provide any corroboration 
that his drug use ended.17 His failure to present corroboration about his rehabilitation 
from medical/psychiatric personnel, co-workers, neighbors, family or friends is a factor 
in this decision.18 Based on all the facts and circumstances, including the falsifications 
15 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing.  The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy.  For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the Administrative Judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The Administrative Judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an Administrative Judge stating: 
 
The Administrative Judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history 
of improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the 
security clearance process.  That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times 
a year from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the 
illegal purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
16 In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the Administrative Judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse.  
 
17 See whole person analysis, infra. See ISCR Case No. 04-07360 at 2, 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 
2006) (indicating when a mitigating condition cannot be fully applied, “some credit” is still available under 
that same mitigating condition). 
 
18Administrative judges “must look at the record for corroboration of Applicant’s testimony.” ISCR 
Case 02-03186 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006). Moreover, a judge may consider “Applicant’s failure to 
present documentary evidence in corroboration of his denials and explanations.” ISCR Case 01-20579 at 
5 (App. Bd. Apr. 14, 2004) (holding Applicant’s failure to provide reasonably available corroborative 
evidence may be used in common sense evaluation to determine whether Applicant’s claims are 
established). In ISCR Case 01-02677 at 7 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 2002), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                          
of his security clearance applications, his less than full candor in his 2003 NSA 
interview, and his 2007 less-than-credible explanation in his response to the SOR 
concerning the security clearance falsifications, he has not met his burden of 
establishing that his drug use will not recur. Because he may again use illegal drugs, his 
current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment is not completely restored.   
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. Although he has abstained from drug abuse since December 
2003, he did not provide “a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.” Guideline ¶ 26(b) is not applicable.  
AG ¶ 26(c) is not applicable because his abuse of marijuana did not follow an 
illness, and marijuana was never prescribed for him. AG ¶ 26(d) is not applicable 
because he has not completed a prescribed drug treatment program, and there has not 
been a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.  
In sum, Applicant ended his drug abuse in December 2003. However, his 
credibility about abstaining from illegal drug use is damaged by his submission of 
multiple falsified security clearance applications. He lied in his 2003 NSA interview. 
Although the motivations to stop using drugs are evident,19 he did not disclose any 
internal motivation to refrain from drug abuse. He has not shown or demonstrated a 
sufficient track record of no drug abuse.   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
 
While lack of corroboration can be a factor in evaluating the reliability or weight of 
evidence, lack of corroboration does not automatically render a piece of evidence 
suspect, unreliable, or incredible. . . . Evidence that lacks corroboration must be 
evaluated in terms of its intrinsic believability and in light of all the other evidence of 
record, including evidence that tends to support it as well as evidence that tends to 
detract from it.   
 
19Retention of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free.  
  
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and, 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose or fully disclose his illegal drug possession and/or use 
on his security clearance applications in 1991, 1996, 2003, 2004, and 2006. He falsely 
denied illegal drug use during a 2003 NSA interview. In 2007, his claimed rationale in 
his SOR response for providing false statements on his security clearance applications 
was because his drug use was “in rare recreational circumstances” and not what he 
considered to be drug “use.”  He has held a security clearance for many years, and has 
a masters degree. He is intelligent, well educated, and mature. His explanation is not 
credible. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) both apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and, 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 17 apply. Applicant’s falsification of his 
security clearance application on July 13, 2006, is recent.20 He did not promptly inform 
the government of the falsification. He attempted to mislead a security investigation. He 
did not receive counseling designed to improve his conduct.  Applicant’s claim that his 
illegal drug use was recreational and therefore not reportable to security officials is not 
credible. No one advised him to falsify his security clearance applications or to lie to a 
NSA investigator. He admitted the false statements at issue, and the falsification 
allegations are all substantiated. His statement that he learned from his mistakes does 
not convince me that similar misbehavior is unlikely to recur. His falsifications cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Security concerns 
pertaining to his personal conduct are not mitigated. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying, ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime,” and ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.”  SOR ¶ 3.a alleges that Applicant violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001 
by falsifying his security clearance applications in 1991, 1996, 2003, 2004, and 2006. 
Applicant deliberately provided false information. He falsely denied illegal drug use 
during a 2003 NSA interview.   
 
For a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 to occur, the falsification must be material. 
The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 
20 The falsifications cannot be considered in isolation or piecemeal. The Judge is required to 
evaluate the record evidence as a whole and reach a reasonable conclusion as to the recency of his 
conduct. ISCR Case No. 03-02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 4 
(App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When the falsifications are considered in connection with the falsifications, the 
personal conduct in SOR ¶ 2 cannot be mitigated under AG ¶ 16(c). His misconduct continues to cast 
doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
(1995): as a statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of 
influencing, the decision making body to which it is addressed.” See also United States 
v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 2004).    
 
  If Applicant had provided accurate answers on his security clearance 
applications, his accurate answers are capable of influencing the government to deny 
his security clearance, as indicated in the Drug Involvement section of this Analysis. 
His illegal drug use is sufficiently recent and serious21 to jeopardize approval of his 
security clearance. Making a false statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, 
a felony (the maximum potential sentence includes confinement for five years and a 
$10,000 fine). Accordingly, AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply because Applicant violated 18 
U.S.C. § 1001.   
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and, 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) – 31(d) do not apply. Applicant’s false statement occurred on his 
2006 security clearance application, which is recent. It casts doubt on Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. He was not pressured or coerced 
into making his false statements. His expression that he has learned from his mistake is 
undercut by his incredible explanation in his SOR response that he did not believe his 
drug use was really drug use. He admitted making the false statements, and for the 
reasons stated previously, the offense is substantiated.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
21 In Applicant’s case, this includes aspects such as, the seriousness of the misconduct, and the 
number of violations of the law, regardless of whether the misconduct resulted in an arrest or conviction. 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                          
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
Applicant earned a masters degree in electrical engineering. He has been 
employed for the last 17 years primarily as an electrical or software engineer, working 
for the U.S. Army and government contractor. His record of good employment (aside 
from falsifying his security clearance applications and lying to an NSA investigator) 
weighs in his favor. This shows some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
The evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct is more substantial. 
Applicant used a variety of illegal drugs from 1985 to December 2003, including 
marijuana, cocaine, hallucinogenic mushrooms, LSD and whippets. He used each of 
these illegal drugs at least once while holding a security clearance. He failed to fully 
disclose his illegal drug possession and/or use on his security clearance applications in 
1991, 1996, 2003, 2004, and 2006, and during a 2003 NSA interview. His decisions not 
to fully disclose his drug use were deliberate and intentional. His falsifications and drug 
use were knowledgeable, voluntary, and not isolated. He was sufficiently mature to be 
fully responsible for his conduct. Criminal misbehavior and drug use is not prudent or 
responsible. His falsification of his 2006 security clearance is particularly aggravating, 
and weighs most heavily against granting or continuing his security clearance. He did 
not receive counseling or therapy, and may not have a clear understanding about how 
to avoid problematic situations and why he engaged in the misconduct. I have persistent 
and serious doubts about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
  Applicant’s criminal misconduct calls into question his current ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the 
whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns pertaining to drug 
involvement, personal conduct and criminal conduct.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”22 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
22See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
15 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                            
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a(1) to 1.a(5):  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b(1) to 1.b(4):  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c(1) to 1.c(2):  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a to 2.g:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.h:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.i:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
