 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-08754 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on September 23, 2005.  
On September 18, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and 
E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 8, 2007 and answered 
it on November 21, 2007. On November 28, 2007, he requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge.  The date of DOHA’s receipt of the request for a hearing is not 
reflected in the record.  Department Counsel was ready to proceed on December 7, 
2007, and the case was assigned to me on December 12, 2007. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on January 18, 2008, scheduling the hearing for February 11, 2008. I 
 
2 
 
 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were 
admitted in evidence without objection, except for part of GX 3, which was excluded for 
the reasons set out below. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s 
request to keep the record open until February 25, 2008, to enable him to submit 
additional documentary evidence. Applicant timely submitted AX B and C, and they 
were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s response to AX B and C is 
attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on February 19, 2008. The record closed on February 25, 2008. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Evidentiary and Procedural Rulings 
 
Personal Representative 
 
 Applicant stated at the hearing that a union representative had agreed to 
represent him but could not attend the hearing because of a medical appointment (Tr. 
5). I informed Applicant that I would postpone the hearing if necessary to enable his 
personal representative to attend. Applicant responded that he preferred to continue 
with the hearing (Tr. 6). Based on his affirmative waiver of his right to the assistance of 
his personal representative, I conducted the hearing with the Applicant representing 
himself. 
 
Unauthenticated Report of Investigation 
 
 Department Counsel offered GX 3, DOHA interrogatories that included a 
personal subject interview extracted from a report of investigation, without calling an 
authenticating witness as required by the Directive ¶ E3.1.20. I explained the 
authentication requirement to Applicant, and he declined to waive it (Tr. 37).  I excluded 
the part of GX 3 containing the personal subject interview (Tr. 38).  However, I permitted 
Department Counsel to cross-examine Applicant about the interview (Tr. 84-87). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶1.b, 1.d 
through1.l, and 1.n.  He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.m, 1.o, and 2.a.  At the hearing he 
admitted all the delinquent debts alleged except SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.k (Tr. 43). His 
admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings 
of fact. I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a federal contractor.  He has worked for 
his current employer since August 2004. He was unemployed from May 2003 to August 
2004.  He served in the U.S. Army Reserve from December 1984 to April 2003. During 
his last year in the Army Reserve, he was on full-time active duty, serving as an 
ammunition sergeant (Tr. 44-45).  He received a security clearance in June 1994 and 
held it until it was suspended after issuance of the SOR (Tr. 9).   
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was married in October 2001.  He has no children from this marriage 
but pays child support of about $100 a month for a 13-year-old son from a previous 
relationship (Tr. 50-51). His spouse does not work outside the home. 
 
 Around 1990, Applicant moved in with his seriously ill grandmother to care for 
her. Around 2000, his grandmother was placed in a nursing home by her children, and 
he was forced to move out when her home was sold (Tr. 94). While living with his 
grandmother, he lost his job because he was taking too much time off to care for her 
(Tr. 95-96). The combination of losing his place to live and losing his job caused him to 
fall behind on his debts, and two cars he owned were repossessed (Tr. 94-95). 
 
 After moving out of his grandmother’s house, Applicant rented a room for three or 
four months from the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a (Tr. 67). Because she kept 
increasing the rent, Applicant moved out. After they disagreed about whether Applicant 
owed any rent, she kept some of Applicant’s property and eventually obtained a 
judgment against him.  Applicant considers the rent paid because she kept his property.  
He has had no contact with her and no recollection of any notices regarding the 
judgment (Tr. 53-55).  He did not provide any documentation of his dispute about the 
rent.   
 
Applicant has not resolved the debts alleged in the SOR, except for SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 
1.j, 1.k, and 1.m.  At the hearing, he presented a money order for the medical bill 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d and stated he intended to deliver it immediately after the hearing, 
and obtain a receipt for the payment (Tr. 59-60). The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 
1.k appear to be the same debt (Tr. 22), and it was settled after the hearing (GX 5; AX B 
at 2).  After the hearing, Applicant also presented evidence that the telephone bill 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m had been resolved.   
 
 The evidence concerning the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR is summarized 
in the table below. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Judgment (Rent) $500 Unpaid GX 4; GX 5 
1.b Medical $1,249 Unpaid GX 4 
1.c Credit card $647 Unpaid GX 4 
1.d Medical $133 Paid GX 4; AX A; Tr. 59-60 
1.e Credit card $1,494 Unpaid GX 4 
1.f Car loan $2,409 Unpaid GX 4; GX 5 
1.g Credit card $5,252 Unpaid GX 4 
1.h Personal loan $4,070 Unpaid GX 4 
1.i Personal loan $1,768 Unpaid GX 4 
1.j Credit card $635 Settled GX 5; AX B at 2 
1.k Credit card $561 Same debt as ¶ 1.j GX 5; AX B at 2; Tr. 22 
1.l Medical $280 Unpaid GX 5 
1.m Telephone $100 Resolved AX B at 3 
1.n Medical $68 Unpaid GX 5 
 
4 
 
 
 
 On his security clearance application, Applicant answered “yes” to question 28a, 
asking if he had been more than 180 days delinquent on any debts in the last seven 
years, and he answered “yes” to question 28b, asking if he was currently more than 90 
days delinquent on any debts.  He disclosed a delinquent credit card account and the 
delinquent medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, but he did not disclose the delinquent 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.k (a duplication of 1.j), 1.m, 
and 1.n.  He admitted he understood the two questions about delinquent debts and 
testified he did not know why he failed to list his other delinquent debts (Tr. 81-82). 
 
 After Applicant submitted his security clearance application, he was interviewed 
by a security investigator. This interview is the basis for the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.o. 
which alleges, “[Y]ou said that your financial situation could possibly be used against 
you for the purpose of blackmail and coercion.” I excluded the report of investigation 
containing the investigator’s summary of the interview. However, at the hearing 
Applicant testified the investigator asked if he could be blackmailed, and he responded: 
“It could be possible but it ain’t gonna happen on my part.  I can guarantee it.” He 
testified his delinquent debts would have a negative impact on his reputation among his 
supervisors and coworkers if they knew about them (Tr. 86-87). 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories in September 2007, Applicant submitted a 
personal financial statement reflecting net monthly income of $1,400 and monthly 
expenses of about $770, leaving a net monthly remainder of about $630 (GX 3 at 6). 
However, his testimony at the hearing indicates this personal financial statement is 
inaccurate. He testified his net pay is about $2,800 per month (Tr. 78). Although he 
listed his car expenses on the personal financial statement as about $150 per month, he 
testified he spends about $400 per month to buy gas for his large four-wheel-drive truck 
(Tr. 79).  His financial statement does not list his car loan payment of $308 per month 
(Tr. 76-77). Based on his testimony, it appears that his net monthly remainder is around 
$1,300. His financial statement reflects no payments on the debts alleged in the SOR.   
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
 
5 
 
 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges fourteen delinquent debts totaling more than $19,000 (SOR ¶ 
1.a-1.n). It also alleges Applicant admitted during a personal subject interview that his 
financial situation could possibly be used against him for blackmail and coercion (SOR ¶ 
1.o).  The security concern relating to Guideline F is set out in AG & 18 as follows: 
 
 
6 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is 
raised where there is Aindebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a 
realistic plan to pay the debt.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending 
beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@  
Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e). AG ¶ 19(b) is not raised 
because there is no evidence of frivolous or irresponsible spending. 
 
 Although Applicant did not provide a receipt for payment of the $133 medical bill 
for which he presented a money order at the hearing, I have taken Applicant at his word 
and resolved SOR ¶ 1.d in his favor. 
 
 The same debt is alleged twice in SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k.  When the same conduct 
is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations 
should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 
21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I resolve SOR ¶ 1.k. in 
Applicant=s favor. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.o, alleging Applicant’s admission that his financial situation could 
possibly be used to blackmail or coerce him, does not allege any conduct encompassed 
by Guideline F. It merely sets out Applicant’s acknowledgment of the nexus between 
financial problems and security concerns. Applicant’s acknowledgment has no 
independent security significance. Furthermore, the allegation was based on the report 
of investigation that I excluded for lack of authentication.  I resolve SOR ¶ 1.o for 
Applicant. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 
7 
 
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
 The first prong (“so long ago”) is not established because Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are not yet resolved. The second prong (“so infrequent”) is not established 
because he has numerous delinquent debts. The third prong (“unlikely to recur”) also is 
not established because Applicant is still financially overextended and has not resolved 
many of his delinquent debts.  I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. 
 
 Applicant’s loss of a rent-free home and his extended period of unemployment 
were conditions beyond his control. However, he has not contacted most of his creditors 
or attempted to negotiate with them, even though he has been employed continuously 
since August 2004. He has not sought professional assistance through credit 
counseling services. I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@  AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@  ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under 
pressure of qualifying for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant had resolved only one debt, the telephone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m, 
before learning his security clearance was in jeopardy.  He settled the medical bill 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b on the day of the hearing, and the credit card debt in SOR ¶¶ 1.j 
and 1.k after the hearing. He has done nothing regarding the other debts, even though 
some of them are for small amounts. For example, the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.l and 1.n are for $280 and $68, respectively. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigating by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
disputed the judgment for rent at the hearing, but provided little information about the 
basis for the dispute and no documentation. He has not disputed any of the other debts. 
I conclude AG ¶ 20(e) is not established.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to disclose all his delinquent debts 
on his security clearance application.  The concern under this guideline is set out in AG 
¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.”  AG ¶ 16(a). 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s 
state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 
02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).   
 
 Applicant understood the questions about delinquent debts, as evidenced by his 
disclosure of two delinquent debts. He had no explanation for omitting the rest of his 
delinquent debts. I conclude AG ¶ 16(a) is raised, shifting the burden to Applicant to 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). There is no evidence Applicant made any effort to correct his 
omissions until he was interviewed by a security investigator in November 2006 and 
 
9 
 
 
confronted with the evidence of his delinquent debts. I conclude AG ¶ 17(a) is not 
established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigating by showing “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c).  
Applicant’s intentional omission of relevant and material information from his SF 86 was 
a felony, violating 18 U.S.C. § 1001. It involved his current application to continue his 
clearance. Although it is the only instance of its kind in his record, it raises doubt about 
his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. 
No other enumerated mitigating conditions under this guideline are established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult. He has been gainfully employed since August 2004.  
He earns a modest income and appears to have a net monthly remainder available for 
debt payments. Some of his debts are for small amounts, e.g, SOR ¶¶ 1.l for $280 and 
1.n for $68, but they were unpaid as of the date of the hearing. He has not sought credit 
counseling and has no firm plan for resolving his debts. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
