 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 07-09236 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on October 19, 
2006. On November 7, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to 
deny his application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 13, 2007; answered it 
on November 27, 2007; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
received the request on November 30, 2007. Department Counsel was ready to 
proceed on December 7, 2007, and the case was assigned to me on December 12, 
2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 18, 2007, scheduling the hearing for 
 
2 
 
 
February 12, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. GX 5 was not admitted, for the 
reasons set out below. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A and B, which were admitted without objection. I granted Applicant’s 
request to keep the record open until February 29, 2008 to enable him to submit 
additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AX C through F. AX D was unsigned, 
and Applicant was given additional time to obtain a signed copy. He submitted AX G 
and H (the signed version of AX D) on March 6, 2008, and they were admitted without 
objection. Department Counsel’s responses to AX C through H are attached to the 
record as Hearing Exhibits (HX) I and II. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on February 22, 2008. The record closed on March 6, 2008. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Unauthenticated Report of Investigation 
 
Department Counsel offered GX 5, a personal subject interview extracted from a 
report of investigation, without calling an authenticating witness as required by the 
Directive ¶ E3.1.20. I explained the authentication requirement to Applicant, and he 
declined to waive it (Tr. 36-38). I did not admit GX 5.  
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 
1.h, and 1.i, to allege the specific collection agencies to which the medical debts alleged 
had been transferred. Applicant did not object, and I granted the motion to amend (Tr. 
27-28). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the delinquent debts alleged 
under Guideline F, except the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p. He denied the conduct alleged 
under Guideline E. His admissions in his answer to the SOR and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact. I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old help desk technician employed by a federal contractor.  
He has worked for his current employer since October 2007. He worked for another 
federal contractor from July 2006 to October 2007 (Tr. 54-55). He was married in 
December 1990. He has a 22-year-old stepdaughter and two daughters, ages 16, and 
15.  He received a security clearance in April 1991. 
 
 Applicant began accumulating delinquent debts around 2002 or 2003, when the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.n, 1.o, and 1.s became delinquent. His financial 
problems were exacerbated when both he and his wife were laid off. He was 
unemployed for about two years, ending with his employment in July 2006. His wife was 
 
3 
 
 
laid off from her job in late 2004 after working for eight years (GX 2 at 3; Tr. 96), and 
she was unemployed for about two and a half years (Tr. 55). In response to DOHA 
financial interrogatories, he attributed his financial problems to the long periods of 
unemployment suffered by his wife and himself, college tuition for his stepdaughter, and 
the cost of his stepdaughter’s wedding (GX 2 at 6). He suffered an injury in June 2007 
and had no medical insurance, resulting in the medical debt of $1,282 alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.f.  
 
In a personal financial statement executed in October 2007, Applicant listed net 
monthly income of $3,082, monthly expenses of $2,550, no debt payments, and a net 
remainder of $532 (GX 2 at 5). This personal financial statement did not include any 
income earned by his spouse. 
 
On November 27, 2007, the day Applicant answered the SOR, he enrolled in a 
credit counseling service (Enclosure to Answer to SOR). The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b, 1.f, 1.n, 1.o, 1.q, 1.r, and 1.x are being managed through this service. The 
credit counseling service will receive $443 each month, beginning in February 2008, 
which will be automatically deducted from Applicant’s bank account (AX B).  His debt 
payment plan is designed to pay off the delinquent debts in about 39 months (Tr. 50). 
 
 Applicant purchased a home with his mother-in-law and father-in-law in May 
2003. His in-laws obtained the mortgage, but Applicant and his spouse pay the 
mortgage, taxes, and upkeep on the house (Tr. 49).  His monthly mortgage payment is 
$350, plus taxes of about $1,595 per year. His payments on the home have been made 
on time (AX H). 
 
 When Applicant executed his security clearance application on November 19, 
2006, he answered “yes” to question 27b, asking if he had his wages garnished or had 
any property repossessed in the last seven years, and he disclosed a repossession in 
May 2005, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He did not disclose that two vehicles were 
repossessed.  
 
Applicant answered “no” to question 27c, asking if any tax liens were placed 
against his property in the last seven years. He did not disclose the state tax lien 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p. The lien was imposed after Applicant moved from one state to 
another in the same tax year and was liable for taxes in both states.  He trusted a friend 
to prepare his tax returns.  He testified he was unaware of the tax lien until he received 
the Statement of Reasons (Tr. 76, 82).  
 
Applicant also answered “no” to question 28a, asking if he had been more than 
180 days delinquent on any debt in the last seven years, and question 28b, asking if he 
was currently more than 90 days delinquent on any debt.  He did not disclose the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h through 1.u. After giving several vague reasons for not 
disclosing the debts, he admitted he answered “no” to questions 28a and 28b to avoid 
the hassle of obtaining the information about all his debts (Tr. 92-93). 
 
 
4 
 
 
 The evidence concerning the debts alleged in the SOR is summarized in the 
table below. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Car Repossession $7,511 Credit Counseling AX B 
1.b Cable Service $367 Credit Counseling AX B 
1.c Medical $81 Uncertain, no 
documentation 
Tr. 66 
1.d Medical $199 Unpaid Tr. 67 
1.e Medical $75 Uncertain, no 
documentation 
Tr. 68 
1.f Medical $1,282 Credit Counseling AX B 
1.g Cell Phone $671 Unpaid Tr. 69 
1.h Medical $100 Paid AX A; Tr. 70 
1.i Medical $75 Paid GX 4; AX A; Tr. 70 
1.j Unknown $80 Uncertain, no 
documentation 
Tr. 70-71 
1.k Trash Collection $51 Uncertain, no 
documentation 
Tr. 71 
1.l Trash Collection $75 Paid GX 2, 3, and 4; AX A;  
Tr. 70 
1.m Credit Card $855 Credit Counseling AX B; Tr. 72 
1.n Credit Card $1,220 Credit Counseling AX B; Tr. 73-74 
1.o Utilities $1,048 Credit Counseling AX B 
1.p State tax lien $481 Paid AX A; Tr. 70 
1.q Payday loan $470 Credit Counseling AX B; Tr. 77 
1.r Credit card $685 Same debt as l.n AX B; Tr. 23 
1.s Insurance $793 Unpaid, disputed, 
no documentation 
Tr. 78 
1.t Car repossession $4,899 Car sold, balance 
unpaid 
Tr. 79 
1.u Car repossession $958 Car sold, balance 
unpaid 
Tr. 80 
1.v Medical $1,282 Same debt as 1.f Tr. 23, 81 
1.x1 Cable Service $367 Same debt as 1.b Tr. 23, 64, 81 
1.y Medical $70 Uncertain, may be 
same debt as 1.c 
AX B 
1.z Medical $607 Unpaid,  AX B; Tr. 82 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
                                                          
1 There is no paragraph 1.w in the SOR. 
 
5 
 
 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
 
6 
 
 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges 25 delinquent debts. Applicant admitted all the debts except for 
the state tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.p. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG 
¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is 
raised where there is Aindebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a 
realistic plan to pay the debt.@ AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@ AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending 
beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@ AG ¶ 
19(g) is raised by Afailure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.@   
 
 The same debts are alleged twice in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.x, 1.f and 1.v, and 1.n 
and 1.r. Applicant suspected the medical debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.y were the same 
debts, but he was uncertain and could provide no documentation. When the same 
conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative 
allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). Accordingly, I resolve SOR ¶¶ 1.r, 
1.v, and 1.x. in Applicant=s favor. 
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debts raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e).  AG ¶ 
19(b) is not raised because there is no evidence of “frivolous or irresponsible spending.”  
AG ¶ 19(g) is not raised because there is no evidence that the state tax lien was 
imposed for failure to file a return or for filing a fraudulent return.  The evidence shows 
only that the taxes due were not paid. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ AG ¶ 20(a). This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong.  It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@ If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
 The first prong (“so long ago”) is not established because several of Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are not yet resolved. The second prong (“so infrequent”) is not 
established because he has numerous delinquent debts. The third prong (“unlikely to 
recur”) also is not established because Applicant is still financially overextendedand has 
not resolved several of his delinquent debts. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. 
 
 The long periods of unemployment suffered by Applicant and his wife were 
conditions beyond his control. However, some of the debts alleged in the SOR were 
delinquent before they became unemployed. For those debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.n, 1.o, 
1.s), AG ¶ 20(b) is inapplicable.  For the debts that became delinquent because of their 
unemployment, the evidence shows that Applicant returned to work in July 2006, but he 
did not begin a systematic program for resolving his delinquent debts until November 
2007, after he received the SOR. Thus, I conclude the second prong, responsible 
conduct, is not established.  Accordingly, I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is not established.   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition also has two prongs that may be either disjunctive or conjunctive.  It 
the person has received counseling, as in this case, it must also be shown that there 
are clear indications the problem is being resolved or under control.  
 
8 
 
 
 
 Applicant’s enrollment in a credit counseling program is a promising first step.  
However, he receives only limited mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c), because his program 
only applies to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, and 1.q.   
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@  AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@ ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under 
pressure of qualifying for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant has paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.l, and 1.p, and he has 
initiated a payment plan to pay the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, 
and 1.q.  AG ¶ 20(d) is established for these debts. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing Athe 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.@ AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
suggested that the insurance debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.s was disputed, and he was 
uncertain about the debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, 1.e, 1.j, 1.k, and 1.y, but he offered no 
evidence of a legitimate basis for any disputes. I conclude AG ¶ 20(e) is not 
established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges Applicant falsified his answer to question 27c on his security 
clearance application by deliberately failing to disclose a state tax lien. It also alleges he 
falsified his answer to questions 28a and 28b by deliberately failing to disclose his 
delinquent debts. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire.” AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s 
 
9 
 
 
state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 
02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
 Applicant’s failure to disclose that two vehicles were repossessed in May 2005 is 
not alleged in the SOR.  Both vehicles apparently were repossessed at the same time.  I 
am satisfied he did not intentionally omit relevant and material information in response 
to question 27b. Likewise, I found his explanation for not disclosing the state tax lien in 
response to question 27c plausible and credible. However, I find that he intentionally 
omitted his delinquent debts in response to questions 28a and 28b, because he 
admitted he omitted them to avoid the hassle of obtaining and providing the information 
about them. Thus, I conclude the disqualifying condition is AG ¶ 16(a) is raised, shifting 
the burden to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). There is no evidence of any effort by Applicant to correct the 
record before he was confronted with the evidence of his delinquent debts.  I conclude 
AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigating by showing “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c).  
Applicant’s intentional omission of relevant and material information from his SF 86 was 
not a minor dereliction. It was a felony, violating 18 U.S.C. § 1001. It was recent, 
involving his current application for a clearance. It did not occur under “unique 
circumstances,” but rather as part of a routine security clearance application.  Although 
it is the only instance of its kind in his record, it raises doubt about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. No other 
enumerated mitigating conditions under this guideline are established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
 
10 
 
 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guidelines F and E above, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult, gainfully employed and devoted to his job and his 
family. Now that his stepdaughter has graduated from college and married, his financial 
obligations are lessened. He has taken significant steps to resolve his debts, but many 
of them are still unresolved. His lack of candor on his security clearance application 
raises serious questions about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.o:     For Applicant 
 
11 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.p:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.s:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.t:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.u:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.v:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.x:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.y:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.z:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
