   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 07-04373 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se                 
         
                               
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Clearance is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Applications (SF 86), on April 12, 
2005, and September 27, 2005. On October 19, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guidelines F (Financial) for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 5, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on December 17, 2007, and I received the case assignment on December 20, 2007. 
 
2 
                                      
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 14, 2008, for a hearing on January 31, 
2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
At the hearing, the government offered four exhibits (Exh.) which were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant submitted five exhibits which were admitted without 
objection. He and one witness testified on his behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on February 14, 2008. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open 
until March 14, 2008, to submit additional evidence. Two additional documents were 
received on February 14, 2008, and admitted without objection. Based upon a review of 
the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
Notice 
The hearing notice was dated 15 days before the hearing date. I advised Applicant 
of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice before the hearing. Applicant 
affirmatively waived his right to the 15 days notice and indicated he was ready to proceed 
(Tr. 10).  
Findings of Fact 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted twelve of the sixteen allegations in 
the SOR relating to approximately $29,000 in delinquent debts. He denied the other four 
allegations. 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a government contractor working as a 
propellant mechanic since March 2005. He supervises ten people and has never held a 
security clearance. He was married in 1997 and he and his wife bought a home and did 
not budget wisely. He was injured soon thereafter and was out of work for nine months. 
Their debts continued to grow and he was laid off from his former job in 2003 and took a 
a low paying hourly job thereafter. He is now fully employed and earning more than he 
did with his two former employers.  
Applicant is well regarded by his present employer and his former employers for 
his skill and dedication (Exhs. A, B, and F, and Tr. 62-65). He also has several excellent 
character references from people who know him well (Exhs. C, D, and E). His wife and 
he are expecting their first child after several years of working with a fertility clinic. They 
acquired another home in 2004 from a friend when they were unable to obtain financing. 
The delinquent debts arose from two automobile repossessions, credit cards used 
for household and trade expenses, and medical bills. A summary of the debts and their 
status based on testimony reveals the following (Tr. 30-48).  
 
3 
                                      
 
1. The two automobile repossessions constitute the largest of the delinquent debts 
(SOR ¶ ¶ 1.b. and j. for $12,777 and $5,857) which occurred in 1997 and are unresolved  
but probably written off by the creditors.  
2. There are five credit card debts used for living expenses listed on the SOR but 
there are two duplicates which he denied in his answer (SOR ¶ ¶ 1.a. and g, and e. and 
f.). Thus, these four allegations are for only two debts of $949 and $793. The remaining 
one is for $749 (SOR ¶ 1.d.). None have been paid.  
3. A single debt for $2,354 (SOR ¶ 1.c.) was for tools used in a former job from 
which he was laid off. He has not made payments on the debt since 2003. 
4, There are six medical debts of over $3,000 (SOR ¶ ¶ 1.k.-p.), the largest for 
$2,500 is for a fertility clinic used by Applicant’s wife (SOR ¶ 1.k.). Applicant thought this 
bill should have been covered by insurance but the claim was denied. The others are for 
small amounts and some have been delinquent for since 2004 and 2005. None have 
been paid.   
5. He denied two debts one of which for $183 he had no recollection of but had not 
called the number listed on the credit report to find out (SOR ¶ 1.h.). The second one for 
$968 (SOR ¶ 1. i.) was for dish network equipment which he returned to the provider. 
Applicant’s financial situation is now stable and he is current on expenses. His wife 
is the beneficiary of a trust established by her father which pays her $650 per month. He 
recently received $30,000 by inheritance from his father. The funds from the inheritance 
were used to pay the balance due on an expensive automobile he purchased before he 
received the inheritance (Tr. 52). He has also purchased a truck for $25,000 for which he 
pays $255 per month by payroll withholding (Tr. 51). The trust fund payments to his wife 
are placed in a savings account when received and now total approximately $10,000 (Tr. 
72). 
Policies 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
4 
                                      
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The Applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) listing multiple prerequisites for 
access to classified or sensitive information.  
Analysis 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying. 
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated the delinquent debts cited in the SOR and was 
unable or unwilling to pay the obligations for several years. The evidence shows that he 
has been able pay many, if not all, of the debts for the past year yet very little has been 
 
5 
                                      
 
done to even contact the creditors. Thus, the evidence clearly raises these potentially 
disqualifying conditions. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Most of Applicant=s 
financial problems arose in the past ten years ago. He now has a job which pays a 
reasonable salary and his wife is employed. It seems likely that he will be able to resolve 
the debts over time but all of them, some with significant amounts and others with small 
amounts, remain unsatisfied. While he has excellent references and the support of his 
employer, the delinquent debts does raise security concerns under the Guideline F. 
Under AG & 20(b), the security concern may be mitigating where Athe conditions 
that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss 
of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As 
noted above, some of the financial problems arose from his medical problems and 
periods of unemployment and reduced income. However, he has been employed with a 
better income for three years with no payment or settlement of any of delinquent debts. 
Rather than doing so, Applicant used the funds from his father’s inheritance to pay the 
balance on an expensive automobile and his wife is saving all the payments from her 
trust.  
Evidence that the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control is 
a potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. Applicant recently started credit counseling with the aim of 
resolving the delinquent debts but this only began after the hearing in this matter (Exh. 
G). While laudable, it is not timely. While it not necessary for mitigation to apply that all of 
the delinquent debts be resolved, it is necessary that a significant portion of this many 
debts be settled or paid. Even this test has not been met. Not a single debt listed in the 
SOR has been paid. Thus, I conclude that the mitigating conditions do not apply. 
 The debts cited in the SOR remain outstanding except for two (SOR ¶ 1.e. and f.) 
that are duplicates. Two of the four debts that he denied are duplicates and are mitigated. 
However, the dish network and fertility clinic debts (SOR ¶ ¶ 1.i. and k.) appear to be 
valid debts and his explanations to mitigate are not persuasive.  
Whole Person Concept 
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
 
6 
                                      
 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and 
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the 
presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; 
and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole person concept.  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. When these problems first began, 
Applicant was a young man in his early 20's (See AG & 2(a)(4)). He accumulated debt 
during periods of unemployment and medical problems (See AG & 2(a)(2)). Since that 
time he has obtained a better paying job, has received funds from an inheritance, but has 
not resolved any of the debts. .  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance at this time. I recognize his interest to 
resolve these financial issues to restore his credit rating. However, the lack of action to 
resolve these delinquent debts over the past three years when he and his wife had extra 
income from inheritances yet did nothing to use those funds to resolve his delinquent 
debts, prompts me to conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising 
from these financial considerations and that it is premature at this time to grant a security 
clearance. 
Formal Findings 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a.:  Against  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.k.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m.: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.n.:  Against Applicant 
 
7 
                                      
 
Subparagraph 1.o.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.p.:  Against Applicant 
Conclusion 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
______________________ 
Charles D. Ablard 
Administrative Judge 
 
