 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-09546 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by the falsification of his 
Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions and by his history of not meeting his financial 
obligations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On November 3, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines 
F, Financial Considerations and E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 6, 2007, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel 
 
2 
 
 
submitted the government’s written case on January 10, 2008. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on January 22, 2008, and responded 
in an undated response with two attached letters. Department Counsel did not object to 
Applicant’s response. I received the case assignment on February 27, 2008. Applicant’s 
response contained an ambiguous reference to a hearing. I asked Department Counsel 
to contact Applicant to ensure that he wanted his case decided on the written record in 
lieu of a hearing. Applicant replied with a fax letter on February 28, 2008, certifying that 
he did not want a hearing. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding the following 
allegation:  
 
1.m. You are indebted to [creditor] for a delinquent account that has been 
charged off in the approximate amount of $1,115. As of November 7, 
2006, this debt had not been paid. 
 
Two credit reports were submitted as evidence. The credit report of November 7, 
2006, lists the above debt and shows “account transferred to another office,” and 
“$1115 CHG-OFF.” However, it does not show a balance. The credit report of August 
15, 2007, shows the above debt as “account transferred or sold” and lists a balance of 
zero. It is unclear who the debt was transferred to or the current status of the debt. I do 
not find that the requested amendment is in conformity with the evidence admitted. The 
motion to amend the SOR is denied.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated December 6, 2007, Applicant admitted all the 
factual allegations in the SOR, but indicated that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.k were 
duplicates. He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility 
for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. His education is not 
listed in the FORM. Applicant served in the U.S. Army Reserve from 1985 to 1993 and 
active duty Army from 1993 to 1999. He was honorably discharged as a Sergeant (E-5). 
Applicant is married and has two stepchildren, ages 25 and 18.2  
                                                          
1 If the motion had been granted, the allegation would have been concluded in Applicant’s favor. 
 
2 Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant has an extensive amount of delinquent debt. He was married in 2003. 
He and his wife accepted offers for credit cards. They wanted to purchase a house and 
thought that using the credit cards would help them build their credit and would assist 
them in obtaining a mortgage. Applicant admitted that they “messed up and received 
too much credit and used the credit wrongly.” He stated that after “trying to make the 
payments [they] fell behind and the service charges and late fees were more than [they] 
could handle.”3  
 
 The SOR lists 12 debts totaling approximately $18,254. Applicant admitted all the 
debts listed in the SOR, but indicated that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.k were 
duplicates. SOR ¶ 1.a lists an unpaid judgment of $569, awarded in July 2006 to a 
collection company.  SOR ¶ 1.k lists a delinquent debt of $569 owed to a different 
collection company on behalf of a financial institution. After reviewing the evidence, I 
find they represent the same debt. After that duplication is eliminated, 11 debts remain, 
totaling approximately $17,685. The credit reports in the FORM corroborate the debts.4 
There is no evidence that any of the debts have been paid.  
 
 Applicant started talking with a credit card assistance program in October 2007. 
He was accepted into the program in December 2007. The company will negotiate with 
Applicant’s creditors on his behalf. His monthly allocation into the program is $337, 
which will disburse the funds to Applicant’s creditors.5 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions (SF 86), signed and 
certified as true on October 20, 2006. Applicant answered “NO’” to all the pertinent 
financial questions on the SF 86, including Questions 27D, 28A, and 28B. Question 27D 
asked, “Last 7 yrs, judgements not paid?” Question 28A asked, “Last 7 yrs, over 180 
days delinquent on any debts?” Question 28B asked, “Currently over 90 days 
delinquent on any debts?” Applicant admitted the three falsification allegations in the 
SOR. An admission to a falsification allegation is not absolutely binding on an 
Administrative Judge, particularly where there is an additional explanation that serves to 
undercut the admission.6 In this case there are no additional explanations in Applicant’s 
response to the SOR, only the words “I admit.” Department Counsel’s written argument 
in the FORM states that Applicant “deliberately” falsified material facts on the 
questionnaire. When Applicant submitted his response to the FORM, he discussed his 
finances in some detail. He did not discuss the questionnaire at all, but he stated that he 
had no idea his “credit was so bad and was so delinquent.” He also stated that he and 
his wife “started this process in October and received a credit report in November and 
realized how horribly bad [they] had failed.”7  
                                                          
3 Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
4 Items 5 and 6. 
 
5 Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
6 ISCR Case No. 02-21087 (App. Bd. Aug. 19, 2005). 
 
7 Item 4; Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant submitted the SF 86 in October 2006. He had a number of debts that 
were placed for collection well before the SF 86 was submitted. After considering all the 
evidence, including Applicant’s admissions in his responses to the SOR and the FORM, 
I find Applicant knew he had delinquent debts when be submitted the SF 86, and that he 
intentionally falsified Questions 28A and 28B. I do not find sufficient evidence that 
Applicant was aware of the judgment awarded against him or that he intentionally 
falsified Question 27D. 
 
 Applicant stated that he was ashamed and embarrassed that this has happened. 
He has never been arrested and he has a perfect driving record.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
8 Applicant’s response to FORM. 
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.  
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his obligations for some time. He admitted that he and his wife used credit cards 
excessively and were unable to pay them. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
 
6 
 
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant currently has delinquent debt totaling more than $17,000. His overall 
conduct with his creditors casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable. He and his wife used credit cards and 
spent more than they could afford to pay. That does not qualify as a condition that was 
largely beyond his control. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. Applicant was accepted in a 
credit card assistance program in December 2007. It is too early in the process to know 
if Applicant will adhere to the program. There are not yet clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable. 
Applicant has not yet done enough to show a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.k 
are duplicates. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to SOR ¶ 1.k.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
  
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
7 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
           The intentional falsification of Applicant’s SF 86 in October 2006, raises AG ¶ 
16(a).  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and the individual 
 
8 
 
 
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. 
 
I have considered all the potential mitigating conditions. Applicant submitted his 
SF 86 in October 2006. He deliberately failed to disclose significant delinquent debt. 
Applicant has not submitted sufficient credible information to establish any of the 
mitigating conditions. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant served honorably in the 
U.S. Army. He has clean criminal and driving records. However, he has a history of 
shirking his financial responsibilities, and he intentionally provided false information on 
his security clearance questionnaire.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns based on his financial issues and personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b. and 2.c: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
