 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of:          ) 
                                                                  ) 
            ---------------------                 )        ISCR Case No. 07-05017 
            SSN: -----------                        ) 
                                                                  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance               ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
ABLARD, Charles D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns regarding Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations, E (Personal Conduct) and J (Criminal Conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 7, 2006, Applicant submitted a Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) also known as Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On July 27, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and 
modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended, 
modified and revised. The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines F 
(Financial), E (Personal Conduct), and J (Criminal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons  
why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
2 
                                      
 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations in a sworn statement signed on 
August 14, 2007, and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. A letter was attached to the answer with some explanatory information. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated December 6, 2007, was 
provided to him, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant provided a letter with 
additional information dated February 22, 2008. The case was assigned to me on 
January 8, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted in his response to the SOR six of the nine allegations of 
specific delinquent debts in the SOR relating to financial issues He also admitted two 
allegations of a bankruptcy in 1997. He denied three delinquent debts for medical 
services. He admitted two allegations relating to personal conduct concerning failure to 
register for Selective Service and to disclose the delinquent debts in answer to Question 
38 of his SF 86. He also admitted the same allegation relating to failure to register with 
Selective Service in the allegation of criminal conduct. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of 
record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
            Applicant is 33 years old who works for a defense contractor. He does not now 
hold a security clearance but seeks one to qualify for a position in the federal 
government. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
            The security concern under Guideline F of the Directive is that Applicant 
incurred debts totaling over $17,000 which became delinquent and have not been 
resolved. In addition he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1997 which was discharged in 
1998.  
             
            The letter enclosed with Applicant’s answer stated some reasons why the three 
medical debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.e., 1.f., and 1.g.) were incorrect. However, no evidence was 
provided to substantiate his claim or dispute. All of the remaining delinquent debts are 
unresolved.  
 
Personal Conduct 
    
            Question 38 of Applicant’s SF 86, asked if he had any debts that were 180 days 
delinquent in the past seven years. Applicant answered, “No” to this question 
notwithstanding the fact that there were such debts. He does not deny that he knew of 
the delinquent debts. 
 
Also alleged under Guideline E is Applicant’s failure to register under the 
Selective Service System as required by 50 U.S.C. Appendix 453. He admitted he failed 
 
3 
                                      
 
to register when he turned 18 years of age, but offered the explanation that he had a 
young family and was unfamiliar with U.S. laws. However, the record indicates that he 
did not have a family at that time. He did attempt to register after he was 26 years old, 
but registration is not permitted after that age.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
The same facts relating to failure to register are alleged under Guideline J since 
such failure to register is a criminal offense punishable by a $10,000 fine and 
imprisonment for five years, if the prosecution is made within five years of a person 
attaining the age of 26. (Item 9).  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the Government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,” 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the Government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
            Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Guideline F Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
           AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
            Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit report (Items 5 
and 7). At least six of the debts remain unresolved. The majority of his delinquent debts 
remain delinquent. He has provided insufficient documentation to show significant 
progress resolving his debts. The government established the disqualifying conditions in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19 (c).  
 
            Five Mitigating Conditions (MC) under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) have been considered. 
They are: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
5 
                                      
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and, 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant provided a letter attached to his answer which indicates he has had 
some discussions with a credit counseling service. However, this is insufficient to 
establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). His statement about contesting some of his 
medical bills is insufficient to warrant application of AG ¶ 20(e) to those debts because he 
did not provide “documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.”  No other mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
  
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case. With respect to his failure to disclose information about his 
delinquent debts on his SF 86, AG ¶ 16(a) provides: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and, 
 
6 
                                      
 
 
Specifically, his omission of delinquent debt information from his SF 86, 
constitutes a deliberate omission or falsification of relevant and material facts from his 
SF 86. Such conduct raises a security concern.  AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
With respect to his failure to register with the Selective Service and falsification of 
his SF 86, the pertinent disqualifying conditions are AG ¶ 16(d)(3), a pattern of rule 
violations and AG ¶ 16(e)(1), which states, “personal conduct, or concealment of 
information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.” Certainly such conduct 
violates important civil rules in our society, and is conduct a person might wish to 
conceal as it adversely affects a person’s professional and community standing. AG ¶¶ 
16(d)(3) and 16(e)(1) both apply. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven MCs that could mitigate security concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully. 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and, 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
7 
                                      
 
  
None of the mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 17 apply. Applicant’s falsification of his 
SF 86 on November 6, 2006, is sufficiently recent as to be disqualifying. He did not 
promptly inform the government of the falsification. He admitted the false statement at 
issue, and the falsification of his SF 86 is substantial and casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He failed to register with Selective 
Service when he reached age 18 and did not attempt to do so for eight years when he 
could have done so until reaching the maximum age to register.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying, ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime,” and ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted.”  Failure to register with the U.S. Selective Service System is a 
serious crime.  Applicant admitted he failed to register without good cause.   AG ¶¶ 
31(a) and 31(c) apply.   
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four MCs that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and, 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Insufficient evidence has been offered to establish that any of the MC’s are 
applicable in this matter. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
8 
                                      
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions previously discussed through application of the whole person concept. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude he has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to financial considerations, personal conduct and criminal 
conduct.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors” and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
         Paragraph 1, Guideline E:              AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. to 1.k.: Against Applicant 
 
        Paragraph 2, Guideline E:                        AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:                        AGAINST APPLICANT 
            Subparagraph 2.a.:                        Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                   
Charles D. Ablard 
Administrative Judge 
