  Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as1
amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program ,
dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive).
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-08256
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: James H. Drescher, Esquire 
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order
and DoD Directive,  the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a1
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant on October 28, 2007. The SOR is equivalent
to an administrative complaint and it details the factual basis for the action. The issues
in this case fall under Guideline B for foreign influence based on Applicant’s ties or
connections to Iraq. For the reasons discussed below, this case is decided for
Applicant. 
   
In addition to the Executive Order and Directive, this case is brought under the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005.
The Revised Guidelines were then modified by the Defense Department, effective
  See Memorandum from the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, Subject:2
Implementation of Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(December 29, 2005). 
2
September 1, 2006. They supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2
to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications and other determinations where an SOR
has been issued on September 1, 2006, or thereafter.  The Directive is pending revision2
or amendment. The Revised Guidelines apply here because the SOR is dated after the
effective date.  
Applicant replied to the SOR on November 10, 2007, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on December 26, 2007. The hearing took place as
scheduled on February 7, 2008, and the transcript (Tr.) was received on February 19,
2008.
The record was left open until February 21, 2008, to allow Applicant an
opportunity to submit additional documentary evidence. No such matters were
submitted.
Findings of Fact
The SOR alleges that Applicant may be subject to foreign influence due to his
family ties or connections to Iraq as well as his service in the Iraqi Army from about
1985 to 1990. Applicant admits the factual allegations in SOR subparagraphs 1.a–1.d.
In addition, the following facts are established by substantial evidence. 
Applicant is a 41-year-old Arabic linguist and cultural advisor employed by a
language-related services company. He has worked for this company since June 2005.
Born in Iraq, he became a U.S. citizen in November 2002; he had held a U.S. passport
since January 2003. He changed his last name to a westernized name in light of the
events of 9/11. With an interim security clearance, he has already worked approximately
18 months in Iraq where he was supporting the mission of the U.S. armed forces. This
is the first time he has applied for a security clearance. 
In 1985, Applicant was attending high school and living with his family when he
was conscripted to serve in the Iraqi Army. Although the Iran-Iraq war (1980–1988) was
ongoing, Applicant did not see duty in that conflict as he was assigned duties elsewhere
working as an electrician. In 1989 or 1990, Applicant was allowed to leave the army,
and he returned to living with his family where he worked with his father selling auto
parts (Exhibit B).
Iraq—under the dictatorship of Saddam Hussein—invaded Kuwait in August
1990. As result, Applicant and many others who had previously served in the army were
recalled to duty. Applicant discussed the situation with his father and decided not to
return to the army. He continued living with his family until Iraq was expelled from
Kuwait in February 1991. After the war, there were rebellions or uprisings in northern
3
and southern Iraq, which the Iraqi government responded to with crushing force against
its own citizens. It was then that Applicant and one of his brothers decided to leave Iraq.
They were successful in fleeing Iraq, but soon found themselves in a refugee camp in
northern Saudi Arabia where they spent the next couple of years under difficult
conditions.
Applicant and his brother were eventually granted political asylum in the U.S.
through the assistance of U.N. representatives and U.S. immigration officials who
visited the refugee camp. In about 1994, Applicant and his brother were flown to the
U.S. with the assistance of a religious organization that paid for the airfare. Their
destination in the U.S. was their current state of residence as they had a distant cousin
living there. Applicant arrived with the clothes on his back and he spoke little English. 
Applicant has been gainfully employed in the U.S. since approximately early
1995, sometimes working two jobs. A neighbor helped Applicant find his first job as a
busboy at a Mexican restaurant. After about five months, Applicant started a second job
at a restaurant known for its hamburgers. Applicant worked at this restaurant during
1995–2005. He worked his way up the ladder in various positions until he was promoted
to general manger. In addition to the restaurant business, Applicant worked as a retail
sales associate for about three years during 2000–2003. A longtime soccer player,
Applicant also plays semi-professional soccer for a local team. 
Applicant has immediate family members who are citizens of or residents in Iraq.
His mother and father are Iraqi citizens and live in Iraq. His mother has been a stay-at-
home mother and wife. His father is retired. During the 1960s–1980s, his father worked
for the Iraqi transportation department, and he receives a pension as a result. He
worked selling auto parts after retiring from the transportation department. Applicant
periodically provides relatively small sums of money to his parents to supplement their
retirement income. Applicant has regular (about twice a month) contact with his parents
via telephone calls. 
Applicant has two brothers and two sisters who are Iraqi citizens living in Iraq.
One sister is in the process of obtaining a divorce and she is living with her parents. The
other sister has recently remarried and she is a housewife. Her first husband was
executed before the fall of the Hussein regime, as he opposed the regime. One brother
works as a truck driver, and he is married with two children. Applicant’s youngest
brother recently completed high school and is now going to college. Applicant is seeking
to sponsor this brother’s immigration to the U.S. and that process is pending. His
contact with his siblings in Iraq is usually incidental to his telephone calls to his parents. 
Other than his father’s status as a pensioner, none of Applicant’s immediate
family members in Iraq are connected with the Iraqi government. 
Applicant also has a brother who is an Iraqi citizen living in Germany. This
brother works at a grocery store. He has lived in Germany for about ten years, and he is
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
4
in the process of obtaining German citizenship. His contact with this brother is limited to
a telephone call every three months or so.
Starting in January 2006, Applicant worked as an Arabic linguist and cultural
advisor in Iraq for approximately 18 months. His assignment was to work as an
interpreter at a detainee facility where he was heavily involved with interrogating
detainees. According to several individuals who worked with him, Applicant’s duty
performance was superb and his linguistic abilities were instrumental in the exploitation
of detainees suspected of terrorist activities (Exhibit A). According to a task force senior
interrogator, an Army major, Applicant possesses several factors that give him the
“uncanny ability [to] identify weaknesses in the detainee for the interrogator to exploit”
(Exhibit A at 5). Likewise, another Army interrogator who testified at the hearing opined
that Applicant was easily one of the best interpreters at the facility because he had,
among other things, the ability to “channel the emotions, the behavior and the body
language of the interrogator, he was literally a mouthpiece for us” (Tr. 92). For his part,
Applicant enjoyed the work and “felt like [he] was making a difference in a war against
religious extremists who were using their religion as an excuse to kill innocent people,
including U.S. troops and Iraqi women and children” (Exhibit B). 
Applicant did not visit his family when he was working in Iraq (Tr. 78). Other than
his mother, none of his family knew he was in Iraq. His mother knew he was in Iraq, but
he led her to believe he was there working for an American construction company. 
Applicant has no business, financial, or property interest in Iraq or any other
foreign country. His financial affairs are all in the U.S. and, in general, consist of a
condo he has owned and lived in with his brother for the last several years, financial
accounts worth about $45,000, and personal property. 
Administrative notice is taken of certain facts about Iraq as described in the
government’s written request (Exhibit 2). The situation in Iraq is well known within the
Defense Department and it is unnecessary to repeat the specific details here. In general
terms, the overall security situation in Iraq is fluid and at times quite unstable if not
deadly, but the situation has improved as of late. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, no one has a right to a security clearance.3
As noted by the Supreme Court in 1988 in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
5
they must, on the side of denials.”  A favorable decision establishes eligibility of an4
applicant to be granted a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-
secret information.  An unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2)  revokes any5
existing security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any
level.  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt about whether6
an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of protecting national security.
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. A person granted access to classified
information enters into a special relationship with the government. The government
must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it
grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a person a security
clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination13
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 5–6 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating14
conditions for Guideline B). 
 Revised Guidelines at p. 5. 15
 Revised Guidelines at p. 5. 16
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8,17
2001).
6
that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has established for
granting eligibility for a security clearance.
Analysis
Under Guideline B for foreign influence,  a security concern may arise due to14
foreign contacts and interests “if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial
interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization,
or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or
coercion by any foreign interest.”  There are two disqualifying conditions  that could15 16
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case:
DC 1. [C]ontact with a foreign family member, business, or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
DC 2. [C]onnections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information. 
Of course, the mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is
not—as a matter of law—disqualifying under Guideline B. But if only one relative resides
in a foreign country and an applicant has contact with that relative, this factor alone is
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the
compromise of classified information.17
Here, the two disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant has contacts with
and connections to immediate family members in Iraq. He comes from a large family,
most of whom live in Iraq. He has regular telephonic contact with his parents and
sometimes his siblings. These circumstances create the potential for a heightened risk
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of his
ties to immediate family members in Iraq. Also, the circumstance of his financial support
to his parents is material because it indicates the strength of his family ties. It is not
enough to constitute a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign
 Revised Guidelines at p. 6. 18
 See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008) (“an applicant’s proven record of action in19
defense of the U.S. is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B
case.”) (citation omitted). 
7
country, however, and the fifth disqualifying condition under the guideline does not
apply. Finally, the circumstance of his service in the Iraqi Army is not particularly
material because (1) he was a conscript, (2) he refused to return to duty when recalled,
and (3) it occurred before he was a U.S. citizen. 
Three of the six mitigating conditions  under the guideline may apply to the facts18
and circumstances of this case:
MC 1.  [T]he nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.;
MC 2.  [T]here is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and
MC 3.  [C]ontact or communications with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation. 
The first and third MC do not apply because Applicant’s relationships with his
immediate family members in Iraq are of sufficient magnitude or strength to negate
these two MCs. In the post-9/11 world, there is at least a remote or slight possibility that
dangerous elements within Iraq could attempt to use his family members to coerce or
pressure Applicant.
But the second MC applies in Applicant’s favor. The record evidence supports a
conclusion that Applicant has a depth of loyalty to the U.S., so that he can be expected
to resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S. interest. He demonstrated his depth of his
commitment to the U.S. by working approximately 18 months supporting the U.S. armed
forces in Iraq.  His work was not minor or trivial, as he performed important duty as an19
Arabic interpreter who participated in the interrogation of detainees (Exhibit A). 
 
 Revised Guidelines at p. 5.20
8
To sum up under the whole-person concept, this is not a case of “divided
loyalties”  with an applicant who has one foot in the U.S. and one foot in his native20
country. On the contrary, the evidence shows Applicant has both feet planted in the
U.S. and that he has significant contacts and ties to the U.S. For example, Applicant’s
employment, financial, and property interests are in the U.S. By all appearances,
Applicant and his brother have made the U.S. their home and that is their future. His
work on behalf of the U.S. in a war zone is further evidence of the strength of his ties to
the U.S. This circumstance and the favorable character evidence deserve substantial
weight. Taken together, these circumstances support a conclusion that Applicant can be
expected to resolve any potential foreign influence or pressure by either coercive or
non-coercive means in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In addition, given that the U.S. is producing relatively few Arabic speakers, this is
a skill set that cannot be ignored. Also, Applicant’s language skills are enhanced by his
understanding of the country and cultural nuances that might be lost on a foreign Arabic
speaker. This circumstance does not dictate the outcome of the case, but it does
receive some consideration under the whole-person concept. 
To conclude, based on the record evidence as a whole, both favorable and
unfavorable, Applicant has presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the foreign influence security concern. Applicant met his ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.d:  For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with national interest  to
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
