 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-00434 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Elizabeth L. Newman, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the foreign preference security concerns arising from 
her exercise of dual citizenship with Belgium. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on May 4, 2005. 
On September 24, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security concerns under 
Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and B (Foreign Influence).1  
  
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 12, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on December 6, 2007. 
Department Counsel contacted Applicant in Belgium to propose hearing dates. 
Applicant requested her hearing be conducted via video teleconference (VTC), and a 
hearing date of February 11, 2008 (Tr. 9-10). DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
January 16, 2008.  
 
The hearing was convened as scheduled on February 11, 2008. Applicant and 
her witness appeared through VTC from a facility in Brussels, Belgium. Department 
Counsel, Applicant’s counsel, and I were located in Arlington, Virginia. The government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted without objection, except for the 
third page of GE 6, which was not admitted (Tr. 14). Applicant testified on her own 
behalf, and presented the testimony of one witness and one exhibit, marked AE 1, 
which was received without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on February 20, 2008.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 By motion dated November 28, 2007, the Government indicated it would not 
pursue the Guideline B concerns alleged in the SOR, and that it would not oppose 
findings for the Applicant. Based on the motion, Applicant mitigated the Guideline B 
concerns with her answers to the SOR and other information provided. My decision will 
address only the Guideline C concerns. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c with 
explanations. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of all evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 40 years old. She has worked for the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO) at the professional/managerial level since March 2006 (GE 3, Tr. 
37). She has had interim access to NATO classified information for approximately two 
years (Tr. 28-29, 55). There is no evidence that Applicant has ever compromised 
classified information or that she has failed to comply with rules and regulations 
concerning the protection of classified information. 
 
Applicant’s parents are Jewish holocaust survivors (GE 3). After World War II, 
her father was sent from Germany to England where he grew up. He came to the United 
States in 1953 to attend college, and became a U.S. naturalized citizen in 1975. Her 
mother immigrated from Lithuania to Canada where she grew up and became a 
Canadian citizen. She moved to the United States in 1959, and became a U.S. 
naturalized citizen in 1975. Her parents married that same year. Applicant was born in 
the United States in 1968. In 1986, when Applicant was eight years old, her father took 
a job in Canada, and the whole family immigrated to Canada. Applicant became a 
Canadian citizen, and attended high school and her first year of college in Canada (Tr. 
 
3 
 
 
23). Her parents are dual citizens of the United States and Canada and currently reside 
in Canada. 
 
In 1987, Applicant married a Belgian citizen and moved to Belgium with her 
husband. She automatically acquired her Belgian citizenship as a result of her marriage. 
Except for a period of around seven months from 1999 to 2001, when Applicant was 
working for a U.S. company in the United States, Applicant has been a Belgium resident 
since 1987 (Tr. 23-24). As a Belgium citizen, Applicant is required by law to vote in 
Belgian elections. She has voted in five Belgian elections (GE 2). She felt compelled to 
vote in light of Belgian law which makes voting mandatory.  
 
Applicant and her husband have five Belgian born children; ages 17, 14, 10, 5, 
and a three-month-old baby (Tr. 25). Her four older children received their U.S. 
citizenship in July 2007 (Tr. 42-46). Applicant was not able to transfer her U.S. 
citizenship to her children because she did not live in the United States for a period of 
two years after age 14. Her children acquired their U.S. citizenship through their 
grandparents. She is in the process of acquiring U.S. citizenship for her new baby. 
 
Applicant completed the last three years of her bachelor’s degree in mathematics 
in Belgium (Tr. 27-28). Additionally, she received a master’s degree in computer 
science in 1995, a doctorate degree (Ph.D.) in mathematics and theoretical computer 
science in 2000, and a master’s in business administration in 2006. Applicant attended 
Belgian universities as a Belgian national and received student grants (Tr. 48-51).  
 
Since 1987, Applicant has worked sporadically for private companies, a foreign 
company, and as a university research assistant (GE 1). As a Belgian citizen, she is 
entitled to and has received social welfare benefits such as healthcare, unemployment 
benefits, child allowances, and educational grants. She is also entitled to a small 
government pension (Tr. 48). Applicant and her husband own no property either in the 
United States or Belgium (Tr. 47). She claimed they never intended to live permanently 
in Belgium and never purchased a home (Tr. 57). In 1999, Applicant took a job in the 
United States with the idea of moving permanently to the United States, however, her 
husband did not get a job and they had to return to Belgium. Thereafter, the opportunity 
never presented itself again (Tr. 58-59). Applicant owns bank accounts both in Belgium 
and in the United States. She also voted in U.S. elections in 1996 and 2006, and is 
registered to vote in the 2008 U.S. Presidential election. 
 
In 2005, when Applicant applied for her NATO job, she was informed about the 
security clearance concerns raised by having Canadian and Belgium passports and was 
asked to surrender them. She surrendered both passports in November 2005 (GEs 5, 
6). Applicant claimed she was not informed that her dual citizenship, voting in Belgium, 
or otherwise receiving social welfare benefits from Belgium (exercising her dual 
citizenship) could raise security concerns. Applicant became aware of these security 
concerns for the first time when she received the pending SOR in September 2007 (Tr. 
35-36, 40). Notwithstanding, Applicant was interviewed in September 2006 by a 
government investigator concerning possible foreign preference and foreign influence 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
security concerns. The investigator noted in his summary of Applicant’s interview that 
“she [was] not ready to renounce her Canadian or Belgian citizenship[s]” (GE 3). 
 
At her hearing, Applicant expressed several times her willingness to renounce 
her Belgian citizenship to eliminate security concerns raised by her dual citizenship (Tr. 
41). She presented no evidence of efforts taken to renounce her Belgian citizenship.  
 
Applicant considers herself a loyal American. She stated: “My loyalty to the 
United States is undivided. My family relationships in the United States are deep and 
longstanding. There is no conflict of interest. If ever a conflict of interest appears I will, 
without hesitation, resolve the conflict in favor of the United States interest” (GE 2). As 
evidence of her ties to the United States she noted that her children are U.S. citizens, 
she assures their connection to the United States by sending them to the United States 
for summer camps and to visit their friends and relatives living in the United States. 
Applicant and her spouse speak English at home, and their children are fluent in English 
(Tr. 26). 
 
Applicant has four siblings. Her 29-year-old brother was born in Canada. He is a 
citizen and resident of Canada. Her 26-year-old sister was born in Canada. She married 
a U.S. citizen, became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2000, and resides in the United 
States. Both her half-brother and half-sister were born in the United States and are 
residents of the United States.  
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.2 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
2  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”3 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under Guideline C the government’s concern is that “[w]hen an individual acts in 
such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then 
he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the 
interests of the United States.” AG ¶ 9. 
 
Applicant was born and lived in the United States for the first eight years of her 
life. At age eight, she moved to Canada with her parents, and became a Canadian 
citizen. She attended Canadian schools and enjoyed the privileges of her Canadian 
citizenship, including a Canadian passport. In 1987, at age 19, she married a Belgian 
national and automatically acquired her Belgian citizenship. She moved to Belgium in 
1987, and she has lived in Belgium ever since.  
3  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 
Applicant considers herself a tri-citizen of the United States, Canada, and 
Belgium. Her home is in Belgium where she has lived with her Belgian husband since 
age 19. She completed college, and two higher education degrees with the assistance 
of Belgium educational grants. Except for a bank account in the United States, all of 
Applicant’s and her spouse’s financial/economic interests are in Belgium. Applicant’s 
children were born and educated in Belgium. Applicant has received or is entitled to -- 
on her own right or through her spouse’s or children’s citizenship, -- privileges and 
benefits reserved for Belgian citizens such as a Belgian identification card, a Belgian 
passport, educational grants, unemployment and healthcare benefits, child allowances, 
and a pension. She also voted in five Belgian elections. 
 
Her actions constitute an exercise of dual citizenship and raises security 
concerns under Guideline C. Foreign preference disqualifying condition AG 10(a), 
“exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. 
citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes . . . (3): 
accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such benefits from a 
foreign country, and (7) voting in a foreign election,” apply. 
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of the disqualification condition 
in AG ¶ 10(a)(3) and (7), and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the Government.4 
 
  AG ¶ 11 provides for six foreign influence mitigating conditions that are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority. 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; 
 
4See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
7 
 
 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
Applicant surrendered her Belgian passport in 2005. At her hearing she 
expressed her willingness to renounce dual citizenship. Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 
11(b) and (e) apply. The remainder of AG ¶ 11 mitigating conditions are either not 
applicable or were not fairly raised by the evidence of record. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
“(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant strongly averred her 
loyalty to the United States, that she feels like an American, her desire to raise her 
children as Americans, and to live in the United States. Applicant has had access to 
interim NATO classified information for the last two years and there is no evidence that 
he she failed to comply with rules and regulations concerning the protection of classified 
information. 
 
Although Applicant surrendered her passport and expressed willingness to 
renounce her dual citizenship, considering the record evidence as a whole, her 
favorable evidence is not sufficient to mitigate the foreign preference security concerns. 
Applicant has stronger ties and connection with Belgium than with the United States. 
She was born in the United States, but only lived the first eight years of her life in the 
United States. Except for a period of less than one year around 1999-2001, during 
which she worked and resided in the United States, she has lived 31 years of her life in 
foreign countries. She has lived in Belgium as a Belgian citizen for the last 21 years of 
her life enjoying all the privileges and benefits reserved for Belgian citizens. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s social, emotional, and financial ties are connected to her husband, 
and their children all of whom are Belgian citizens. This is partially confirmed by her 
2006 statement to a government investigator to the effect that she was not ready to 
surrender her dual citizenship. On balance, I am not convinced that Applicant’s 
favorable evidence is sufficient to outweigh the potential conflicting loyalties for Belgium 
and the United States. 
 
“Because of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong 
presumption against granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . .  it 
is deemed best to err on the side of the government’s compelling interest in security by 
denying or revoking [a] clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990).  After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all the facts and 
circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude she has not mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign preference. The evidence leaves me with doubts 
as to Applicant’s security eligibility and suitability.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the concerns 
arising from her foreign preference security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
