 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-08398 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his financial history. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On November 21, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 18, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to another 
Administrative Judge on January 17, 2008, and reassigned to me on February 4, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 28, 2008. I convened the hearing as 
 
2 
 
 
scheduled on February 21, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through I, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on March 7, 2008.   
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated December 18, 2007, Applicant admitted all the 
factual allegations in the SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is a high school 
graduate and is attending classes toward an associate degree. He served in the U.S. 
military from 1997 to 2001, and was honorably discharged. He is married and has two 
stepchildren, ages 12 and 13.1  
 
 Applicant joined the military when he was 19 years old. He was unsophisticated 
about finances and the ways of the world. He met his future wife who was also in the 
military. She had two children, and as he stated, “she was 23 and from the City.” They 
moved in together by the end of 1997. Applicant started accepting credit offers and 
became overextended. His future wife left the military in 1998 and did not work. She 
went to school and some bills went unpaid. She handled the finances and told him, “it’s 
okay to miss a couple of payments until she got a job.” They married in 1999. She 
finished her education, but her employment was sporadic. Applicant was discharged 
from the military in 2001. He did not seek reenlistment because he felt he could earn 
more in the civilian world. He could not. They moved a number of times over the next 
several years. They lived with her mother, and then with his parents, but they both 
continued to have employment problems. She went for lengthy periods between jobs. 
She went back into the military in about 2002, but only stayed on active duty for about 
six to eight months. They separated and reconciled a few times.2   
 
 Applicant realized his marriage was not working out and separated from his wife 
in 2006. He moved home to live with his parents. He obtained his job with his current 
employer in November 2006. Applicant filed for divorce. He testified it should be final 
within about two weeks of the hearing date.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 29, 30; GE 1; AE A, D, I. 
 
2 Tr. at 16-17; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 17; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; AE F. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts totaling approximately $33,509. Applicant 
admitted owing all the listed debts, and none of the 18 debts have been paid. He 
completed mandatory credit counseling on November 6, 2007, in anticipation of a 
bankruptcy. He filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy on November 30, 2007. His bankruptcy 
petition reflects three repossessed cars. Applicant testified that he believed there were 
four voluntarily repossessed cars. His debts have not yet been discharged.4 
 
 Applicant submitted letters from two supervisors. He is described as an 
exemplary employee who has always received good evaluations. They state he is 
ethical, a team player with a great attitude, and an asset to their organization. He has 
worked many hours of overtime without complaint.5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
                                                          
4 Tr. at 17-18, 31-32; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; AE B, E. 
 
5 AE C, G, H. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable to pay his 
obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above potentially 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has 18 delinquent debts totaling more than $33,000. While a young 
and impressionable member of the military, he met and eventually married another 
service member with two children. She is older than Applicant, but far from mature. 
They both left the military and went through a number of years of sporadic employment. 
Their employment issues are conditions that were largely beyond his control. However, 
he permitted at least three cars to be repossessed, and there is no evidence that he 
made an effort to pay any of his debts, even the small debts, since he started working 
for his current employer in November 2006. I am unable to make a finding that Applicant 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. FC MC 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
Applicant will soon be divorced from his wife and his debts will be discharged in 
bankruptcy. He appears to be on the right track. He is living with his parents and is 
working overtime for a company that values his work. He received mandatory financial 
counseling as part of his bankruptcy and there are indications that the problem is being 
resolved and is under control. However, it is too soon for a determination that the 
problems are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Applicant satisfied the first prong of FC MC 20(c). 
The second prong is partially applicable. No other mitigating condition is completely 
applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
6 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was young and 
unsophisticated when he became involved with another service member with two 
children. They lived together and then married. He left the military with an Honorable 
Discharge to seek a more lucrative job, but he failed to find one. She did not work for 
extended periods and debts became delinquent. He is attempting to resolve all his 
issues. His divorce is imminent, and barring something unforeseen, his debts should be 
discharged in bankruptcy. He now has a good job where he is highly regarded. He lives 
at home, attends college, and works overtime. Applicant is still too early in the process 
for a determination that his finances are in order. One year from now, his financial 
problems may be a thing of the past. At this instant they remain a concern.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1r:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
