 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-06550 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Glenn P. Schillo, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on January 10, 2006. On 
October 17, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines E (Personal Conduct) and F 
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 25, 2007; answered it on 
November 16, 2007; and requested a decision on the record without a hearing. DOHA 
received his answer on November 19, 2007.  On December 7, 2007, Department 
Counsel requested a hearing in accordance with Directive ¶ E3.1.8, and was ready to 
proceed on December 27, 2007. The case was assigned to me on January 2, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 18, 2008, scheduling the hearing for 
 
2 
 
 
February 12, 2008. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 
through 10 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through O, which were admitted 
without objection. The record closed on February 12, 2008. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 21, 2008. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a (6). At 
the hearing, he admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His admissions in his answer to 
the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact. I make the following 
findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 60-year-old consultant for a federal contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since June 2003. He served as an officer in the U.S. Army 
Reserve from April 1970 to November 1996, retiring as a lieutenant colonel (Tr. 40). 
 
 Applicant is married and has a 12-year-old daughter (Tr. 63). He received 
bachelor’s degrees in metallurgical engineering and chemistry in 1970, a master’s 
degree in materials science in 1971, a degree equivalent to a master’s degree in 
business administration in 1977, and a doctorate in materials science and engineering 
in 1978. 
 
Applicant received a clearance in May 1990. His employer sponsored his 
application for access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) in March 2004 (GX 
4). His application was for SCI eligibility was denied in March 2005 (GX 3). This denial 
of access was alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, and the basis for the denial was the conduct 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a (1) through 1.a (6). He appealed the denial of SCI eligibility (GX 
5, 6, and 7). His appeal was denied in June 2005 (GX 8). 
 
Applicant’s work is time sensitive, involves extensive travel, and requires long 
work days (Tr. 72-73). From about October 1996 through June 1999, Applicant worked 
as a self-employed consultant. From July 1999 to October 2001, he worked as a full-
time employee of a consulting firm. From October 2001 to June 2003, he worked out of 
his home for a consulting firm. During all three periods involving three different 
employers, Applicant claimed reimbursement for more than his actual travel expenses.  
He would claim more than he spent for a meal because no receipt was required for less 
than $20. He would claim more miles driven to the airport than actual mileage, overstate 
the amount of tolls paid, and overstate the cost of gasoline for a rental car (GX 4 at 1). 
He explained to security investigators that he did not consider his claims for meals, 
gasoline and tolls fraudulent, because he worked long hours, did not take time for 
formal meals, claimed less for gasoline than rental agencies would charge for gasoline, 
and incurred numerous unreimbursed incidental expenses (GX 6 at 2). 
 
 
3 
 
 
About once a year, Applicant used frequent flier miles to fly to a client site and 
then charged his employer the cost of the tickets.  On two occasions, in September 
2004 and November 2004, he purchased airline tickets for duty travel, used his personal 
vehicle to drive to the duty locations, and then claimed and received reimbursement for 
the cost of air travel (Tr. 77-78). He did not consider his conduct employee theft 
because he frequently saved his employers money by flying on weekends, flying 
through airline hubs rather than non-stop, and driving to more distant airports to benefit 
from lower fares (GX 6 at 3). At the hearing, he admitted the factual allegations and 
attributed them to his “subjective rationalization” of his conduct (Tr. 108-11). 
 
During calendar years 2006 and 2007, Applicant intentionally forfeited vacation 
hours and holiday pay in an effort reimburse his employer for his false claims for 
reimbursement.  By his calculations, he returned 34 hours at $77.65 per hour in 2006 
and 44.5 hours at $80 per hour in 2007 (AX M). As of the date of the hearing, 
Applicant’s employers were not aware of his false claims for reimbursement or his 
reimbursement procedure (Tr. 71, 88).  Applicant believes he would be “considered for 
termination” if his employer knew about his fraudulent claims for reimbursement (Tr. 
89). 
 
At some time after initiation of Applicant’s SCI application and the ensuing 
polygraph examination, Applicant consulted with a lawyer and an accountant and 
received advice about the proper method of accounting for his expenses. Based on that 
advice, he changed his methodology and now keeps accurate records and files 
accurate reimbursement vouchers (Tr. 85-86). 
 
For about 15 years, Applicant claimed charitable deductions for cash donations 
to his church of $100 per week when he actually donated $10-$15 weekly.  He claimed 
clothing donations of $475 for clothing worth less than $100, and claimed business 
expenses for which he was fully reimbursed by his employer (GX 4 at 2; Tr. 90-91).  He 
made the same false claims in his 2006 federal income tax return, even though he knew 
his false tax returns were one of the reasons his application for a SCI clearance was 
denied (Tr. 91, 99). He testified he inflated his charitable deductions to compensate 
himself for the expenses of maintaining a home office.  He also testified he was advised 
by an accountant that deductions for a home office were more likely to be audited than 
charitable contributions (Tr. 91-93). 
 
Applicant submitted ten letters of recommendation from colleagues and 
supervisors (AX C-L). All the letters describe him as honest, dedicated, loyal, 
trustworthy, dependable, and a person of high integrity and moral standards. The letters 
were written at Applicant’s request (Tr. 58). He testified none of the letter writers were 
aware of his false tax returns and only one, submitted by a fellow Army Reserve officer 
(AX K), was aware of his false reimbursement vouchers (Tr. 95). 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
5 
 
 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant’s application for SCI access was denied for 
submitting fraudulent travel vouchers to three separate employers from October 1996 to 
June 2003 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a (1), (2), and (4)); using frequent flyer mileage to obtain airline 
tickets and then submitting reimbursement vouchers for the tickets (SOR ¶ 1.a (3)); 
cashing in airline tickets paid for by his employer, driving to his destination, and keeping 
the refunds for the airline tickets (SOR ¶ 1.a (5)); and filing fraudulent federal income 
tax returns by inflating his charitable contributions and claiming business expenses for 
which he was reimbursed (SOR ¶ 1.a (6)).  
 
The security concern relating to Guideline E is set out in AG & 15 in pertinent 
part as follows: “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”  
Potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline include “deliberately providing 
false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer”; “a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations”; and “personal conduct, or concealment of information 
about one's conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, 
such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, 
professional, or community standing.” AG ¶¶ 16(b), (d)(3), and (e).  Applicant’s false 
reimbursement vouchers, his concealment of his conduct from his employer, his 
vulnerability to being terminated for his dishonesty, and the damage disclosure of this 
conduct would cause to his professional and community standing raise all three of these 
potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions above, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers to an employer may be 
mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.”  AG ¶ 
17(a).  This mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not informed 
his employers of his false reimbursement vouchers. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the offense is so minor, or so much 
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). This is a compound mitigating 
condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong. It may be 
established by showing the conduct was minor, long ago, infrequent, or occurred under 
unique circumstances.  If any of these disjunctive prongs are established, the mitigating 
condition is not fully established unless the conduct “does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
 
 Some of Applicant’s inflated travel vouchers, considered separately, may have 
been minor thefts. Each fraudulent tax return was a misdemeanor under 26 U.S.C. § 
7207. However, the amounts involved in the airline tickets were significant. Thus, I 
conclude the first prong (“so minor”) is not established. The second prong (“so much 
time has passed”) also is not established because his fraudulent conduct continued 
through tax year 2006. The third prong (“so infrequent”) is not established because of 
his multiple fraudulent acts. His 15-year track record of fraud casts doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant received legal advice long before he received the SOR.  
He continued to rationalize and justify his behavior in his answer to the SOR. He finally 
acknowledged his behavior at the hearing. He has not established that his fraudulent 
behavior is “unlikely to recur, because he continued to file fraudulent tax returns even 
after they cost him his opportunity for a SCI clearance. I conclude AG ¶ 17(d) is not 
established. 
 
 Finally, security concerns may be mitigated if “the individual has taken positive 
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 
17(e).  Applicant admitted he has not told his employer about his fraudulent behavior 
and he acknowledged that it could cost him his job. Moreover, disclosure of his 
fraudulent conduct would damage his professional and community standing. I conclude 
AG ¶ 17(e) is not established. None of the other enumerated mitigating conditions under 
this guideline are established. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges that the same conduct alleged under Guideline E also raises 
security concerns under this guideline. The security concern under this guideline is set 
out in AG ¶ 18 in pertinent part as follows: 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
 
7 
 
 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
 
  A disqualifying condition under this guideline may be raised by “deceptive or 
illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income 
tax evasion, expense account fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other 
intentional financial breaches of trust.” AG ¶ 19(d). Applicant’s fraudulent travel 
vouchers raise this disqualifying condition. 
 
 A disqualifying condition also may be raised by “failure to file annual Federal, 
state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same. AG ¶ 
19(f). Evidence that Applicant claimed false charitable contributions for 15 years on his 
federal income tax returns raises this disqualifying condition. 
 
Security concerns based on financial conduct can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@  AG ¶ 20(a).  Like AG ¶ 17(c) 
under Guideline E, this is a compound mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs 
and one conjunctive prong.   
 
The first prong (“so long ago”) is not established, because Applicant continued to 
file fraudulent tax returns through tax year 2006. The second prong (“so infrequent”) is 
not established because of his numerous fraudulent tax returns. The third prong 
(“occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur”) is not established, 
because his fraud occurred during routine filing of tax returns and travel vouchers.  
Finally, his fraudulent travel claims, and fraudulent tax returns over a 15-year period, 
continuing even after he knew the denial of his SCI application was based on part on his 
fraudulent tax returns, preclude a finding that it is unlikely to recur and cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@ AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
received counseling from a lawyer and an accountant, but he continued to file fraudulent 
returns.  I conclude AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, intelligent, exceptionally well-educated adult. He served as 
an officer in the Army reserve for twenty years. However, his history of fraudulent 
conduct suggests a propensity to violate rules for personal convenience and to 
rationalize his violations. He is highly regarded by many colleagues and friends; 
however, all but one of those who submitted statements on his behalf were unaware of 
his behavior. To this day, he has not been candid with his employer.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines E and 
F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a (1)-(6):    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
