                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-01436 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mr. Keith Willeford, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a thirty-four-year old Iranian born, naturalized U.S. citizen, who has 
lived in the United States since 1998. She has substantially more connections to the 
United States than to Iran. Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Iran. In 
2004, she showed her Iranian passport when she traveled to Iran. After a thorough 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and evidence, I conclude Applicant has 
rebutted or mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline C, foreign 
preference, and Guideline B, foreign influence. Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
 
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 11, 2007, detailing the security concerns under 
Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence. 
  
On August 29, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On October 16, 2007, I was assigned the case. On 
October 17, 2007, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing held on 
November 14, 2007. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3, which were 
admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on her own behalf. The record was kept open 
to allow Applicant to submit additional matters. On November 14, 2007, additional 
documents were received. Department Counsel did not object to the material and it was 
admitted into evidence as Ex. A and Ex. B. On November 26, 2007, the transcript (Tr.) 
was received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iran. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HEx) I─VIII. 
 
 Applicant’s counsel argued that the facts administratively noticed must be limited 
to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable dispute. The 
facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations in the 
SOR, with explanations. The admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of the record, case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old software engineer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since July 2005, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant was born in Iran in 1973. In 1998 her parents ─ now ages 60 and 68 ─ 
helped her and her two siblings leave Iran and move to the U.S. Applicant was 24 years 
old, her brother was 23, and her sister was 18. (Tr. 72) Her parents remained in Iran to 
care for their parents who were old and sick. (Tr. 35)  Applicant’s grandparents have 
since died. In December 1997, she obtained an Iranian passport (Ex. A) in order to 
leave the country. She entered the U.S. as a refugee because of her faith. (Tr. 27, Ex. 
 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
2)The passport initially expired in September 2002, but was renewed in May 2003, and 
expired in June 2007. The expired passport has been cut up. (Ex. B)  
 
  
Applicant showed her Iranian passport when she entered Iran in 2004. She had 
not seen her parents since leaving Iran in 1998. When she left Iran, she knew there was 
a real possibility she may never have seen her parents again. (Tr.45, 83) She was in 
Iran 17 days visiting her parents. Her father was ill suffering from heart problems. She 
used her U.S. passport when she left Iran. (Ex. 2)  
 
She became a U.S. citizen in November 2003. Her parents’ applications before 
the United States Citizenship and Immigration Service have been approved and they 
are awaiting visas to come to the U.S. since 2005. (Tr. 30, 58, Answer to SOR) They 
have been waiting since 2005. Neither of her parents have ever worked for or been 
affiliated with the current Iranian government. Before the 1979 Islamic Revolution, 
Applicant’s father worked for the city government and her mother was a teacher. (Tr. 28, 
56) Applicant has no intention of ever visiting Iran again. (Ex. 2) She is willing to 
denounce her Iranian citizenship. (Tr. 39) If someone tried to pressure her through her 
parents she would report it to the company security officer. (Tr. 45, 84)  She talks with 
her parents twice a month for ten minutes. (Tr. 49)  
 
 Applicant belongs to a faith that has been persecuted in Iran since 1979. Iran 
does not recognize it as a faith and people are not allowed to practice this religion in 
Iran. (Tr. 28, 53) People of her faith have been specifically persecuted by the 
government of Iran for practicing their religion. (Hex. 14, 15, 27) The Iranian 
government defines the faith as a political sect linked to the Shah monarchy and Israel, 
and, therefore, counter-revolutionary. (Tr. 91) As a member of her faith she is not 
allowed to have an Iranian National Identification Card.  She believes the Iranian 
government does not consider members of her faith to be Iranian citizens. (Answer to 
SOR) Members of her faith are not allowed higher education, to have a government job, 
to own land, and are not treated well in Iranian society. Applicant has no rights in Iran 
due to her religion. (Ex. 2) 
 
 After graduating high school in Iran, there was no way for Applicant to improve 
her life. She was not free to practice her religion, and could not get a job. There was no 
way to obtain a better job. (Tr. 34) Since coming to the U.S., Applicant states she has 
experienced freedom and the “American Dream.” She has obtained her bachelor’s and 
master’s degrees. She attended school full time and also worked full time on the night 
shift. (Tr. 73) She is married to a pharmacist and they have bought a house. Her 
husband is a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 39) 
 
Her brother resides in the U.S., has a master’s degree, and works as a senior 
associate accountant for an auditing and professional services firm. (Tr. 31) He is 
married and has two children. Application could not be made until Applicant’s brother 
had become a citizen. (Tr. 63) Her sister resides in the U.S., has a master’s degree, and 
 
 
 
4
                                                          
works as a civil engineer. Both her brother and sister are U.S. citizens. (Tr. 32) Her 
uncle, his wife, and their son immigrated to the U.S. in 1988. They currently live in the 
U.S. Her uncle is a college professor. In 1984, her aunt, her husband, and their son 
immigrated to the U.S. (Tr. 67) They live in the U.S. Her aunt owns a beauty salon. In 
2001, another uncle and his wife and two children immigrated to the U.S. All of her 
relatives living in the U.S. are U.S. citizens. (Tr. 33) 
 
Iran 
 
 Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The U.S. has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since 1980. The President’s National Security Strategy has stated 
that the United States “may face no greater challenge from a single country than from 
Iran.”  
 
The U.S. Government has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
 
$ Iran=s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction; 
$ Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; 
$ Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process;  
$ Its dismal human rights record; and 
$ Iran=s intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq.2 
 
 The U.S. has designated and characterized Iran as the most active state sponsor 
of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. The government 
of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses against the Iranian 
people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary executions, 
including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary arrest and 
detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; severe 
restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement and 
privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and legal 
and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.  
 
 The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens who were born in Iran and the children of Iranian 
citizens—even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian- 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
2Background Note; Country Reports on Terrorism 2006, U.S. Department of State Office of the 
Coordinator for Counter-Terrorism, dated April 30, 2007 (country Report on Terrorism). . 
 
 
 
5
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter/depart Iran using their U.S. 
passport; they even had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or departure. 
U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian government. 
Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. Hotel rooms, 
telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personnel possessions in hotel 
rooms may be searched. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
 
 
 
6
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Foreign Preference is a security concern when an individual acts in such a way 
as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she 
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests 
of the United States. AG & 9. Additionally, the possession or use of a foreign passport is 
a condition that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying. AG & 10(a) (1) 
Applicant did possess a now expired Iranian passport, which she used for identification 
when entering Iran in 2004. I find AG 10(a) applies.  
 
Even individuals without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves 
Iranian, are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not 
recognize dual citizenship. Because of her religious beliefs, Applicant is unable to hold 
an Iranian National Identification card and she does not believe Iran considers her a 
citizen. Even individuals holding U.S. citizenship, under Iranian law, must enter and exit 
Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian government has recognized a formal 
renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship.  
 
Applicant showed her Iranian passport when she entered Iran in 2004. Her 
parents are the only relatives she has in Iran. They have been approved by the United 
States Department of Justice Immigration and Naturalization Service for entry into the 
U.S. They are awaiting notification from the National Visa Center at the State 
Department to have their visas issued.  She has no need of the expired Iranian passport 
and destroyed it by cutting it up. The Iranian passport had expired in June 2007.  
 
AG & 11(e) sets forth conditions that could mitigate security concerns if the 
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or 
otherwise invalidated. First, the passport is no longer a valid passport. It expired in June 
2007.  Second, the passport was destroyed.  AG & 11(e) applies.  
 
Foreign Influence  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a 
foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, 
 
 
 
7
or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the 
foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens 
to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. AG & 6 
 
I have considered all of the Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions. Conditions 
that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying are listed under AG & 7. 
AG & 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion and AG & 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and the individual=s desire to help a foreign person, 
group, or country by providing that information, apply. Applicant’s parents are citizens 
and residents of Iran.  
 
 In 1989, Applicant ─ then age 25 ─ moved to the U.S. She obtained her 
bachelor’s and master’s degree. She became a U.S. citizen in November 2003. She is 
married and a home owner and has no foreign assets. Applicant has significant ties to 
the U.S. and few ties to Iran.  
 
¶ 8(a) “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country 
are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.” and ¶ 8(b) “there is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual=s sense of loyalty or obligations to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” apply to Applicant’s parents.  
 
 Applicant’s sense of loyalty is exclusively to the U.S. There is little likelihood 
Applicant has any conflict of interest.  If she did it is clear, due to her loyalty to the U.S. 
and the likely minimal nature of the conflict; that she would resolve the issue in favor of 
the U.S.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
 
 
8
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an established, highly regarded 
software engineer, with U.S. ties and assets. Since coming to the U.S., Applicant has 
experienced freedom and the “American Dream.”  She has obtained her bachelor’s and 
master’s degrees. She is married to a pharmacist and they have bought a house. Her 
brother, sister, aunt, uncles, and cousins resides in the U.S. Applicant stated she is 
loyal to the U.S. and would do nothing to compromise U.S. interests.  
 
I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iran and the heavy burden an 
applicant carries when she has family members in a foreign country that is clearly 
hostile to the United States, and the heavy burden an applicant carries when he or she 
has family members in a hostile country. Iran is the most active state sponsor of 
terrorism and has a dismal human rights record.  
 
Applicant has strong ties to the U.S. with limited contact with Iran. Her financial 
ties are in the U.S., and she and her husband own a home in the U.S. She owns no 
property and has no financial or business interests in Iran. All of her relatives, except 
her parents, are citizens and residents of the U.S., including her siblings, aunts, uncles, 
and cousins. Her parents have approved applications before the United States 
Citizenship and Immigration Service and are awaiting visas to come to the U.S. Neither 
of her parents have ever worked for or been affiliated with the current Iranian 
government. Applicant has no intention of ever visiting Iran again. Applicant has no 
rights in Iran due to her religion. Applicant’s faith has been persecuted in Iran since 
1979.  As a member of her faith she is not allowed higher education, to have a 
government job, to own land, is not treated as an Iranian citizen, and is treated poorly in 
Iranian society. Her sense of loyalty is exclusively to the U.S. She will never return to 
Iran. Applicant left Iran nine years ago and returned only once. Her parents are not 
connected to any foreign government. These facts minimize any potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress.  
 
Applicant was sincere, open, and honest at the hearing. In the unlikely event that 
her parents were subjected to coercion or duress from terrorist groups, I find that with 
Applicant’s deep relationships and loyalties to the U.S., including her uncompromising 
commitment to this country, Applicant would resolve any attempt to exert pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress in favor of the U.S. 
 
 
 
 
9
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated or overcome the foreign preference and foreign influence 
security concerns. I have no doubts concerning Applicant’s security eligibility and 
suitability. I conclude Applicant is eligible for access to classified information.  
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
