 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 07-09178 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns raised 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On September 29, 2006, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application 
(e-QIP). On October 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
H for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 28, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On December 20, 
2007, Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing five 
 
2 
 
 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy on December 26, 2007. Applicant 
received the FORM on January 2, 2008, and had 30 days from its receipt to file 
objections and submit additional information. Applicant did not submit additional 
evidence. On March 13, 2008, the case was assigned to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
   
 Applicant is 32 years old and married. In April 2003, he earned a Doctorate of 
Philosophy in Industrial Psychology. In May 2006, he began working as a research 
scientist for his current employer, a federal contractor. In September 2006, he submitted 
an e-QIP.  (Item 4). 
 
 In response to Section 24: Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity on the e-
QIP, Applicant disclosed the following information: (1) during August 2006, he used 
marijuana on one occasion; (2) from September 2002 to February 2006, he used 
marijuana 40-50 times; (3) in September 2003, he used cocaine once; (4) from January 
1999 to September 2002, he used marijuana 80-100 times; and (5) from February 2000 
to February 2002, he used cocaine three times. (Item 4 at 39). 
 
 In September 2007, Applicant completed Interrogatories regarding the above 
information. Applicant again disclosed the frequency and amount of his drug usage, and 
noted that he also used marijuana from August 1993 to December 1998 about 80 to 100 
times. He asserted, “I stopped smoking marijuana in 2/2006. I did smoke once again in 
8/2006 but have not since then.” (Item 5 at 60). He decided to quit using illegal drugs 
because “it was time to “grow up” and know that if I wanted to receive a clearance one 
day that I would have to stop.” (Id.).  During a December 2006 interview with a 
government investigator, Applicant indicated that he never purchased marijuana or 
cocaine, but obtained it at social settings. (Id. at 26).  His wife, parents and close friends 
know he used marijuana, but not the extent. They do not know about his cocaine use.  
Because he never felt addicted to marijuana, he has not sought treatment to cease 
using it.  (Id.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used to evaluate 
an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
 
3 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a 
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: (1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified 
and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
 
4 
 
 
hallucinogens), and; (2) inhalants and other similar substances; (b) drug 
abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction. 
AG ¶¶ 25(a)-(h) describe eight Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions that 
may be applicable to security concerns raised under this guideline. Based on 
Applicant’s admissions that he used cocaine and marijuana from approximately August 
1993 until September 2006, the Government raised a potentially disqualifying condition 
under AG ¶ 25(a) “any drug abuse (see above definition).” 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of that disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation. 
Four Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 26 (a)-(d) are potentially 
applicable:  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and, 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 I reviewed the record evidence as a whole and conclude none apply. AG ¶ 26(a) 
does not apply because Applicant has frequently used marijuana and occasionally 
cocaine for the past fourteen years.  His drug abuse does cast doubt on his current 
reliability and raises questions about his trustworthiness and good judgment.  Other 
than his assertion in September 2007 that he has abstained from using illegal drugs 
since August 2006 and does not intend to use drugs in the future, Applicant did not 
produce any independent substantive evidence to corroborate his claim. Given the 
 
5 
 
 
frequency of his use since 1993, his statement alone is not persuasive and does not 
demonstrate an intention to stop abusing drugs, sufficient to trigger the application of   
AG ¶ 26(b).  His drug use has not involved the abuse of prescription drugs, as required 
under AG ¶ 26(c), nor has he completed a drug treatment program, which is necessary 
to establish AG ¶ 26(d). 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 In addition to evaluating the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each 
guideline, the adjudicative process requires thorough consideration and review of all 
available, reliable information about the applicant, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, to arrive at a balanced decision. The essence of scrutinizing all appropriate 
variables in a case is referred to as the “whole person” analysis. In evaluating the 
conduct of the applicant, the Administrative Judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Those factors include: (1) the nature, extent, and 
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 32-year-old highly 
educated man, who began voluntarily using illegal drugs in 1993 and continued using 
them until August 2006, three months after beginning his current employment with a 
federal contractor. While his September 2007 statement that he does not intend to use 
marijuana or cocaine in the future, along with his honest disclosure of his drug history, 
represent positive steps in addressing his drug problem, they are woefully inadequate to 
mitigate years of illegal drug use. Although he claims he is not addicted to marijuana, 
the evidence tends to paint a different picture. Absent independent corroboration, such 
as an evaluation from an appropriately credentialed health care provider or other 
source, documenting Applicant’s assertions that he is drug free, along with proof of 
honest disclosures to his family about his drug use, he did not demonstrate that it is 
unlikely that he will cease using illegal drugs in the future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
