 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-07988 
 SSN:  )  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations and Personal Conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on October 9, 
2006. On September 18, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F 
and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on September 27, 2007, which was 
received at DOHA on October 2, 2007. He answered the SOR in writing on November 
19, 2007, which he supplemented on November 27, 2007, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received the responses/requests on November 
 
2 
 
 
21, 2007, and November 28, 2007, respectively. Department Counsel was prepared to 
proceed on January 10, 2008, and I received the case assignment on January 17, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 23, 2008, scheduling the hearing for 
February 20, 2008.  The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, which 
were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 28, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Except for SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.g., 2.a., and 2.b., Applicant admitted all of the SOR 
allegations with explanations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
During the hearing, Applicant amended his answer to ¶ 1.c. from “denial” to “admit.” Tr. 
38-39. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old senior computer scientist, who has worked for his 
defense contractor employer since August 2006. He is a first-time applicant for a 
security clearance. He graduated from high school in June 1979, and did not pursue 
higher education after receiving his high school diploma. Tr. 67-68. 
 
Applicant was previously married to his first wife from July 1988 to January 1998, 
and to his second wife from April 1998 to April 2001. Both those marriages ended by 
divorce. He married his current and third wife in December 2002. Applicant has a 14-
year-old daughter and a 15-year-old stepson. GE 1, Tr. 25-26.  
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his October 2006 and August 2007 credit bureau reports. GE 2, 
GE 4. During a background investigation interview in December 2006, an Office of 
Personnel (OPM) Investigator confronted Applicant about his delinquencies. He stated 
to the Investigator that he does not intend to pay any of these debts. He explained he 
was told by his equity loan officer when applying for a loan that if he took any action on 
the delinquent accounts, the accounts would become current, as opposed to their 
current status as unpaid and dormant accounts. He further explained if the accounts 
became current, his credit score would become very low and he would be ineligible for 
loans and other financial considerations. For this reason, he chose to ignore the 
accounts unless the creditors actively pursued him. GE 3 (Results of Interview 
December 2006).  
 
Applicant’s financial problems started around 2001 to 2002. Although his divorce 
from his second wife became final in 2002, he denied having difficulty paying his bills. 
Tr. 50-51. When queried by Department Counsel whether he was having difficulty 
paying his bills, Applicant responded, “No. I was just not diligent in paying my bills.” Tr. 
51. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s SOR identified seven debts ranging from $109 to $9,252 for a total of 
about $18,911. SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.g. His position at his hearing did not change from 
the time he was interviewed by OPM. He provided various explanations regarding each 
debt, but provided no documentation corroborating his position or documentation that 
suggested he attempted or had attempted to resolve any of the debts. In short, all debts 
alleged have not been addressed and are still outstanding. Tr. 70-73. 
 
In October 2006, Applicant submitted a security clearance application. GE 1.  
Applicant answered “No” to questions 28(a) and 28(b) [asking whether in the last seven 
years he had been 180 days delinquent on any debt, and whether he was currently 90 
days delinquent on any debts (respectively)]. He failed to disclose the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g. Applicant denied that he deliberately provided false responses 
to these questions. Applicant claims that he “was unaware of any debts that were 180 
days past due,” and “[n]one of the debts in question showed up on my request for a 
FHA mortgage, which would not have been possible had any account been even 30 
days past due. The [bank] debts were bought by [bank] from the original creditor, and 
are not current. According to my mortgage consultant, paying those debts would have 
brought them current, and resulted in my mortgage being denied. By not responding to 
[bank’s] requests, I kept them off of my current report, and out of my current FICO 
score.” Response to SOR. 
 
Applicant’s testimony at his hearing provided a similar explanation. He adds in 
his Response to SOR and in his testimony that he brought up the bank mortgage debt 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.) during his OPM interview. Response to SOR, Tr. 63-67. In assessing 
Applicant’s credibility on this point, I do not find his explanation credible. He was aware 
of past due account concerns when discussing his credit history with his mortgage 
consultant, aware enough to consciously not pay them to prevent their being 
reactivated. The SOR debts clearly fell within the period covered by questions 28(a) and 
28(b). 
 
Applicant submitted four reference letters that provided favourable comments 
about his character and supported his being granted a clearance. AE A through D. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),1 the Government’s concern is that 
an Applicant’s “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” 
1  Guideline ¶ 18. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant has a history of failing to meet his financial obligations dating back to 
2001. Since then, he has accumulated at least seven delinquent/charged off debts 
totaling approximately $18,911. In December 2006, Applicant was confronted about his 
financial problems and indicated he does not intend to pay any of the unpaid accounts. 
He presented no evidence to show he has taken any action to resolve his debts. As of 
the hearing date, he still had the same seven outstanding delinquent/charged off debts. 
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) ¶ 19(a): inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts; and FC DC ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial 
obligations; apply in this case.  
 
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,2 I conclude that none of the 
mitigating conditions apply. Applicant presented no evidence documenting efforts taken 
to contact creditors, or to resolve any of the debts since he acquired them. Nor is there 
any evidence that he has participated in any financial counseling. I specifically 
considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) Guidelines ¶ 20(b): 
The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances, and conclude it does not apply.  
 
Applicant’s uncorroborated testimony fails to establish mitigating factors that may 
be considered as circumstances beyond his control contributing to his inability to pay his 
debts. By his own admission, his divorce did not interrupt his income stream to preclude 
him from remaining current on his debts. His failure to responsibly deal with his debts 
appears to be a conscious choice. When confronted with the Government’s concerns 
that his financial past was a security concern, he failed to pursue any corrective action 
that would have included disputing or otherwise resolving past debts.   
 
He presented no evidence to show he dealt responsibly with his financial 
obligations before, or especially after receipt of the SOR (i.e., paid debts, settlements, 
documented negotiations, payment plans, budgets, financial assistance/counseling). 
Applicant’s financial history and lack of favorable evidence preclude a finding that he 
has established a track record of financial responsibility, or that he has taken control of 
his financial situation. Based on the available evidence, his financial problems are likely 
to be a concern in the future. Moreover, his financial problems are recent, not isolated, 
and ongoing.  
 
Under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), conduct involving questionable judgment, 
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can 
raise questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. Guideline & 15. 
2  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered as 
a whole. 
 
6 
 
 
As noted, Applicant’s explanation for failing to disclose truthful responses to 
questions 28(a), and 28(b) is not credible. Considering the record as a whole, I am 
convinced Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the information. Numerous factors 
weighed in my analysis to reach that conclusion, including: Applicant=s age, his level of 
education, his employment history, his demeanor and testimony, the number and value 
of the debts, his long term disregard of the debts, and the lack of credibility of his 
excuses. He knew the importance of accurate completion of his security clearance 
application, and nevertheless failed to provide information that was material to making 
an informed security decision. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 16(a): deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire 
. . ., and DC 16(e): personal conduct or concealment of information about one=s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress . . ., apply. 
 
I specifically considered all Guideline E Mitigating Conditions (MC) and conclude 
that none apply. Applicant=s falsification is recent, and his favorable information is not 
sufficient to apply any of the MCs. Additionally, for the same reasons outlined under the 
discussions of Guidelines F, incorporated herein, I conclude Applicant=s behavior shows 
questionable judgment, lack of reliability, and untrustworthiness.  
 
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. 
Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision. In reaching this conclusion, the whole person concept was given due 
consideration and that analysis does not support a favorable decision. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
   
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
