 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-00383 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
Thomas Coale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his personal conduct and 
criminal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
On October 9, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 26, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to another 
Administrative Judge on January 17, 2008, and reassigned to me on January 31, 2008. 
 
2 
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 13, 2008, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on March 12, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called one 
witness, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through F, without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 21, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a through 1.d and 1.f through 1.i. He denied the remaining allegations.  
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is attending 
college. He is married with no children.1 Applicant has had a number of jobs, some he 
left voluntarily and some he left involuntarily. A number of the SOR allegations relate to 
concerns about his employment. 
 
 Applicant was terminated from employment with a company where he worked 
from about 1994 to 1995. He admitted he was “fired,” and indicated that he believed it 
may have been related to his requesting a raise. He was working at a job site and was 
called back to a previous site and was informed they were letting him go. He further 
speculated that the termination may have been related to the quality of his installation 
work at the previous site, but he was never given a specific reason for the termination. 
No other evidence was submitted as to why the company ended his employment.2  
 
 Applicant left employment with a company where he worked from about January 
1996 to August 1996, under “unfavorable circumstances.” Applicant did similar work on 
his own to what he did for the company for family, friends, and other people. He stated 
this could have been viewed as a conflict of interest. He did not use company tools or 
supplies on the side jobs. No other evidence was submitted as to why his employment 
was terminated.3  
 
 Applicant was terminated by his employer from a job he held from about March 
2002 to August 2002. He was not given a reason for the termination, other than they 
told him that he had a brilliant mind, but they could not afford to keep him. He later was 
unable to locate the company and concluded that it went out of business and that he 
was therefore “laid off.” No other evidence was submitted as to why the company ended 
his employment.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges Applicant was terminated by his employer from a job he held 
from about October 2002 to June 2003, following charges of sexual harassment. 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 172-173; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 34-38, 104-115; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1, 6, 8.  
 
3 Tr. at 39-44, 115-119; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1, 6. 7. 
 
4 Tr. at 45-48, 120-124; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1, 8. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant admitted he was terminated from his employment and that it followed an 
allegation of sexual harassment, but he denied that he sexually harassed anyone. He 
stated that in June 2003, he and his wife were planning a trip to a vacation resort. A 
female co-worker had recently returned from the same area. He asked the co-worker for 
a picture intending to show it to his wife. The co-worker filed a complaint and Applicant 
was subsequently terminated and told that the company had a zero tolerance policy. 
Applicant believes the true reason for the termination was a salary dispute. No evidence 
was submitted to dispute Applicant’s recitation of events.5 
 
 Applicant started working for a company in about November 2003. In about 
November 2004, the company initiated an investigation into allegations made by two 
females at his work site. The company concluded in a letter dated November 11, 2004: 
 
[Company] was unable to substantiate the allegations made by the two 
non-[Company] employees. While the company has concluded that your 
words and actions did not amount to a violation of the law or of company 
policy, [Company] did conclude that you made insensitive comments 
inappropriate for the workplace, which contributed to the allegations being 
raised.6 
 
Applicant stated that the allegations were related to a married male co-worker and a 
female employee at the work site. Applicant advised him that they should not spend so 
much time together, and at one point referred to her in front of him as a “chicken head,” 
which he described as “someone who doesn’t commit and walks around getting into 
everything.” When the male co-worker stated that Applicant could lose his job for his 
comments, Applicant responded with words to the effect: 
 
I have a perfect record, no write ups, I come to work everyday and do my 
job. If some one come after my job I will come after them and squash 
them like a bug legally.7 
 
No evidence was submitted to counter Applicant’s account of the events. At some point 
Applicant went to a part-time status, but he continued to work at the same company 
until he resigned almost a year later in about October 2005.8 
 
 Applicant was denied access to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and 
Explosives (ATF) information and/or facilities on June 22, 2005. ATF based the denial in 
part on Applicant’s unfavorable employment history and his “lack of candor in 
discussing the reasons for [his] termination with [Company alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d].”9  
                                                          
5 Tr. at 48-60, 124-139; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1, 2, 8. 
 
6 GE 2. 
 
7 Id. 
 
8 Tr. at 61-74, 100, 139-146; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1, 2, 8; AE D. 
 
9 Tr. at 66-73; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant was laid off from employment with a company in about June 2005, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, after he failed to obtain access to ATF information and/or 
facilities.10 
 
 Applicant started working for a company in June 2005. He was responsible for 
checking the room at the end of the day for classified materials. In about the fall of 
2005, Applicant came to work in the morning. Two co-workers told him that they found a 
classified computer drive that had been left unsecured the previous night by one of his 
co-workers. The hard drive was in a cubicle out of plain sight. The hard drive was 
marked as classified, but it was brand new and had not yet been used, so no actual 
classified information was on the drive. They discussed reporting the incident. Applicant 
did not feel that it was his fault that the drive was left unsecured and the discussion 
became heated. He told them to do what they had to do and that he would see them 
later. The co-workers may have taken the statements as a veiled threat, something 
Applicant vehemently denies. Applicant requested and was granted a transfer to a 
different team. No disciplinary action was taken against him. He continued to work for 
the company until he voluntarily left the company in about April 2007.11 
 
 Applicant has been attending college off and on since he first enrolled in July 
1999. The college has a workplace mentor program. Material from the college describes 
the workplace mentor as “usually the student’s supervisor, but sometimes an 
experienced colleague, [who] assists the student in those aspects of the program that 
relate directly to the workplace.” Other options also exist when the above is not a viable 
option. Applicant had to repeat three classes that he took in 2002. He stated that his 
mentor was a member of the faculty who left employment with the school. A mentor was 
required to fill out an evaluation for certain class projects. When it came time for him to 
turn in his work, Applicant was unable to contact his mentor. He stated his instructor told 
him to sign the form himself, which he did. This ultimately resulted in Applicant having to 
retake three classes. Applicant’s faculty advisor wrote a letter on July 24, 2007, stating 
that Applicant was not suspended; he elected to discontinue classes and that “while 
there was an issue regarding certain classes, it was not plagiarism.”12 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for National Security Positions 
(SF 86) certified as true on October 3, 2005. Applicant answered “Yes” to Question 22, 
which asked about adverse employment terminations. He listed that he was fired from 
the company alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, and provided a detailed discussion about the 
termination and how it related to his salary dispute. SOR ¶ 1.j alleges that Applicant 
falsified the SF 86 by not fully discussing the circumstances surrounding his termination 
from the company alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d and by failing to list his termination of 
employment from the company alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, following his inability to obtain 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
10 Id. 
 
11 Tr. at 73-79, 146-153; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2. 
 
12 Tr. at 80-84, 101, 153-164; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1, 2, 9; AE E. 
 
 
5 
 
access to ATF information and/or facilities. While he may not have included all the 
information directly on the SF 86, he attached 11 pages of documents to the 
questionnaire, which discussed both incidents in great detail.13 
 
 On the same SF 86, Applicant answered “No” to Question 26, which asked in 
part if he “ever had a clearance or access authorization denied, suspended, or 
revoked,” or if he had “ever been debarred from government employment.” SOR ¶ 1.k 
alleges Applicant falsified material facts on the SF 86 by deliberately failing to list that 
he was denied access to ATF information and/or facilities in 2005. Applicant testified he 
misinterpreted the question and he did not think the ATF denial had to be included in 
this question. He clearly was not trying to withhold this information from the government 
as he included a copy of the ATF denial letter in the attachments to the SF 86.14 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) certified 
as true on February 23, 2006. He answered “Yes’” to Question 12, which asked about 
adverse employment terminations. He listed that he was fired from the company alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.d, writing that the reason was because of a “[r]eduction in pay dispute.” Like 
the SF 86 he submitted approximately four and a half months earlier, he again 
answered “No” to the question which asked if he ever was denied a clearance or 
access. SOR ¶ 1.l alleges that Applicant falsified the SF 85P by not fully discussing the 
circumstances surrounding his termination from that company and by failing to list his 
termination of employment from the companies alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.g. 
Applicant listed all three companies in the employment history section of the 
questionnaire. SOR ¶ 1.m alleges Applicant falsified the SF 85P by not listing the denial 
of access to ATF information and/or facilities in 2005. Applicant testified that he gave 
the same attachments to his security officer as he provided with the previous 
questionnaire. When he was interviewed for his background investigation on May 22, 
2006, the investigator had a copy of the attachments.15  
 
 I find that Applicant did not intentionally falsify either the 2005 SF 86 or the 2006 
SF 85P. There is independent evidence that Applicant provided all the requested 
information as attachments to the 2005 SF 86. While there is no independent evidence 
that Applicant attached the same documents to the 2006 SF 85P, it is not logical to 
believe that he would attempt to hide from the government the facts that he previously 
divulged several months earlier. 
 
 A statement was not provided of Applicant’s background interview on May 22, 
2006, but the interview was summarized in a Report of Investigation (ROI). Applicant 
was sent Interrogatories containing the ROI and was asked if the ROI accurately 
reflected the information that he provided to the investigator. He certified on July 23, 
2007 that it was accurate, with some minor corrections. He was provided an opportunity 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 60, 85-88; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
14 Tr. at 89-91, 168-171; GE 1, 2. 
 
15 Tr. at 92-96, 165-167; GE 2, 3, 8. 
 
 
6 
 
to add additional information regarding the matters discussed during his interview and 
submitted a statement about the issue with the mentor, as discussed above, and the 
letter from his faculty advisor. The ROI contains information about Applicant’s 
education, and includes the sentence, “He is unknown to school disciplinarians.” This 
sentence forms the basis for SOR ¶ 1.n, which alleges that Applicant “deliberately failed 
to disclose that [he was] required to retake classes following an inquiry into allegations 
of improper conduct.” Applicant has admitted that he was required to retake three 
courses.16 That is not enough to extrapolate that there was “an inquiry into allegations of 
improper conduct.” This was not a sworn or a signed statement; it is a summarized ROI, 
without the testimony of the interviewer. Applicant stated the interview was about five 
hours long. He stated the interviewer asked him if he had any problems at the college 
and he responded that he did not. His having to retake classes did not come to his mind 
at that time. He testified that he was never disciplined at the school, but acknowledged 
that some people could interpret the retaking of the classes as a form of disciplinary 
action. There is insufficient evidence for a finding that Applicant intentionally provided 
false or misleading information to the investigator, or concealed information. 
 
 Applicant’s first day with his current employer was the day before the hearing. He 
changed jobs for greater compensation. His supervisor at his previous employment 
testified on his behalf. He rated Applicant’s job performance as outstanding and 
described him as reliable, trustworthy and someone who gets along with everybody. 
Thirteen character letters were submitted on his behalf. Applicant is described as 
competent, dependable, efficient, honest, responsible, hard working, reliable, 
compassionate, and resourceful, with a high degree of integrity.17 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
16 Tr. at 96-99; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1, 2, 8. 
 
17 Tr. at 21-32, 99; AE C. 
 
 
7 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
8 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations;  
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's personal, 
professional, or community standing; and  
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment.  
 
9 
 
 Applicant did not deliberately omit, conceal, or falsify relevant facts on his 
questionnaires. SOR ¶¶ 1.j through 1.m are concluded for Applicant. The government 
has not established that Applicant deliberately provided false or misleading information 
about his college education during his background interview. SOR ¶1.n is also 
concluded for Applicant.  
 
 A number of the SOR allegations refer to Applicant being terminated from 
employment. There can be a number of reasons for a job termination that have 
absolutely no correlation with a person’s conduct or security worthiness. SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
and 1.c allege that Applicant was fired from employment in 1995 and 2002, but does not 
provide a reason for the termination. No evidence was submitted that Applicant’s 
personal conduct was the basis for the terminations. Applicant left employment under 
unfavorable circumstances in 1996, as alleged in SOR ¶1.b, when there was a potential 
conflict of interest because he was working on the side doing similar business as his 
company.  
 
 Applicant was terminated from employment in 2003, as alleged in SOR ¶1.d, 
following charges of sexual harassment. Applicant admitted he was terminated but 
denied that his actions of asking a co-worker for a picture constituted sexual 
harassment. The government presented no evidence that the incident happened in any 
way other than described by Applicant. I find that the incident as described by Applicant 
did not amount to sexual harassment.  
 
 SOR ¶1.e alleges Applicant resigned from employment in October 2005, 
following an investigation into allegations of sexual harassment. The allegations and 
investigation were in November 2004. The company was unable to substantiate the 
allegations but concluded Applicant made insensitive comments inappropriate for the 
workplace. No evidence was submitted at the hearing for a finding that Applicant 
sexually harassed anyone during this period. There is sufficient evidence that he made 
insensitive comments in the workplace. There is no evidence that his resignation almost 
a year later was connected to the allegations.  
 
 Applicant was denied access to ATF information and/or facilities in June 2005, as 
alleged in SOR ¶1.f, essentially for the same reasons as the allegations in the SOR. 
The government did not submit evidence of personal conduct additional to what was 
already alleged in other allegations of the SOR. Applicant was terminated from 
employment in June 2005, because he was unable to obtain ATF access. This does not 
allege inappropriate personal conduct on Applicant’s behalf. It alleges a consequence of 
other personal conduct by Applicant, which is discussed under other allegations. 
 
 Applicant voluntarily transferred to a different office in 2005, after a somewhat 
heated discussion with co-workers after a classified hard drive was left unsecured 
overnight. Department Counsel stated the personal conduct concern in SOR ¶1.h was 
not the potential security violation, but was Applicant’s conduct during the heated 
discussion. Applicant admitted the discussion became heated and that he told them to 
do what they had to do and that he would see them later. He denied that he meant this 
in any way to be a threat.  
 
10 
 
 Applicant had to repeat three college classes that he took in 2002, after he 
signed a form that was to be signed by his mentor. He stated his instructor told him to 
sign the form himself, after Applicant was unable to contact his mentor. His faculty 
advisor wrote a letter stating that Applicant was not suspended, and there was an issue 
regarding certain classes, but it did not amount to plagiarism. 
 
 Virtually all the information which formed the basis for the allegations in the SOR 
came from Applicant, through his questionnaires, his attachments to his questionnaires, 
his interviews with investigators, and his responses to Interrogatories. Some allegations 
of the SOR were not established by evidence, as discussed above. Several other 
allegations were true but did not invoke a security concern. The admitted information of 
concern is that Applicant’s side job in 1996 involved a potential conflict of interest with 
his employment; he retook college classes in 2002 after he signed a form at the 
direction of his instructor; he asked a co-worker for a picture in 2003; he made 
insensitive comments in 2004; and he had a heated discussion with co-workers in 2005. 
This information is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e). On a number of occasions 
Department Counsel raised suggestions of personal conduct, but did not submit any 
evidence to rebut Applicant’s account of events. Questions by Department Counsel, 
without admissions by an applicant, do not constitute record evidence. A credibility 
determination is not a substitute for record evidence.18  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
                                                          
18 In ISCR Case No. 02-12789 at 4 (App. Bd. May 13, 2005) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 
4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004), the Appeal Board stated: 
 
An unfavorable credibility determination provides an Administrative Judge with a basis for 
deciding to disbelieve an applicant's testimony. However, mere disbelief of that 
testimony, standing alone, is not a sufficient basis for a Judge to conclude that an 
applicant did something (e.g., engaged in drug use or other acts constituting poor 
judgment other than on a given date) for which there is no independent evidence. An 
applicant does not have the burden of disproving a controverted fact; rather, the burden 
of proving controverted facts falls on Department Counsel. If an applicant has not 
admitted to engaging in specific acts of misconduct, and if there is no record evidence in 
that regard, then a Judge has no rational basis to find such misconduct occurred. 
(internal citations omitted)  
 
 
11 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability;  
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s 
reliability, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and the individual 
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress. 
I contrast the established nominal personal conduct with the very favorable 
character evidence presented by Applicant. On balance, I find the conduct is minor, so 
much time has passed, and it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 16(c) is applicable. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
It is a criminal offense to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, 
fictitious, or fraudulent statement or representation in any matter within the executive 
branch of the Government of the United States. 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Security clearances 
are within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the Government of the United 
States. A violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious offense as it may be punished by 
imprisonment for up to five years. Applicant did not knowingly and willfully make 
materially false statements on his questionnaires and interview, as discussed above. No 
Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Condition is applicable. 
 
 
 
12 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has held many different 
jobs, some of which he left involuntarily. He has been involved in several minor 
incidents of questionable personal conduct, the most recent in the fall of 2005. 
Department Counsel asked about other conduct, which Applicant denied, but submitted 
no evidence to substantiate the conduct. Virtually every piece of adverse information 
about Applicant came directly or indirectly from him. I also considered the testimony of 
his witness and the very favorable character letters. I do not find that Applicant’s 
conduct can be a basis for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal and 
criminal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:  For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
13 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
