                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-01101
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
March 17, 2008
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY-ANDERSON, Darlene, Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on November
24, 2004. On October 22, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as amended) issued a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the Applicant and
recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether clearance
should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on December 13, 2007, and
requested a hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to
the undersigned on January 15, 2008.  A notice of hearing was issued on January 23,
2008, scheduling the hearing for February 13, 2008.  At the hearing the Government
presented six exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 6.  The Applicant
presented two exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A and B.  The Applicant also
testified on her own behalf.  The record remained open until February 23, 2008, to allow
2
the Applicant to submit additional supporting documentation.  She did not submit any
additional documentation.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on February 27,
2008.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 52 years old and has a Masters Degree in Biology.  She is
employed by a defense contractor as a Computer Consultant and is seeking to obtain a
security clearance in connection with her employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she is financially overextended and at risk
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
In 1986, the Applicant and her husband started their own computer consulting
business that they ran out of their house.  From 1986 through 1998, they had an
accountant who prepared their tax returns, but did not do a good job.  The Applicant
claims that their business expenses were significantly underestimated and so they are
now being held liable for this situation.  From 1987 until 1994, the Applicant worked full
time for another company.  In 1994, she started doing independent consulting
exclusively for her own business.  In approximately 1996/1997, the Applicant learned
that they had serious tax problems and she took over the financial responsibilities of the
company.  Since then, she has been trying to resolve their tax problems. Additional tax
problems surfaced following 9/11 when the Applicant was unemployed for eighteen
months.    
The Applicant admits that she is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service in the
amount of $188,788.49 in taxes, penalties and interest for tax years 1992 through 1997.
Notices of federal tax liens were filed against her in 1995, 1997, 2000 and 2001 for non-
payment of her federal income tax debt.  (See Government Exhibit 5).  
The Applicant also admits that she is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service in
the amount of $67,180.04 in taxes, penalties and interest for tax years 2001 and 2003.
(See Government Exhibit 5).
The Applicant denies that she is indebted to the California Franchise Tax Board
in the amount of $6,716.17.  She has set up a payment plan and has been making
regular monthly payments towards her indebtedness.  She currently owes
approximately  $2,171.72, and has only eleven payments left until she has paid the debt
in full.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit B). 
3
In numerous conversations with the IRS, it was suggested to the Applicant that
she sell her home which has sufficient equity to pay her delinquent federal tax debt.
The Applicant did not find this to be a reasonable solution because of her two adult
children who come to visit from time to time, and because she maintains two offices and
networks of computers in her home.
In March 2005, the Applicant made an offer and compromise of $50,000.00 cash
to resolve all of her delinquent federal tax issues.  This offer was rejected.  Since then,
over the past two and a half years, the Applicant has been trying to get the IRS to
reconsider her original offer and compromise or place her on a payment plan.  She has
met with an IRS representative on several occasions and she has provided them the
requested documentation.  (See Applicant’s Exhibit A).  She is currently awaiting a
response.  She has not spoken to any one from the IRS since September 2007.  The
Applicant has even secured a promise of a mortgage loan from a lender to show the
IRS that she had the funds immediately available to start paying on the debt.
The Applicant was told by the IRS at one time that because her indebtedness
was so large, no one agent had the authority to handle it.  (Tr. p. 65).  She was also told
that by the end of September 2007, her tax indebtedness would have increased to
approximately $350,000.00.  (Tr. p. 63).
Since the Applicant started taking over the financial side of the business, she has
been paying their taxes in full each year and has recently started making quarterly tax
payments.  They have also hired a competent accountant in order to prevent future tax
problems.
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.
4
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
19(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
 a.  The nature and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding circumstances
b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e.  The voluntariness of participation
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes
g.  The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
5
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, a security clearance is entrusted to civilian workers who
must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information twenty-four hours per
day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore appropriately concerned when
available information indicates that an Applicant for such access may be involved in
instances of financial irresponsibility which demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with her security clearance eligibility.
Since 1996/1997, the Applicant has known about her serious tax delinquencies.
Over the years, the penalties and interest have continued to accrue, increasing her tax
liability.  Although she states that she has been consistently working to resolve these
issues, it is clear that she has not been as diligent as she should have.  She presently
owes, from her own admission, approximately $350,000.00 in delinquent federal tax
debt.  Her offer and compromise of $50,000.00 was not acceptable to the IRS.  She has
not made one payment toward resolving her enormous federal tax liability.  With regard
to her delinquent state tax, she is currently making payments toward the debt and has
reduced it, and plans to continue to pay it until it is paid off in full.  However, she has not
started to reduce her delinquent federal tax debt and has a long way to go before it is
resolved.  At the present time, she has not presented sufficient evidence to demonstrate
a track record of financial responsibility or that she has resolved her financial
indebtedness.  Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced
6
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome
the Government's case. 
 Upon review of her financial statement, it appears that she has some disposable
income at the end of the month to pay her delinquent federal tax debt.  However, given
the large amount of  federal tax debt that she owes, and the fact that she has not yet
made even one payment toward the debt, there is little evidence of financial
rehabilitation at this time.  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying
Conditions 19(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts and 19(c) a history of not
meeting financial obligations apply.  None of the mitigating conditions apply.  Her
financial problems remain current, they are not isolated, and the Applicant has not
initiated a prompt, good faith effort to repay her overdue creditors or otherwise resolve
his debts.   Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).  
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing her request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the Government's Statement of Reasons.     
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interests to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
