 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )    ISCR Case No. 07-03216 
 SSN:                                                   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), on 
August 4, 2006. On August 8, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On August 30, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on 
the administrative record. DOHA received Applicant’s answer to the SOR on September 
4, 2007.  On September 15, 2007, Department Counsel requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge in accordance with ¶ E3.1.7 of the Directive. Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed on November 20, 2007. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on November 27, 2007. The case was transferred to me on 
December 10, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 22, 2008, and I 
 
2 
 
 
convened the hearing as scheduled on February 7, 2008. The government offered 
Exhibits (Gov Ex) 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified 
on his own behalf and submitted four documents which were admitted as Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A – D without objections. On February 13, 2008, Applicant submitted a 13-
page document which is admitted as AE E without objection.  DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr) on February 19, 2008. The record closed on March 1, 
2008. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
 On January 29, 2008, the Government submitted a Motion for Telephone 
Testimony. On February 1, 2008, I denied the request.  At hearing, the Government 
withdrew their motion for telephone testimony and requested the record be left open 
until February 14, 2008, to allow them to submit an incident report.  Applicant did not 
object. The Government had until February 14, 2008 to submit the additional document. 
(Tr at 8-9.) The Government was required to serve a copy of the document on the 
Applicant. Applicant had until March 1, 2008, to submit any additional comments or 
suggestions pertaining to the additional document. On February 14, 2008, the 
Government submitted a JPAS Incident History, which was admitted as Gov 6. 
Applicant did not submit a response pertaining to Gov 6. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 Administrative notice is taken of General Order Number 1 (GO-1), Prohibited 
Activities for U.S. Department of Defense Personnel Assigned to the Multi-National 
Corps – Iraq (MNC-I) or present within the MNC-I Area of Responsibility (AOR), from 
Headquarters Multi-National Corps – Iraq, dated February 12, 2005, a copy of which  
was admitted as Gov 5.      
 
 The following sections are noted, in particular: 
 
 PURPOSE: To identify conduct that is prejudicial to the maintenance of 
 good order and discipline to all forces assigned to the MNC-I or present 
 within the MNC-I AOR. 
 
 APPLICABILITY: This General Order is applicable to all United States 
 military personnel, and to civilians serving with, employed by, or 
 accompanying the Armed Forces of the United States, while assigned to 
 the MNC-I or while present in the MNC-I AOR except for personnel 
 expressly excluded under USCENTCOM GO-1A.  This General Order also 
 applies to all United States military personnel, and to civilians serving with, 
 employed by, or accompanying the Armed Forces of the United States, 
 while under the operational control of the Commander, MNC-I and present 
 for duty in Kuwait or Iraq. Such duty includes but is not limited to pre-
 deployment site surveys, leader’s recons, and advanced party 
 
3 
 
 
 deployments. This General Order is not applicable to any personnel 
 assigned to XVIII Airborne  Corps (Rear) or personnel located outside the 
 USCENTCOM AOR. 
 
STATEMENT OF MILITARY PURPOSE AND NECESSITY: Current 
operations and deployments place United States Armed Forces into areas 
where local laws and customs prohibit or restrict certain activities that are 
generally permissible in western societies. Restrictions upon these 
activities are essential to fostering US/host nation relations and combined 
operations of US and friendly forces. In addition, the high operational 
tempo combined with the hazardous duty faced by MNC-I soldiers and 
other US forces in the MNC-I AOR makes it necessary to restrict certain 
activities in order to maintain good order and discipline and ensure optimal 
readiness. 
 
2. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES: in accordance with and in addition to 
USCENTCOM GO-1A, the following activities are prohibited: 
 
 a. Purchase, possession, use or sale of privately owned firearms, 
ammunition, explosives, or the introduction of these items into the MNC-I 
AOR. 
 
 c. Introduction, possession, sale, transfer, manufacture or 
consumption of any alcoholic beverage within the MNC-I AOR. This 
restriction also prohibits the introduction, possession, sale, transfer, 
manufacture or consumption of any alcoholic beverage by military 
personnel or civilians serving with, employed by, or accompanying the 
Armed Forces of the United States, while assigned to or under the 
operational control of the Commander, MNC-I and present for duty in 
Kuwait or Iraq. This prohibition does not apply to personal hygiene items 
(like mouthwash) commercially available for sale by AAFES in the MNC-I 
AOR, nor does it apply to the use of alcohol for authorized religious 
ceremonies. 
 
 e. Introduction, possession, transfer, sale, creation or display of any 
pornographic or sexually explicit photograph, videotapes, movie, drawing, 
books, magazine, or similar presentations. The prohibitions contained in 
this subparagraph shall not apply to AFRTS broadcasts and commercial 
videotapes distributed and/or displayed through AAFES or MWR outlets 
located within the USCENTCOM AOR. This prohibition shall also not 
apply within the areas exclusively under the jurisdiction of the United 
States, such as aboard United States vessels and aircraft. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 k. Taking or retaining individual souvenirs or trophies, except as 
noted below: 
 
(3) No weapon, munitions, or military article of equipment obtained 
or acquired by any means other than official use may be retained 
for personal use or shipped out of the AOR for personal retention or 
control unless authorized by the Commander, MNC-1.  
 
3. PUNITIVE ORDER: Paragraph 2 of this General Order is punitive. 
Persons subject to the UCMJ may be punished for violations of this 
General Order. Civilians serving with, employed by, or accompanying the 
Armed Forces of the United States in the MNC-I AOR may face criminal 
prosecution or adverse administrative action for violation to this General 
Order. 
 
4. INDIVIDUAL DUTY: All persons, military and civilian, subject to this 
General Order are charged with the individual duty to become familiar with 
and respect the laws, regulations, and customs of their host nation insofar 
as they do not interfere with the execution of their official duties. Acts of 
disrespect or violations of host nation laws, regulations, and customs may 
be punished under applicable criminal statutes and administrative 
regulations.  
 
6. CONFISCATION OF OFFENDING ARTICLES: Items determined to 
violate this General Order may be considered contraband and confiscated 
by command or law enforcement authorities if found under the control of 
MNC-I soldiers or within the MNC-I AOR. Before destruction of 
contraband, Commanders or law enforcement personnel will coordinate 
with their servicing judge advocate.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated August 30, 2007, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e and 1.f.   He denied the allegations in ¶¶1.c, and 1.d. He 
also commented that the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.f was redundant with SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old technical writer/technical instructor employed by a 
Department of Defense contractor seeking to maintain a security clearance. He has 
worked for his current employer since November 2003. He is a high school graduate 
with some college. From 1996 to 2002, he served on active duty in the United States 
Army. He separated at the rank of E-4 with an honorable discharge. He was a Specialist 
in the satellite communications career field. He has held a security clearance since 
1996. He is married and has no children. (Tr at 4-6; Gov 1.)   
 
After he separated from the Army, Applicant accepted a job with his current 
employer in September 2003. As a contract employer, he was an electronic technician 
 
5 
 
 
who worked on the installation and operation and maintenance of satellite terminal and 
phone centers used by the troops to call home. Most of the phone centers were located 
at the military exchanges on various US military bases located in Iraq. (AE A; Gov 3.)  
 
Applicant arrived in Iraq in November 2003. When he traveled from base to base, 
he rode in various military supply convoys. He soon discovered that it was dangerous 
driving around the country.  His employer provided a bright red truck that did not have 
armor. His job required him to drive around to various US military locations. Baghdad 
International Airport was his company’s unofficial headquarters. (Tr at 30, 35-36.)   
 
In December 2003, Applicant decided that he needed to have a weapon for 
personal protection due to the increasing insurgent attacks and convoy ambushes. 
Several contractors were kidnapped and killed. (Tr at 32; Gov 3 at 1.) Around that time, 
Applicant testified that a convoy commander, an Army Captain, would not allow 
Applicant to ride in his military convoy unless he had a weapon for self defense.  The 
convoy commander gave him two AK-47 rifles that were seized in a raid earlier that day. 
(Tr at 40.)  Applicant previously had given the convoy commander a bottle of alcohol. 
(Tr at 40-41.) In a signed, sworn, statement dated April 16, 2005 (Gov 3), Applicant 
indicated the following: 
 
In DEC03 I decided that I needed a weapon for protection and to be 
 allowed to ride in Army convoys. I had been told by service personnel that 
 I had to have a weapon to ride in the convoys. So I traded alcohol with 
 U.S. Army personnel at War Eagle where I got two AK 47. I do not recall 
 the names of the individuals who I got weapons from. 
 
Applicant kept one rifle and gave the other rifle to a co-worker. He later traded 
alcohol for a semi-automatic pistol with a soldier from the 82nd Airborne (SP).  He later 
traded alcohol for two AK-47 rifles with a US Marine. He gave the rifles to two co-
workers. In December 2004, he obtained another 9 mm handgun for another co-worker. 
(Gov 3.)  He received no formal training when he was provided the weapons. (Tr at 75.)    
 
Applicant used alcohol to trade for weapons, ammunition and other needs such 
as armor for his vehicle. (Gov 4.) He also gave alcohol when he socialized with troops 
he befriended. (Tr at 47.) He would purchase alcohol at the duty free shop located at 
the Baghdad International Airport. (Gov 3 at 2.) He never contacted his supervisor or his 
employer to inquire about purchasing weapons. He did contact them about providing 
armor for the company vehicle which his employer later provided. (Tr at 76, 97-100.)  
He had copies of Playboy and Penthouse magazines for his personal use. (Gov 3 at 2.)  
 
Applicant states he never concealed the fact that he had weapons.  He kept the 9 
mm pistol strapped to his flak vest in plain view.  He claims he was never questioned 
about it. (Tr at 46.) When he purchased alcohol from the duty free shop at Baghdad 
International Airport, he often saw contractor personnel and military members 
purchasing alcohol from the shop.  He claims there was a widespread culture of drinking 
by the military. He was not aware that military members were forbidden to drink alcohol. 
 
6 
 
 
(Tr at 47; Gov 3 at 2.) No Army Air Force Exchange System (AAFES) facilities located 
in Iraq sold alcohol. (Tr at 86.) 
 
On April 15, 2005, Applicant was traveling with a night time military convoy to a 
US airbase located in Iraq.  At some point prior to the convoy’s arrival, security at the 
gate was notified by the military that a civilian contractor who stated that he was an 
employee of Kellogg, Brown, and Root (KBR) was in the convoy and that he was 
carrying a 9mm automatic pistol.  When the convoy approached the security check 
point, Applicant was asked if he had a weapon.  He said, “Yes”.  He was subsequently 
searched.  A pistol was removed from the holster that was mounted on Applicant’s body 
armor.  The security officer asked Applicant if he had contraband, weapons, or sharp 
items in the vehicle.  The incident report states that Applicant repeatedly stated that he 
did not. A subsequent search of the vehicle revealed that Applicant had four 9 mm 
magazines loaded with 9 mm ammunition; an AK-47 rifle; two AK-47 30 round 
magazines loaded with 7.62 x 39 ammunition; a 12 inch knife; a global positioning 
system; a digital camera; one bottle of whiskey, one bottle of red wine; seven 16 ounce 
cans of beer; and Penthouse and Hustler magazines (amount unknown). (Gov 4.)  
 
When security personnel asked Applicant why he chose to bring contraband (i.e. 
pornographic material and alcohol) onto a US military installation. He replied that he 
trades pornography and alcohol for weapons, ammunition, and other things he needs.  
He claimed that he got the pornography and alcohol from his coworkers. He was asked 
why he did not seek out weapons through legal channels such as the explosive 
ordnance disposal (EOD) teams or area security managers.  He said he did not move in 
those circles.  He was asked why he was the not following the rules of Combined Joint 
Task Force Seven (CJTF-7). He claimed that he was never briefed on them and he 
never knew there were rules in the theater.  He claimed that he did not know alcohol 
was prohibited.  At the end of the interrogation, Applicant disclosed the name of his 
employer. It was discovered that he was not a KBR employee. (Gov 4.) The record is 
unclear as to whether Applicant actually told the convoy commander that he was a KBR 
employee or whether it was a miscommunication.  Applicant testified that he never said 
he was a KBR employee.  He wears his employee identification at all times. He did not 
discover that there was an issue regarding his identity until a few days after the incident 
when he talked to his supervisor. (Tr at 58-59; Answer to SOR.)     
 
After the search, Applicant was allowed to return to his quarters while the 
investigation was pending. A few days later, he was contacted by a Marine Captain who 
told him to pick up his items that were not considered contraband.  When he picked up 
the items, he was informed that he could not remain in Iraq as of result of the illegal 
contraband in his possession. He was told to clear the base and leave the country 
within 24 hours. Applicant took the first military flight to Kuwait and flew home 
commercially that same day.  After returning to the United States, he was informed by 
his supervisor that AAFES withdrew their letter of invitation which allowed him to work 
as a contractor in Iraq. (Gov 2; Answer to SOR.)  
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant would hand out telephone cards to military personnel, civilians, and 
contractors out of appreciation for what they did for him.  By way of example, he would 
hand out phone cards after he was allowed to travel with a convoy. He gave phone 
cards to employees who let him know when convoys were going out and for helping him 
get on the manifest.  He claims he never gave the phone card out as payment for being 
on a convoy. (Gov 3.)  He spent a lot of time arranging to travel with military convoys. 
(Tr at 78-79.)  
 
Applicant claims that he was never briefed by his employer, the military, or 
contracted security personnel about the rules pertaining to weapons, alcohol, or 
pornography in the area of operation, i.e. Iraq. The first time he learned about General 
Order One was on April 15, 2005, when his vehicle was searched. He claims that he did 
not use the contraband to buy favors. He did not think that his conduct was illegal. He 
felt he needed the weapons to protect himself.  He was never arrested or charged with 
any crime while in Iraq and did not receive any disciplinary action from ITT Industries. In 
April 2005, Applicant resigned from the contract. He never intends to return to Iraq as a 
contractor due to the dangerous nature of the work. (Gov 2; Answer to SOR.) 
 
Applicant listed his position in Iraq in response to question 22 on his security 
clearance application, dated August 4, 2006, which asks “Has any of the following 
happened to you in the last 7 years – Left a job for other reasons under unfavorable 
circumstances?” (Gov 1.)  After learning the rules, he realizes that his conduct was 
wrong and never intends to engage in such activity again. (Gov 2). 
  
The Integrated Logisitics Support Manager where Applicant currently works 
states Applicant has worked on his team for the past 15 months. He states that there is 
no task that Applicant has been assigned and completed that has not exceeded his 
expectations. He interacts with him on a professional and a personal level and would 
not hesitate to entrust him with the company’s most sensitive materials. (AE C.)  The 
Principle Logistics Engineer has worked with Applicant since April 2006 and has dealt 
with him on a professional and a social level. He has not observed any actions that 
would lead him to believe that Applicant is a security risk. (AE B.)   
 
The company Facility Security Officer (FSO) states that she has known Applicant 
for 2 ½ years.  She indicates Applicant handles classified information on a daily basis 
and is diligent about following security procedures. She is aware of the allegations of 
possessing a handgun and possession of pornographic material. He told her that he 
received the handgun from a U.S. solider and purchased the magazine at a local Post 
Exchange in country. She did not state that she was aware Applicant provided alcohol 
to military members in exchange for other weapons. She believes these incidents have 
been blown out of proportion. (AE D.) It is also unclear whether the FSO was aware of 
the prohibitions outlined in General Order 1 pertaining the contractors possessing 
weapons in IRAQ, the use of alcohol, or possessing materials that are considered 
pornographic and/or sexually explicit within Iraq.    
 
 
8 
 
 
During his active duty military service with the United States Army, Applicant 
deployed to Guatemala, Honduras, and Okinawa. (Tr at 77; AE E at 4-13.) He was 
awarded a Good Conduct Medal, the Army Commendation Medal, and two Army 
Achievement Medals while on active duty. (AE E.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
9 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG &15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The government did not establish a prima facie case with respect to the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d.  There is insufficient evidence to support the 
allegation that Applicant misrepresented himself as a KBR employee when he traveled 
with a military convoy to a United States military base in Iraq in 2005 as alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.c.  The incident statement prepared by contracted security personnel indicates they 
received a message from the military that an inbound convoy contained a civilian 
contractor who said that he was a KBR employee and was carrying a 9 mm automatic 
pistol. The incident statement is unsworn, unsigned, and contains hearsay. There is no 
additional reliable evidence to support the premise that Applicant misrepresented 
himself as a KBR employee while traveling with the convoy.  This information could 
easily have been a miscommunication from a third party rather than a deliberate false 
statement made directly by the Applicant.   
 
 There is nothing in the incident report that supports the premise that Applicant 
told the security personnel at the entry control point to the military base that he was a 
KBR employee.  The report states at the end that Applicant stated he was not a KBR 
employee and provided the name of his employer. The report also indicates that 
Applicant was not asked why he told the convoy commander that he was a KBR 
employee.  The incident contains no substantial evidence that Applicant misrepresented 
himself as a KBR employee to the convoy commander or to the security personnel at 
the gate to the base.  Applicant believes there was some sort of misunderstanding.  His 
identity was cleared up when AAFES personnel identified him. I find for Applicant with 
respect the SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d.  
 
 Applicant’s claims of ignorance of the prohibitions listed in General Order 
Number 1 pertaining to the use of privately owned firearms, alcohol, and possession of 
pornography/sexually explicit material in the AOR is not credible. With his six years of 
 
10 
 
 
active duty service, including several deployments outside the United States, it is 
reasonable to conclude that he is aware that while in another country certain customs 
and courtesies must be followed while in that country. He should also be aware that 
commanders set certain rules for all personnel including military, civilian, and 
contractors to follow while in the AOR. He claims he was never trained by his company 
or by the military on these policies. Aside from his own assertions, he provided no 
corroborating evidence from his company and/or the U.S. military about the lack of 
training. 
 
 While Applicant’s concern about needing a weapon for self defense is 
understandable, trading alcohol for weapons is a rather unorthodox manner of obtaining 
weapons. Prior to obtaining the weapons, Applicant neither contacted his supervisory 
chain to inquire about obtaining weapons for he and his co-workers, nor consulted the 
proper military channels to inquire about obtaining weapons for he and his co-workers. 
At one point, he contacted his company to request armor for the company vehicles but 
never submitted a request for weapons.  A reasonable person would assume that, as a 
contractor, the proper way to inquire about and obtain weapons is through their 
employer.  
 
 Of the disqualifying factors under the personal conduct guideline, Personal 
Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) ¶16(c) (credible adverse information in 
several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under 
any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of 
candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information) applies in 
Applicant’s case. Applicant’s claims of ignorance pertaining to General Order 1 lacks 
credibility. Neither he nor his co-workers were authorized to possess weapons. He was 
not allowed to purchase and/or transfer alcohol to military personnel stationed in the 
AOR.   
 
 Even if Applicant truly was ignorant about the prohibitions listed in General Order 
1, he had a duty as a contractor working with the military to inquire about the customs 
and courtesies of the foreign country that he was working in and about the rules and 
standards in the AOR that were set by the Commander. He should have been aware of 
this based on his prior military experience and deployments. His conduct raises 
questions about his judgment and willingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
 The purpose of General Order 1 is to prohibit conduct that is prejudicial to the 
maintenance of good order and discipline of all forces assigned to MNC-I or present 
within the MNC-1 AOR.  Applicant claims that alcohol was legal in Iraq. There is nothing 
in the record evidence indicating whether alcohol was legal in Iraq.  However, this is 
irrelevant, because the standards to follow are the ones set by the geographic 
commander for the AOR.   
 
 
11 
 
 
 Joint Publication 4-0, Doctrine of Logistic Support of Joint Operations, Chapter V, 
paragraph 13.b, dated 6 April 2000, states: 
 
 As a general rule, contractor personnel accompanying US forces should 
 not be armed. Regardless of prior military experience or reserve status, 
 contract personnel are not military personnel. Issuing weapons to 
 contractor personnel deployed in an uncertain or hostile environment can 
 cloud their status, leaving  them open to being targeted as a combatant. 
 Additionally, unless specifically allowed by host nation law, SOFA 
 provision, or other international agreement, US Forces have no legal basis 
 for issuing arms to contractor personnel. Since contractor personnel are 
 not subject to command authority enforced by an internal system of penal 
 discipline, commanders have no method of guaranteeing armed contractor 
 personnel will act in accordance with the law of war or host nation law.        
 
 There are special limited cases where contractors may be issued personal 
weapons. In those cases, the issuance of such weapons must be authorized under 
procedures approved by the geographic commander and comply with military 
regulations regarding firearms training and safe handling. (Joint Publication 4-0, chapter 
V, paragraph 13.b.)  While Applicant more than likely has never reviewed Joint 
Publication 4-0, the Joint Doctrine stresses the point that contractors are not armed 
unless under limited circumstances under procedures approved by the geographic 
commander. It is reasonable to conclude that trading alcohol for weapons is not the 
procedure established by the geographic commander.        
 
 The allegations under Personal Conduct can be mitigated. Personal Conduct 
Mitigating Condition (PC MC) ¶ 17(c) (the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is the only mitigating condition that has the 
potential to apply.  I find that it does not.  Applicant’s actions while deployed as a 
contractor in Iraq were serious.  Once he was finally caught, he was ordered to leave 
the country and AAFES withdrew their letter of invitation for him to work as a contractor 
in Iraq which reinforces the notion that his conduct is considered serious.  His conduct 
was disruptive to the maintenance of good order and discipline of forces assigned to the 
AOR.  Considering his past military experience, he should have known that there were 
proper procedures in place to inquire about obtaining weapons.  He should have been 
aware that trading weapons for alcohol was not the proper procedure for obtaining 
weapons. He should have been aware that the use of alcohol by the troops was 
prohibited. His conduct raises questions about his judgment, trustworthiness and 
reliability.  He has not mitigated the concerns raised under personal conduct. 
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
12 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s favorable 
military record and the favorable recommendations of his current supervisors and co-
workers.  In some ways, his favorable military record is a double-edged sword. Given 
his military experience, Applicant should have known there were orders issued that 
would apply in the AOR. His claims of ignorance are less than credible. Applicant failed 
to mitigate the personal conduct concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under 
personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
                                       
    _________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
