 
 
 
 
1
                                                              
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-01195 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Fadi Toma, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
  History of Case 
 
On November 30, 2006, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application 
(SF 86). On August 13, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
B for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 13, 2007. He answered 
the SOR in writing through counsel on October 16, 2007, and requested a hearing 
 
 
 
 
2
before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on October 18, 2007. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 9, 2007, and I received the 
case assignment on December 3, 2007. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on 
December 19, 2007, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 23, 2007. 
The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3, which were received into the record 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (Ex.) B through D, and G 
through I that were admitted into the record without objection.  DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 1, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq. (Tr. 10-11.) The request and the attached documents are 
included in the record as Administrative Exhibits (AE) I through VII. Applicant’s counsel 
did not object to my consideration of those Exhibits. Hence, the facts administratively 
noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to 
reasonable dispute. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of 
Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated October 16, 2007, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b of the SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional 
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He was born in Algosh, Iraq, a region in the northern 
part of Iraq, commonly referred to as the Kurdish area. He attended high school and 
undergraduate college there, receiving a Bachelor’s Degree in Liberal Arts with an 
emphasis on languages. (Tr. 14).  As required by the Iraqi government, he served eight 
years in its army after completing his education. (Tr. 42). 
 
 In May 1992, Applicant, his wife and two children immigrated to the United States 
on a Family Visa because of the threat of religious persecution against Christians under 
Saddam Hussein. (Tr. 31). In July 1998, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. His wife 
and two children also became naturalized U. S. citizens. Another child was born in the 
United States. All of his family lives in the United States. His wife’s family resides in 
Canada. (Tr. 33). 
 
 Both of Applicant’s parents were born in Iraq. He is one of four children, all born 
in Iraq. His three siblings are married, have families, and are resident citizens of Iraq. 
His father is deceased and his mother, age 79, has Alzheimer’s disease. She no longer 
recognizes Applicant and is not expected to live much longer. (Tr. 22-24). She resides 
with his brother. His siblings are farmers and do not have any connections to the Iraqi 
government.  (Tr. 26). Generally, he speaks to them once every four to six months. He 
 
 
 
 
3
has a long distance relationship with his siblings. “This is no [sic] like a close 
relationship.” (Tr. 22). 
   
 In November 2002, Applicant joined the U.S. Army as one of the first contractor 
linguists to assist in the war on terror. (Tr. 34). He initially went to Kuwait and then 
returned to Iraq in April 2003, for the first time since leaving it in 1992. He remained in 
Iraq until January 2005 when he was sent to Qatar. He returned home in October 2005. 
Prior to going to Iraq, he received an interim Top Secret security clearance that allowed 
him access to classified information. He took a polygraph test prior to receiving the 
clearance. (Tr. 47-48).  In describing his work with the Army, he stated, “I think I did my 
best to help. This is my country now. This is my home, so I decided to help our troops 
there. I saved lives and prevented many injuries through my translations.” (Tr. 18). 
 
 In December 2005, Applicant filed a Petition for Alien Relatives for his two sisters 
and their families. He did not file one for his aged mother or brother. While in Iraq, he 
spoke several times a week (over a period of a month) to his sisters about information 
needed for filing the Petition after receiving letters from the U.S. Immigration 
Department. (Tr. 25; Ex. 3).  His sisters visited him twice while he was stationed in Iraq. 
(Tr. 32).  
 
 Applicant owns a house and a piece of property in the United States.  He also 
has U. S. bank accounts. (Tr. 21). He does not own any property in Iraq. There is no 
derogatory information concerning his police or financial records. He has never been 
fired from a job. He has never been arrested. He has never used illegal drugs, or been 
involved in an alcohol-related incident. (Ex.1).  
 
 Applicant submitted several exhibits attesting to his capabilities and contributions 
to the U.S. Armed Forces’ efforts in the war on terror. According to his performance 
evaluations for the years 2003 and 2004, Applicant performed an outstanding job, 
exceeding expectations. (Ex. B). In November 2003, his U. S. Army commanding officer 
wrote, “Throughout his tenure with us, he has performed his duties in an exemplarily 
manner. . . Bottom line, [Applicant] has truly become indispensable to our operations.” 
(Ex. C at 2). Another commanding officer noted in October 2004 that Applicant’s 
“superior knowledge of the Arabic language helped facilitate and exploit raw intelligence 
into actionable intelligence in support of Brigade operations.” (Ex. C at 3). After working 
with him for four months, a different commanding officer indicated that Applicant “has a 
firm grasp of the mission, knowledge of the country and culture, a great work ethic, and 
dedicated mission accomplishment.” (Ex. C at 4). A captain in the Army stated “I have 
not met many men in my short twenty six years who compare to the moral turpitude, 
devotion to duty and genuine care for the prosperity of a people that [Applicant] 
exhibits.” (Ex. C at 1).  There is no evidence in the record that while holding a security 
clearance in Iraq, Applicant breached any security policies or procedures. 
 
 Applicant credibly and sincerely asserted his pride of U.S. citizenship at his 
hearing and desire to resume his work with the U.S. Army. He currently works as a 
cashier.  
 
 
 
 
4
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts: In 2003, The United States led 
a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq. After free elections, Iraq’s 
new government took office. Despite the elections and new government, Iraq remains 
engulfed in violence, perpetrated by Al Qaeda terrorists and other insurgents. 
Numerous attacks and kidnappings have target the U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, 
and other civilians, as well as Iraqis. Even with aggressive governmental action against 
terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Iraq remains high. Terrorist groups conduct 
intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services.  
 
I also take administrative notice of the fact that the northern area of Iraq, 
occupied by the Kurdish people, has had a functioning democratic form of government 
for approximately ten years. It is more stable, appreciative of the support of the United 
States, and more friendly to the presence of the United States forces than other parts of 
Iraq. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
 
 
5
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes nine conditions that could raise a security concern, three of 
which may be disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1  
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
6
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make 
the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign 
person, group, government, or country. 
 
In this case, Applicant has contact with his three siblings, who are resident 
citizens of Iraq. He has limited contact with his elderly mother because of her mental 
impairment. He has sufficient familial connection to them, such that he has filed a 
Petition to help them immigrate to the United States. His relationship and contact with 
three family members potentially creates a heightened risk of foreign pressure or 
attempted exploitation because terrorists in the Middle East seek intelligence and are 
hostile to United States’ interests. In addition, in 2004 his sisters visited him while he 
was working in Iraq, which could have created a risk of exploitation at that time. 
  
  The Government produced substantial evidence of these three disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. 
 
  Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to the disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
                                                                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
 
7
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have some application because Applicant’s siblings reside in 
the Kurdish area of Iraq, known to be more democratic and less hostile to the United 
States. His relationships with those siblings have become more distant in nature, 
although he acknowledges that he is assisting his sisters with their pursuit of 
immigration to the United States. His contacts with family members in Iraq are relatively 
infrequent since 2004. Although there is a remote possibility that terrorists could attempt 
to coerce or threaten Applicant through his siblings, it is highly unlikely.   
 
Applicant established application of AG ¶ 8(b). Based on his relationship and 
depth of loyalty to the U.S., he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest. He has lived in the United States since 1992 and did not 
return to Iraq until his employment with the U. S. Army in 2003.  The members of his 
immediate family are naturalized U.S. citizens, residing in the United States. He owns 
property and holds bank accounts in the United States. In contrast, his Iraqi interests 
have become minimal over the years. He does not own property in Iraq and has limited 
contact with his family members living there. There is no evidence that he has 
connections or contact with any people other than his family members. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors (APF) listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and 
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” “. 
Because foreign influence does not involve misconduct, voluntariness of participation, 
rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the eighth APF, “the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress,” is the most relevant of the nine APFs to this 
adjudication.2 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.      
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within the 
                                            
2 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the 
eighth APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for 
exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that 
eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole person analysis in foreign influence cases). 
 
 
 
 
8
U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 
7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Four circumstances weigh against 
Applicant in the whole person analysis.  First, there is a significant risk of terrorism and 
various human rights abuses in Iraq. More importantly for security purposes, terrorists 
are hostile to the United States and actively seek classified information. Terrorists, and 
even friendly governments, could attempt to use Applicant’s siblings and mother to 
obtain such information. Second, he had numerous connections to Iraq before he 
immigrated to the United States in 1992. Following his birth, he spent his formative 
years there. He was educated at an Iraqi university and subsequently was conscripted 
into its army. Third, his mother and three siblings remain resident citizens of Iraq. 
Fourth, he has some contact with his siblings because he is trying to obtain resident 
alien status for them in the United States.  
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. He is a mature person, who has lived in the United States for 15 years, and 
has been a naturalized citizen for about ten years.  His spouse has been living in the 
United States since 1992 and is a naturalized citizen, as are two of his Iraqi born 
children. One of his children was born here. Out of his sense of patriotism and love for 
the United States, he joined the U.S. Army, as was one of the first Arabic-speaking 
linguists. His ties to the United States, which he refers to as “my country,” are much 
stronger than his ties to his three siblings and elderly mother living in northern Iraq. 
There is no evidence he has ever taken any action that could cause potential harm to 
the United States. He takes his loyalty to the United States seriously, and he has 
worked diligently for a defense contractor for several years in an important capacity for 
the U.S. Army. His supervisors assess him as loyal, trustworthy, conscientious, and 
responsible, giving him excellent evaluations and praising his dedication to the cause of 
freedom in Iraq. He is an excellent family member, employee and U.S. citizen. After 
leaving Iraq in 1992, he never returned, until he worked with the U.S. Army in April 
2003. No witnesses recommended denial of his security clearance. There is not any 
derogatory information about him in the record.  
 
Applicant held a security clearance during his tenure with the U.S. Army without 
any indication that he breached security policies or procedures. While that fact is not 
normally to be considered a factor in granting a clearance, the Appeal Board noted in 
ISCR Case No. 05-03846 as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s 
prior history of complying with security procedures and regulations 
significant probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or 
extenuating the security concerns raised by the applicant’s more 
immediate disqualifying conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 
5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
 
 
 
 
9
May 30, 2006). However, the Board has recognized an exception to that 
general rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by 
credible, independent evidence that his compliance with security 
procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution 
to the nation security. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. 
July 14, 2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to 
an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognizes, resist, 
and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.3 Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
3 I conclude that the whole person analysis weighs heavily toward approval of his security clearance. 
Assuming a higher authority reviewing this decision determines the mitigating conditions articulated under 
AG ¶8 do not apply and severs any consideration of them, I conclude the whole person analysis standing 
alone is sufficient to support approval of a security clearance in this case. 
