1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-03635
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA), on December 1,
2005. On June 29, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under criminal conduct
(Guideline J). The action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and made
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after September 1,
2006.
Applicant submitted his notarized answer to the SOR on July 13, 2007. He
elected to have his case decided administratively without a hearing. A copy of the
government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM, the government’s evidence in support of
the SOR) was sent to Applicant on November 1, 2007. Applicant received the FORM on
November 7, 2007. Applicant’s six-page response to the FORM was received by DOHA
on December 11, 2007. On January 2, 2008, Department indicated he had no objection
2
to Applicant’s post-hearing submission. The first four pages of Applicant’s submission
are received in the record as AE A, which consists of a personal statement by Applicant
and three character statements. The two certificates of completion are received in
evidence as AE B. AE C, the investigator’s record of an interview (three pages in length)
conducted with Applicant on July 24, 2006, has been admitted in evidence pursuant to
E3.1.19. of the Directive “to permit the development of a full and complete record.” The
problem with AE C is that Applicant confused the arrest dates and/or the details of each
arrest with the subsequent dates he was required to appear in court. Given Applicant’s
admissions to all allegations of the SOR, I will rely on the dates cited in the SOR, even
though SOR 1.d. is not referenced in the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) criminal
record. (GX 5) Based upon a review of the FORM, and Applicant’s response to the
FORM, Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted all allegations under the criminal conduct guideline. He noted
that if he did not receive a security clearance, the future would not be bright for him.
Most of the projects of his employer (who he has worked for since December 1997)
require a security clearance. Applicant is 30 years old and has been employed as an
electronic technician since December 1997. 
On August 2, 2002 (SOR 1.a.), Applicant was arrested and charged with inflicting
corporal punishment to a spouse/cohabitant, a felony. He admitted the offense, and
SOR 1.a. was disposed of in SOR 1.d. 
Before he was arrested for inflicting corporal punishment to a spouse/cohabitant
on August 28, 2002 (SOR 1.b.), Applicant was arguing with his girlfriend about money.
Suddenly, she made a comment about Applicant and her daughter. He became angry
and threw his girlfriend against a wall. After seeing a videotape of the incident, showing
that his girlfriend started the argument, Applicant claims the district attorney declined to
press charges. Though SOR 1.b. indicates in the allegation that the case was not
prosecuted, I do not find Applicant’s videotape explanation credible based on his
admitted conduct in throwing his girlfriend against a wall. 
On November 21, 2002 (SOR 1.c.), Applicant and his girlfriend pushed each
other during an argument. Applicant left the apartment, and walked down the street.
While walking, he saw a police officer, who coincidentally was in his squad car patrolling
the neighborhood. Shortly after telling the officer what had happened, Applicant was
arrested. He contends he was arrested for having admitted he had gotten into a fight
with his girlfriend. Applicant surmised that the charges were dismissed after he was
given a form indicating charges would not be pursued. SOR 1.c. indicates the charge
was not pursued, but rather disposed of in SOR 1.d.
On or about September 2, 2003, Applicant was charged with infliction of corporal
injury to a spouse/cohabitant. (SOR 1.d.) The offense occurred on August 28, 2003.
 According to AE C, Applicant believed he was sentenced in February 2004.1
 No additional details were provided regarding the actual sentence. 2
3
The charge was amended to include those offenses in SOR 1.a. and 1.c., along with an
attempted murder charge that does not appear in the 1.d. allegation. 
Before the arrest on September 2, 2003 (SOR 1.d.), Applicant had returned
home at a time when his girlfriend should have been at work. Their ensuing verbal
argument followed Applicant’s questions to her about being at home and/or being nude.
She responded she had been sleeping with other individuals. Even though he told her to
shut her mouth, she continued to scream. Applicant placed a pillow against her face to
stop her from screaming, and they both resumed fighting each other. He then left the
home and called the domestic violence hot line for information about a place to stay. He
provided his home address during the call. While deciding where to stay, Applicant
returned home, where the police were waiting to arrest him.
SOR 1.d. indicates Applicant pled guilty to the first count of inflicting corporal
injury to a spouse/cohabitant and count three (SOR 1.a.). The imposition of sentence
(not disclosed) was suspended, and Applicant was put on probation for three years to
expire February 18, 2007. There is no indication of the disposition of count 2. (SOR 1.c.)
According to Applicant, the attempted murder charge was dismissed. 
In addition to the unknown sentence that was suspended, other very important
terms of Applicant’s sentence  were not alleged. He was sentenced to 150 hours of1
community service, a $200.00 fine, and participation in 52 weeks of a domestic violence
program. (AE C) Applicant stated in his July 2006 interview that he was considered a
valuable member of the domestic violence group. He completed all elements of his
sentence, including voluntary participation in a 20-hour anger management program.  
While on probation for pleading guilty to the SOR 1.d. offenses, Applicant was
charged on June 8, 2004 for infliction of corporal punishment that occurred on June 1,
2004. (SOR 1.e.) The complainant was again his former girlfriend (same person
referred to in SOR 1.a. through 1.d.) that he claimed he had recently broken up with.
Before the arrest, Applicant saw his former girlfriend at a trolley stop, and she followed
him home. She continued to call him on her cell phone, and he kept telling her the
relationship was not working. When he arrived at his house, he called his probation
officer, who told him to remain in his house. About an hour later, the police arrested
Applicant after receiving a call from his former girlfriend. Though he stated he had no
direct contact with her, Applicant’s explanation for pleading guilty to the infliction of
corporal injury offense was because “it was easier to just plead guilty.” (AE C)
SOR 1.e. reveals that Applicant pled guilty to the offense of inflicting corporal
injury to a spouse/cohabitant. The allegation notes the imposition of sentence  was2
suspended, and he was placed on three years probation to expire on February 9, 2008.
Though not included in SOR 1.e. is the 114 hours of community service Applicant
4
indicates he completed, and the $1,600.00 fine he believes he paid in the spring of
2006. (AE C) 
Applicant claims he filed a restraining order in July 2004 to stop his former
girlfriend from trying to contact him. (AE C) According to Applicant, she violated the
restraining order by sending photos to his cell phone. For unexplained reasons, he
believes she was still trying to contact him at the time of his interview in July 2006 (AE
C), although he had changed his phone number. He provided no documentation in
support of his restraining order claim.
Applicant’s character evidence comes from his general manager, his facility
security officer (FSO), and a coworker. The general manager, who has known him for
nine years and supervised him several times inside this nine year period, admires
Applicant’s professionalism and team player attitude. The FSO, who has known
Applicant for 10 years, stated there is no adverse information in Applicant’s file.
Applicant’s coworker lauded Applicant’s exercise of good judgment over the last six
years. AE B contains a certificate of completion awarded to Applicant in June 2005 for
completing the year long domestic violence course. On January 28, 2006, Applicant
received a certificate for completing  20 hours of an anger management course. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines/conditions are applied in conjunction with the nine general
factors of the whole person concept. The Administrative Judge’s ultimate adjudicative
goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. The Administrative Judge must
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2b.
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
5
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-
the-clock responsibility. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence
in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
Criminal Conduct
Criminal behavior creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability,
trustworthiness, and willingness to comply with the rules. 
Analysis
The SOR identifies five corporal injury offenses that occurred between August
2002 and June 2004. Applicant admitted the conduct on each occasion. The pattern of
criminal conduct falls within the scope of two disqualifying conditions (DC) under the
criminal conduct (CC) guideline. CC DC 31.a. (a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses) and CC DC 31.d. (individual is currently on probation) apply due to the
repeated violations of the law in a two year period, and Applicant’s current probation
status. The criminal conduct is aggravated by his egregious behavior on August 28,
2003 (SOR 1.d.), in putting a pillow over the victim’s face to stop her from screaming.
The fact that the attempted murder charge was dismissed does not eliminate the
significance of Applicant’s underlying conduct. 
Equally disturbing is the fact that Applicant was under the jurisdiction of the SOR
1.d. court (or on probation by that court) when he was charged a fifth time (for the
corporal punishment offense) on June 8, 2004 by the SOR 1.e. court.
There are two mitigating conditions (MC) that could dramatically reduce the
security concerns related to Applicant’s criminal conduct. CC MC 32.a. (so much time
has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment) does not apply. Only four years have
transpired since Applicant was convicted of infliction of corporal punishment. The
criminal behavior was not an isolated offense, but a pattern of conduct that could have
resulted in the death of his former girlfriend. Assuming he successfully completed all
terms of probation, it has only been a month since his discharge from the jurisdiction of
the court. 
6
When an applicant shows evidence of convincing mitigation, then he can take
advantage of CC MC 32.d. (there is successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement) to meet his ultimate burden of persuasion. Applicant is entitled to limited
mitigation under CC MC 32.d. because of the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity. The mitigation must be weighed against the fact Applicant has been
under the jurisdiction of the sentencing court for the entire period. He was well aware
that a violation of one of the probation terms could mean incarceration pursuant to the
terms of the original sentence. 
Applicant has provided detailed information regarding the costs incurred as a
result of the fines and other direct or indirect fees he has had to pay due his criminal
activity. Payment of the fines and other costs weighs in his favor.
Applicant’s successful completion of the year-long, court-ordered domestic
violence program and the voluntary, 20-hour anger management course also count as
favorable evidence for him. Missing from Applicant’s case in mitigation, however, is
evidence that demonstrates the benefit, if any, the courses had on Applicant. This
evidence is critical to Applicant’s case in mitigation. Clearly, the sentencing judge in
SOR 1.d. recognized a problem and ordered Applicant to seek help through the
domestic violence program. I cannot simply assume from Applicant’s certificate of
completion of both courses that he recognizes his domestic violence and anger
management issues, unless he articulates what his completion of the courses have
meant to him. In sum, the mitigating evidence, including favorable job performance
compliments provided by his colleagues, is insufficient to overcome the pattern of
criminal behavior Applicant engaged in between 2002 and June 2004. Subparagraphs
1.a. through 1.e. are resolved against Applicant. 
Whole Person Concept (WPC)
My adverse findings under the CC guideline must still be evaluated in the context
of whole person concept. Applicant’s criminal conduct is aggravated by the fact it
occurred five times in less than two years. Even though SOR 1.d. was not prosecuted,
he admitted throwing his former girlfriend against a wall in 2002. In 2003, he put a pillow
over his face. While he was under the jurisdiction of the Court (probation) in SOR 1.d.,
he committed the same offense in June 2004 (SOR 1.e.), and the judge extended his
probation one year to February 2008. Though Applicant has not violated the law since
2004, and he has completed a year-long court-ordered program, and a voluntary anger
management program, he has not provided any information about the content of either
course, specifically what he learned about effectively dealing with domestic altercations
and controlling his anger. Without this probative evidence, I cannot conclude with
complete confidence this conduct will not recur. The CC guideline is found against
Applicant.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Criminal Conduct, Guideline J): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
