 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-00737
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is denied.
On November 4, 2005, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to request a security clearance for his employment
with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with1
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request. On July 26, 2007, DOHA issued to
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on2
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an
SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.
2
addressed in the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline B (foreign2
influence), Guideline E (personal conduct), and Guideline J (criminal conduct).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a
hearing. On August 27, 2007, pursuant to paragraph E3.1.7 of Enclosure 3 of the
Directive, Department Counsel timely requested a hearing to resolve this matter. The
case was assigned to me on November 2, 2007, and I scheduled a hearing to be held
on December 11, 2007. The parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented
eight exhibits (Gx. 1 - 8) and two witnesses. Department Counsel also asked that I take
administrative notice of the information contained in a pre-hearing submission submitted
on or about October 23, 2007, and included in the record as Judicial Exhibit (Jx.) I.
Applicant testified in his own behalf and offered 16 documents sorted by subject matter
and admitted as Appellant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - D. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on
December 28, 2007.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline E, the government alleged in SOR ¶1.a that Applicant
deliberately falsified his response to e-QIP question 11 (“Your Employment Activities”)
by omitting his employment at a gas station and convenience store in March 2000. In
SOR ¶1.b, the government alleged Applicant deliberately falsified his response to e-QIP
question 23 (“Your Police Record”) by answering “no,” thereby omitting the fact he was
arrested in March 2000 and charged with attempted obstruction of justice and unlawful
sale of alcohol to a minor. He pleaded guilty to the charges and was placed on 12
months probation and fined. In SOR ¶1.c, the government alleged Applicant deliberately
gave a false material statement during an October 31, 2005, interview with a U.S. Army
investigator by denying he had ever been arrested or charged with any crime. In SOR
¶1.d, the government alleged Applicant also deliberately gave a false material statement
when during the same interview when he omitted his March 2000 gas station
employment. In SOR ¶1.e, the government alleged Applicant gave a false name to a
peace officer during his March 2000 arrest.
Under Guideline J, the government alleged in SOR ¶2.a the arrest Applicant
omitted in response to e-QIP question 11. In SOR ¶2.b, the government alleged his
deliberate falsifications of material fact alleged in SOR ¶¶1.a - 1.d constituted criminal
conduct in violation Title 18, United States Code, §1001.
Under Guideline B, the government alleged in SOR ¶3.a that Applicant’s brother-
in-law is a retired Egyptian Army officer, who is a citizen of and resides in Egypt. Under
SOR ¶3.b, the government alleged Applicant traveled to Egypt in 2004, but that his U.S.
passport does not have a visa issued by the Egyptian government.
3
Applicant admitted, albeit with explanation, all of the SOR allegations. His
responses to the Guideline E allegations admit the facts alleged but deny the intent
required to make his statements disqualifying. After a thorough review of the pleadings,
transcript, and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant was born in Egypt in May 1951. He came to the United States in 1977
after receiving a college degree in accounting, and he became a U.S. citizen in May
1983. Applicant married his wife, who was also born and raised in Egypt, in July 1981.
She became a U.S. citizen August 1989. Applicant and his wife have one child, age 24,
who was born and raised in the United States. (Gx. 1)
Applicant’s parents are deceased, but had come to the U.S. and were naturalized
citizens when they died. His three brothers and one sister came to the U.S. before he
arrived, and all are naturalized U.S. citizens. Appellant’s wife has one brother who is a
citizen of and still resides in Egypt. He is a retired Egyptian Army officer with whom
Applicant speaks about once a year. Applicant last saw his brother-in-law in 2004, when
the latter came to the U.S. to see Applicant’s wife. (Tr. 114 - 115) Applicant has no
personal contacts or financial interests in Egypt, and he has returned there twice since
1977, once in 1981 to get married and most recently in 2004 to visit a seaside resort.
He used his U.S. passport for all of his foreign travel and does not hold a foreign
passport. (Tr. 115 - 117)
Egypt and the United States maintain friendly relations. The U.S. provides Egypt
a great deal of financial and military support. Both countries are closely aligned in the
global war on terror (GWOT) and in efforts to maintain stability in the Middle East. Egypt
has a nominally democratic government consisting of an executive branch, a bicameral
legislature, and an increasingly independent judiciary. However, one party has held an
overriding majority in the government since 1978, and only recently were open elections
held. The U.S. State Department has observed that Egyptian citizens have no
meaningful opportunity to change their government. While Egypt has been aggressive
in counterterrorism efforts, its domestic human rights record has been poor. Law
enforcement and executive organizations have employed arbitrary arrests and torture in
the name of rooting out terrorists and other enemies of the state. The results include
deaths while in custody, disappearances while in custody, and suppression of anti-
government expressions. The primary threat of intelligence gathering and espionage
against the United States from Egypt results not from the Egyptian government, but
from the activities of terrorist organizations trying to operate there. (Jx. I)
Applicant’s Egyptian name can be difficult for Americans to either understand or
pronounce, so he has “Americanized” his name as “------------.” However, he has not
legally changed his name, and his Egyptian name is the only name that appears on his
passport. (Gx. 6) It is also the only name he listed on his e-QIP even though e-QIP
Section 5 specifically asked him to list other names he has used. (Gx. 1)
In March 2000, Applicant was working as a cashier at a gas station convenience
store. It was one of three jobs he held at the time as he and his wife were trying to
resolve some financial difficulties. On March 11, 2000, he sold beer to an underage
female who turned out to be working for the police as part of a sting operation. In order
4
to complete the citation against Applicant, a uniformed officer asked  him for some
identification. Applicant stated he did not have his driver’s license or other form of
identification with him, so the officer asked for his name, address, phone number, and
social security number. Applicant stated his name was Sam Nelson, but he did not
explain that it was not his legal name. Additionally, the rest of the personal information
he provided was false. He did not want to provide accurate information because he was
afraid of losing his job. He was then given a citation for selling alcohol to a minor under
21. (Gx. 4; Tr. 30 - 41, 95 - 100, 121 - 129)
On March 13, 2000, the police returned to the convenience store after they
determined he had tried to deceive them. He immediately produced his driver’s license
with the information the police had asked for the day before. He was arrested,
handcuffed and taken to jail, where he was charged with obstruction of justice. Through
a plea agreement, Applicant pleaded guilty to both charges, was fined and placed on
probation for 12 months. (Gx. 3) After Applicant completed the terms of his sentence, he
petitioned to have the record of his arrest expunged. (Ax. D)
In October 2005, Applicant was hired by a defense contractor for work as an
Arabic translator for military personnel at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and for U.S. military
forces in Iraq. His work required a security clearance, for which he applied in November
2005 by submitting an e-QIP. In response to e-QIP questions in Section 11 (“Your
Employment Activities”), he did not list his employment at the convenience store in
March 2000. He explained in his answer to the SOR and in his testimony that he
thought he did not have to list any employment less than 90 days in duration. (Answer
to SOR; Tr. 106 - 107) In response to e-QIP questions in Section 23 (“Your Police
Record”) he omitted the information about his convictions for selling alcohol to a minor
and for obstruction of justice. Applicant has explained he either did not understand the
question or thought that, because his record had been expunged he did not have to
disclose the information. (Tr. 103 - 106)
In October 2005, Applicant was interviewed by a U.S. Army counterintelligence
agent as part of a background investigation to determine whether Applicant should be
given a clearance so he could work as a Category 2 linguist overseas. Applicant failed
to disclose to the agent his March 2000 employment at the convenience store or his
convictions for obstruction and selling alcohol to a minor. In his interview, he denied any
adverse involvement with law enforcement. (Gx. 5; Tr. 47 - 62)
Applicant worked as a translator in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba and in Iraq until July
2007. His performance at both locations was excellent. Several members of the military
chain of command where he was assigned spoke highly of his dedication and reliability.
(Ax. B) Before working for a defense contractor, he worked in various social services
jobs and worked a second job at a home for the mentally challenged. His work in those
jobs earned him equally high praise. (Ax. A)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
 Directive. 6.3.3
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.5
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).6
5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors3
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, these factor are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
Guideline F (financial considerations), at AG ¶ 18, and Guideline E (personal conduct)
at AG ¶ 15.
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a5
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. The
government, therefore, has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses
the requisite judgement, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access in favor of the government.6
6
Analysis
Foreign Influence. Applicant’s contacts overseas may pose a security concern
because, as stated in AG ¶6,
[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
The government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in
SOR ¶3. Applicant’s brother-in-law, a former Egyptian Army officer, still lives in and is a
citizen of Egypt. Applicant has had little contact with him since Applicant became a U.S.
citizen. Applicant has no other personal or financial interests outside the U.S. and has
only returned to Egypt twice since 1977. The facts presented here make applicable the
disqualifying condition at AG ¶7(a) (contact with a foreign family member, business or
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion). 
Also applicable are the mitigating conditions at AG ¶8(a) (the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign  individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.), AG
¶8(b) (there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty or
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest), and AG ¶8(c)(contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation). From 1981 to the present, Applicant has seen his brother-in-law perhaps
three times and only speaks with him at most once a year. Further, all of Applicant’s
personal and financial interests have been in the U.S. for 30 years. On balance, the
security concerns about Applicant’s foreign contacts are mitigated.
Personal Conduct.
Applicant’s personal conduct may be a security concern because, as stated in
AG ¶ 15,
7
[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.
The government’s information supports the allegations that Applicant deliberately
falsified his responses to e-QIP questions about his employment and criminal conduct,
that he gave false information to the police, and that he tried to mislead an Army
investigator by omitting information about his employment history and by denying
adverse involvement with law enforcement. As to his omissions from his security
questionnaire of employment history and criminal record information, his argument that
he misunderstood the questions or thought he did not have to list an arrest that was
expunged finances, without more may seem plausible. However, along with Applicant’s
deliberate attempts to mislead police and an Army investigator, the record reflects a
pattern of deliberate dishonesty intended to protect his own interests. Available
information makes applicable the disqualifying condition at AG ¶16(b) (deliberately
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer,
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government
representative).
By contrast, the record does not warrant consideration of any of the mitigating
conditions listed in AG ¶17. Applicant did not promptly correct any of the false
statements he has made. Nor can his conduct be viewed as minor, because of the
government’s compelling interest in ensuring it has all of the information needed to
make an accurate and fair assessment of a person’s suitability for access to classified
information. In turn, a key aspect of that suitability is a person’s honesty, even when
faced with unpleasant or adverse circumstances. Available information shows Applicant
will resort to deception whenever faced with adverse personal circumstances. Such
conduct bears directly on his trustworthiness, reliability, and judgment. Accordingly,
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns about his personal conduct.
Criminal Conduct. 
Applicant’s criminal conduct may be a security concern because, as stated in AG
¶30, 
[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
The government submitted sufficient information to support the allegations that
he engaged in criminal conduct in March 2000 and in November 2005. After being
convicted in 2000 of trying to impede the state’s ability to enforce its laws by deliberately
providing false information to the police, Applicant repeated his conduct in 2005 by
trying to impede the government’s ability to assess his suitability for access to classified
information. His conduct in 2000 was a violation of his state’s criminal code (Gx. 8), and
his conduct his 2005 was a violation of 18 U.S.C. §1001. Available information requires
application of the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶31(a) (a single serious crime or
 See footnote 6, supra. 7
8
multiple lesser offenses) and AG ¶31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted).
I have also reviewed the mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶32; however, the
record does not warrant consideration of any of them. Available adverse information
goes directly to Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Because the
personal references who have recommended Applicant for a position of trust do not
appear to have knowledge of the adverse information in his background, the favorable
information about his work performance and reliability does not have sufficient
persuasive value to overcome the security concerns about his criminal conduct.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines B, E, and J. I have also reviewed the record
before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶2(a). Applicant is 56
years old and has spent most of his adult life as a productive citizen of the United States
since arriving from Egypt more than 30 years ago. His work as a translator in support of
the U.S. military has been outstanding. His co-workers, friends, and superiors feel he is
reliable and trustworthy. However, he has tried to conceal information the government
needs to accurately assess his ability and willingness to protect the national interests as
his own. Such dishonesty is not isolated because he had also tried to deceive civilian
authorities a few years earlier when faced with misdemeanor criminal charges. His
conduct is directly at odds with the fundamental tenets of the personnel security
program, in that Applicant has a history of lying to protect his own interests at the
expense of the government’s compelling interest in protecting classified information.
That he has done so even when faced with possible criminal penalties only reinforces
the government’s concerns. Available information tends to show he will repeat this
conduct in the future. Accordingly, significant doubts persist about whether Applicant is
suitable for access to classified information. Because protection of the national interest
is paramount in these determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the
national interest.  7
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a - 2.b Against Applicant
9
Paragraph 3, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a - 3.b: For Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                             
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
