                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-01646 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had a judgment and 15 past due accounts totaling approximately 
$41,000. Applicant has been making payments in accordance with repayment plans on 
the three largest debts. Half of the debts were for medical treatment provided following 
a slip and fall. One of the debts belongs to her ex-husband and she disputes two of the 
other debts. She intends to pay all she owes. Applicant has successfully mitigated 
financial considerations and personal conduct concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on May 31, 2007, detailing the security concerns under 
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2
Guideline F for financial considerations based on a history of financial problems as 
evicenced by delinquent debts and Guideline E for personal conduct for falsified 
material on a Security Clearance Applicant, Standard Form (SF) 86.  
  
 On July 9, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. On December 11, 2007, DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
scheduling the hearing held on January 15, 2008. On December 14, 2007, I was 
assigned the case. At the hearing, the government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, 
which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted 
Exhibits A through D, which were admitted into evidence. The record was kept open to 
allow Applicant to submit additional matters. On January 25, 2008, additional 
documents were received. Department Counsel did not object to the material, which 
was then admitted into evidence as Ex. E.  On February 1, 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was 
received.  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
On November 1, 2007, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by 
adding three unpaid debts as ¶¶ 1.m, 1.n, and 1.o and add falsification for failing to list a 
past due unpaid judgment on her SF-86 (¶ 2.c). Applicant had no objection to the 
amending of the SOR and the motion to amend was granted. (Tr. 10-11) At the hearing, 
¶ 2.b was amended to delete all reference to a Diners Club debt of $4,861. Applicant 
has never had a Diners Club account. Neither Applicant nor DC could explain the 
reference to the Diners Club debt. Applicant had not objection to the deleting of the 
reference and the motion to amend was granted. (Tr. 21-22) Applicant neither admitted 
nor denied the amended allegations. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.g, 1.i, 1.k, and, 1.l of the SOR, with explanations. She denied the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.g, 2.a, and 2.b of the SOR. She does not know the creditor listed in 
1.c, 1.f, 1.h, and 1.j. The admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the record, case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old truckdriver who has worked for a defense contractor 
since November 2000, and is seeking to maintain a security clearance. Applicant and 
her husband are long haul truckers. They have recently purchased a new truck, a 2008 
Peterbilt, and hope to sell the old one, a 1998 Peterbilt, worth approximately $30,000. 
(Tr. 125, 143) The have already found a buyer for their old truck. (Tr. 143) They pay 
$3,000 monthly for the truck tractor payment and $700 for the trailer. (Tr. 118)  
 
For 2004, they had $180,000 in income and $213,000 in expenses. Their 
adjusted gross income was a loss of $42,440. (Ex. E) During 2005, their income was 
$208,000 and their expenses were $191,000. Their adjusted gross income was $8,146. 
 
 
 
3
During 2006, their income was $202,000 and their expenses were $196,000. Their 
adjusted gross income for the year was a loss of $2,024 after adjusting for alimony paid. 
(Ex. E) In April 2007, Applicant completed a personal financial statement listing monthly 
income of $5,700, $3,100 in monthly expenses, and $1,000 in debt payment leaving a 
remainder of $1,600 per month. (Ex.2) Applicant believes her monthly discretional 
income is between $100 and $200. (Tr. 150 – 154). Applicant income fluctuates 
depending on how many trips are made and how many miles are traveled each month 
 
 From 1994 to 2000, Applicant was unemployed and on Social Security disability 
due to migraine headaches and Crohn’s disease. (Tr. 27, 28) Applicant’s new truck, with 
bathroom facilities, allows her to resume truck driving.  
 
In November 2000, she returned to the work force. She informed the Social 
Security Administration (SSA) she had returned to work, called them 6 or 7 times to ask 
why she was still receiving payment, and stressed to them she did not want to be 
overpaid, because she would not have the ability to repay an overpayment. (Tr. 74, Ex. 
B) SSA informed her she was entitled to the money and had 11 months to show she 
was still in the workforce. (Tr. 74) However, she was overpaid and the SSA is 
attempting to recover $1,650. (SOR ¶ 1.i) When she called the SSA about the 
overpayment, SSA’s records indicated Applicant had previously called about possible 
overpayment. In three years, when Applicant turns 62 and become eligible for Social 
Security, the amount owed will be deducted from her benefits. (Tr. 75) The SSA 
informed her that approximately 90% of recipients are overpaid. (Tr. 77)  
 
 In 1998, Applicant separated from her previous husband. In 1999, she divorced 
and remarried. Her current husband was also recently divorced.  
 
 Shortly after returning to work, she stopped working to take care of her brother 
who later died in April 2001. Following his death, she returned to work. In March 2003, 
she experienced a slip and fall in a store breaking her knee cap in four places. (Tr.40) 
Medicare was paying only 80% of the medical bills. She has had numerous surgeries: in 
March 2003 to wire the knee together (Tr. 40), January 2004 to remove the wires, 
August 2004 to remove a piece of bone (Tr. 41), and August 2007 when her knee cap 
was  surgically removed. (Tr. 41) She missed work due to the surgeries. Some of the 
medical bills are held by a single creditor. Applicant has arranged a repayment plan with 
this creditor.  
 
 Applicant had 77 therapy treatments assuming Medicare would pay 80% of the 
cost. Medicare failed to pay. The creditor has a lien against any settlement Applicant 
may obtain from the store where she fell. Applicant’s court date for the suit is in August 
2008. Mediation in the matter started on January 28, 2008. (Ex. E) Since being on 
disability, Applicant has received Medicare coverage for her medical expenses. She 
pays her premium every three months. (Tr. 88)  
 
 Applicant has paid two medical bills ($1,811.60 and $160) in full and has 
arranged payment on two other medical bills ($1,513.79 and $142.75) through the 
 
 
 
4
collection agency. (Ex. A) The creditor indicates Applicant’s payment record has been 
excellent. She has been paying $50 on this account since she was injured in 2003. (Tr. 
139-140) Applicant was paying $250 monthly to a creditor for multiple accounts, but has 
recently raised the monthly payment to $400. (Tr.61, 138) She has been making 
payments for more than 18 months. (Tr. 139) The balance owed is $16,115. (Tr. 46, Ex 
D) The bill started out at $20,000. (Tr. 47) A number of medical bills have been paid in 
full.  
 
Seven of the debts listed in the SOR are medically related. SOR ¶ 1.c is a $134 
medical bill, which Applicant did not recognize until the time of the hearing. (Tr. 64) She 
intends to pay this debt. (Tr.39) SOR ¶ 1.d is a $643 hospital bill. SOR ¶ 1.e is two 
debts of $48 and $267 owed a city hospital. (Tr. 64) SOR ¶ 1.f is a $424 debt owed a 
medical center. (Tr. 65) SOR ¶ 1.k are three medical bills totaling $196. (Tr. 86) SOR ¶ 
1.l. represents 26 medical accounts totaling $7,571. SOR ¶ 1.n is a $76 debt owed for 
radiology. Applicant hopes to use the recovery from her slip and fall case to pay these 
debts. (Tr. 39) 
  
 Applicant and her husband owed the IRS approximately $19,000 (SOR ¶ 1.b) for 
tax years 2001, 2002, and 2003. (Tr. 33, Ex. 6) She is paying the IRS $500 per month 
on this debt. (Ex. C) Until recently the amount was deducted through her employer, but 
since it was a voluntary levy the amount is now paid directly by Applicant. (Tr. 34) She 
has been making payments to the IRS for two and a half years. (Tr. 35) 
 
The divorce decree required her ex-husband to pay the amount owed ($1,022) 
on a credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.g.). (Tr. 69) Applicant is unfamiliar with two debts listed 
in her credit reports; one for $428 (SOR ¶ 1.h) and the other for $3,794 (SOR ¶ 1.j). (Tr. 
71, 83) The $428 was the amount of high credit on the account. The balance is zero 
and the credit report indicates the account was transferred or sold. (Exs. 3, 4) The debt 
appears in the February 2007 credit report (Ex. 4), but not in the May 2007 credit report 
(Ex.5). Applicant has no knowledge about the $484 debt (SOR ¶ 1.m), and intends to 
contact the creditor about this debt. (Tr. 90) The credit history (Ex. 4) indicates 
payments have been made on this account and $73 is past due. The credit report (Ex.3) 
lists a $68 unpaid debt (SOR ¶ 1.o). 
 
 The creditor holding the $5,182 debt listed in (SOR ¶ 1.a) reduced the debt to a 
judgment in the fall of 2003. Applicant’s checking account was garnished for $149, 
which may or may not have been related to the judgment. (Tr. 31) The garnishment was 
stopped and the judgment remains unpaid. Applicant wishes to set up a repayment 
arrangement on this debt, but has been unable to locate the creditor. (Tr. 32, Ex. 6, Ex. 
B) Applicant does not remember the reason for the judgment. Her attorney looked it up 
and brought it to Applicant’s attention. It was a default judgment. (Tr. 30) 
 
 When completing her SF 86, Applicant did not remember all of her creditors. 
Question 36 asked if any liens had been placed against her property for failing to pay 
taxes. She answered “no” because she had not received a tax lien but was making 
 
 
 
5
voluntary payments to the IRS. (Tr. 98) Additionally, Applicant believed the lien had to 
be placed against her property and she had no real estate property. (Tr. 98)  
 
Applicant denied deliberately failing to list her debts that had ever been more 
than 180 days delinquent, or were currently more than 90 days delinquent. (Tr. 99-100) 
The government was concerned why six prior debts were not listed. Applicant stated 
three of the debts were not known to her and it had been years since she had been 
contacted by creditors. SOR ¶ 2.b references a debt which Applicant never had and DC 
acknowledged should not have been included in her debts.  
 
Applicant’s response to the SF-86 was handwritten and Ex. 1 is a computer 
generated form. Applicant and her husband are long-haul over the road truck drivers.  
As such, there are periods of time when they are gone from their home for extended 
periods. At one point during the security clearance application, Applicant was sent 
paperwork and she was not home for almost three months to receive the paperwork. 
(Tr. 29)   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
 
 
6
                                                          
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F (financial considerations) a security concern typically exists 
due to significant unpaid debts. Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy 
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.2 
 
 An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal or unethical acts to generate funds to meet financial obligations. Additionally, an 
individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, 
negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified information. 
Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how 
a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant owed more than $41,000 to 14 creditors. One of the debts was 
2 Revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) ¶ 18. 
 
 
 
7
reduced to judgment. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s financial problems 
were contributed to by numerous surgeries and medical treatment related to her slip 
and fall that destroyed her knee cap. Seven of the debts, totaling more than $9,000, are 
for medical bills. Applicant pays premiums for Medicare coverage and assumed 
Medicare would pay for her 77 treatments. The mediation process has recently started 
on this slip and fall case. 
 
Additionally, Applicant lost time from work caring for her brother prior to his death 
and because of her migraine headaches and Crohn’s disease. The restrictions imposed 
on her job as a truck driver by her Crohn’s disease have been lessened by the 
bathroom facilities on the new truck. The medical bills resulting from the slip and fall, the 
time lost from work caring for her brother, and the restrictions on her work imposed by 
Crohn’s disease are not likely to recur because of the facilities in the new truck. AG ¶ 
20(a) applies. 
 
AG & 20(b), Athe conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances,@ applies. Applicant experienced an 
unexpected medical emergency and caring for her brother along with the financial 
burden associated with each. She has paid what she was able to on her debts. AG & 
20(b) applies. 
 
AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Applicant has paid a 
number of the medical bills. She has been making $250 monthly payments, recently 
raised to $400, to one creditor for more than 18 months. She has been making $50 
monthly payments on other medical bills since March 2004, approximately 4 years. She 
has been voluntarily paying the IRS $500 per month for more than two and a half years. 
Additionally, the debt ($1,022) listed in SOR & 1.g. is her ex-husband’s debt. AG & 
20(b) applies to these four obligations.  
 
 The SSA overpaid Applicant $1,650 in disability payments. Applicant acted 
reasonably in attempting to avoid overpayment. She called the SSA and told them she 
had returned to work and they assured her she was entitled to the payments. She 
intends to allow SSA to take the amount owed from her benefits when she starts 
receiving payment in three years. This may not be the best way to handle the 
overpayment, but one can only do so much with the funds available.  
 
 
 
 
8
 Applicant wants to arrange payment on the $5,000 judgment. She also owes four 
additional debts: $ 68 (SOR ¶ 1.o), $428 (SOR ¶ 1.h), $484 (SOR ¶ 1.m), and $3,794 
(SOR ¶ 1.j). Should their old truck sell or should she receive settlement on the slip and 
fall case, these amounts could easily be paid. If there is no sale or settlement, Applicant 
has arranged payments with other creditors in the past and her long history of payments 
indicates her creditors will be paid. These five additional debts do not raise concerns 
about her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The allegations under Guideline E, (Personal Conduct) are refuted. The 
Government has shown Applicant's answers to questions 37, 38 and 39 were incorrect, 
but this does not prove the Applicant deliberately failed to disclose information about her 
finances. The Applicant has denied intentional falsification. In July 2004, when 
completing her SF 86, Applicant did not list any debts as having ever been more than 
180 days delinquent or being currently more than 90 days delinquent. At the time she 
completed her SF 86, she was making payments on three of the obligations. Applicant 
does not recognize three other creditors and was not being called or contacted by any 
creditors. A default judgment was obtained against Applicant, but Applicant was 
unaware of the judgment until her attorney looked it up. Applicant was not receiving any 
calls or correspondence from the creditors and had simply forgot about the debts when 
she completed her SF-86 
 
Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written 
document or oral statement to the Government when applying for a security clearance 
is a security concern. But every inaccurate statement is not a falsification. A falsification 
must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully. An 
omission concerning delinquent debt is not deliberate if the person did not know of their 
existence or failed to remember them. The Applicant was unaware of the default 
judgment and did not know her accounts were delinquent when completing her SF 86. 
Additionally, Applicant’s job took her away from home for months at a time, thereby 
limiting her access to her mail. 
 
I found Applicant’s explanation of her negative answers on her SF 86 plausible. 
After hearing her testimony, observing her demeanor, and evaluating all the evidence of 
record, I found her testimony credible on the falsification issue. I am satisfied she did 
not intentionally falsify her SF 86.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
 
 
9
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The debts set forth in the SOR were 
not incurred on luxuries. The majority were for medical treatment and taxes. 
 
Applicant is making monthly payments on three of the largest of her debts. These 
debts cannot be a source of improper pressure or duress. Applicant is addressing those 
debts she can. There are debts she is currently unable to address. The issue is not 
simply whether all her debts are being paid—it is whether her financial circumstances 
raise concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a) (1)) 
Applicant is paying those bills that she can and has been doing so for a number of 
years. The length of time she has been making payments gives me confidence she will 
continue to make payment until these debts are paid. Once the debts are paid she will 
work to pay off the remaining obligations.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.o: For Applicant 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a- 2.c: For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
