1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                          )          ISCR Case No. 07-03504
SSN:                     )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SCA), on December
February 28, 2006. On July 11, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under
financial considerations (Guideline F). The action was taken pursuant to Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29,
2005, and made effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued on or after
September 1, 2006. 
Applicant submitted her notarized answer to the SOR on August 24, 2007. She
elected to have her case decided administratively without a hearing. A copy of the
government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM, the government’s evidence in support of
the SOR) was sent to Applicant on September 17, 2007. Applicant received the FORM
on January 8, 2008. Applicant’s response was due by February 8, 2008. No response
was received at DOHA. The case was assigned to this administrative judge on March 4,
 Next to each debt in the SOR, Applicant indicated in writing that she admitted owing the debt. She also wrote1
additional information about the debt. For example, under SOR 1.i., Applicant wrote updated information that
the debt had been sold to a collection agency. W hether this information was obtained through her research
in an effort to identify and pay the debt, or through the mail in the ordinary course of business events to notify
the debtor of the present status of the debt is unknown. 
2
2008. Based upon a review of the FORM, Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
Findings of Fact
There are ten debt allegations under the financial considerations guideline.
Applicant admitted all alleged debts,  and attributed the delinquent debts to her former1
husband who reneged on his promise to pay them off. She advised she was now in a
position to address the debts, and desired to consolidate them. 
Applicant is 30 years old and has been employed by a defense contractor as a
stewart assistant since February 2008. She seeks her first security clearance.
The 10 debts (two gas and eight general credit cards) listed in the SOR total $11,
328.00. The debts in SOR 1.a. through 1.f. became delinquent between 2000 and
November 2002. The more recent debts fell delinquent between 2003 and 2006. In her
security clearance application (SCA, GX 4), she indicated she was delinquent to the
SOR 1.c. and the 1.j. creditors, and was making payments. No additional information
was provided.  
The only source of explanatory information for her financial delinquencies
besides the supplemental statement to her answer, is the information Applicant
provided May 17, 2007 in her answers to interrogatories. (GX 5) She stated in response
to question 3 of GX 5:
Although the debt is in my name, it was accrued during my first marriage
and should be equally shared. I’ve tried unsuccessfully to resolve this
matter with my ex[-]husband. During our divorce my husband decided he
was not going to help pay our debt any longer. This resulted in late
payments and eventually no payments because I did not have the means
to handle it alone. I am saving money currently to pay my debt, in hopes
the credit card companies might drop the late fees, etc, if I am able to
hand them the majority of the cash in one lump sum. Working for
[employer] has been the light at the end of the “debtors” tunnel and I hope
my employment with them will not be affected by this issue. Thank you.
No additional information was provided about Applicant’s negotiations to pay the
creditors or consolidate her debt. Furthermore, Applicant has provided no information
about her job performance.
3
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are flexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the general policy factors of
the whole person concept. The Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
security clearance decision.
The protection of the national interest is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2b.
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-
the-clock responsibility. The Government places a high degree of trust and confidence
in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include
consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to
protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of
legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise
of classified information.
Financial Considerations (FC)
Inability to pay bills on time places the individual debtor at risk of committing
illegal acts to generate funds. 
4
Analysis
The SOR lists 10 past due debts totaling $11,328.00. Four of the debts have
been delinquent since 2000. Though Applicant contends she made payments to at least
two of the creditors, it is her responsibility to support her contention, and she failed to do
so. FC disqualifying condition (DC) 19.a. (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and
FC DC 19.c. (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply.
The FC guideline contains four mitigating conditions (MC) that may allay the
security concerns cause by a person’s indebtedness. FC mitigating condition (MC) 20.a.
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
currently reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment) may overcome dated financial
issues that occurred under peculiar circumstances which are unlikely to recur. Though
five of the listed debts are more than five years old, the remaining debts are delinquent
by five years or less. FC MC 32.a. does not apply.
FC MC 20.b. (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control, and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances) has limited application to this case because of Applicant’s marital
troubles. Her marital discord does not receive greater weight because it lacks detail.
Was her husband’s agreement (to pay the delinquent debt) an unofficial understanding
that the two parties made after they separated, or was this agreement actually a
condition in the divorce? Without more information about the surrounding circumstances
of his decision to pay the delinquent debts, it is difficult to conclude whether she acted
reasonably after he stopped paying the past due debt. She claimed she made payments
on the debts, but provided no documents to verify this claim.
FC MC 20.c. (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control)
does not apply as there is no evidence of counseling or evidence to demonstrate the
financial problems are under control.
FC MC 20.d. (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay creditors or
otherwise resolve debts) does not apply either. Applicant’s statements of intention to
save money so she could negotiate with her creditors and/or enroll in a debt
consolidation plan have little probative weight because she has presented no
documented proof of her intentions. Applicant’s improved financial position has no
probative value unless coupled with corroborated action to pay off her overdue debts. 
Whole Person Concept
As explained on page 18 of Enclosure 2 of Directive 5220.6, the decision
whether to grant or deny a security clearance depends on a common sense
assessment of the FC guideline evaluated in the context of the whole person. I have
carefully evaluated the FC guideline in the context of the general factors of the whole
5
person. Applicant’s history of financial problems began in 2000 when she was 22 years
old, and her first credit card bill became delinquent. In the next eight years, Applicant
accumulated nine additional delinquent accounts. Her claims of continuing to pay
several of the creditors after her separation and divorce from her spouse suffer from an
absence of proof demonstrating continued payments or any other action to resolve her
indebtedness. Without evidence indicating changes made in the way Applicant
manages her past due debt and overall financial practices, it is likely Applicant’s
financial problems are likely to continue. The amount of delinquent debt and the lack of
documentation to resolve the debts substantiates a finding against Applicant under SOR
1.a. through 1.j. Accordingly, the FC guideline is resolved against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25. of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
