 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                      )  ISCR Case No. 07-03102 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel, 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2003, and received his U.S. 
passport shortly thereafter. His renewal, use, and current possession of a valid Nigerian 
passport pose an unacceptable security concern. He mitigated the foreign influence 
security concerns arising from his family in Nigeria, but failed to mitigate the foreign 
preference security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on June 2, 2005. 
On October 3, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security concerns under 
Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and B (Foreign Influence).1  
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 15 and 31, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on December 
19, 2007. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 24, 2007, and I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on January 16, 2008. The government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 3, which were received without objection. GE 3 was not admitted, but 
considered for administrative notice purposes only.2 Applicant testified on his own 
behalf and submitted one exhibit, marked AE 1. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on January 30, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a, and 2.b with 
explanations. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. His admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of all evidence of record, I make the following 
additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old information security engineer, working for a 
government contractor. He was born, raised, and educated in Nigeria (Tr. 28, GE 1). In 
1994, at age 24, he completed a Nigerian “higher national diploma,” which is the 
equivalent of a bachelor’s degree (Tr. 31). From 1994 to 1997, he worked for two 
Nigerian private companies as a quality surveyor estimating building construction costs 
(Tr. 33).  
 
In 1997, Applicant won a lottery for a U.S. visa and immigrated to the United 
States (Tr. 29). After his arrival, he enlisted and served in the U.S. Army from August 
1998 to March 1999. He was medically discharged due to health problems. His service 
was characterized as honorable. Applicant then worked for several U.S. companies as a 
physical security officer, and at a group home where he cared for mentally retarded 
people (Tr. 31). From 1998 to 2000, he attended college while working full time “to 
prepare himself to fit in the U.S. environment and accomplish his dream.” From 2002 to 
2003, he earned a master’s degree in network security, which was awarded in August 
2004 (Tr. 42). Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in February 2003, and 
received his U.S. passport the following month (GE 1). 
 
Since his release from the Army in 1999, Applicant worked for several 
information technology and computer business related companies. In May 2005, he 
started working for his current employer, a federal contractor, as an information security 
engineer. He ensures clients’ compliance with security requirements, and conducts 
vulnerability assessments, certifications, and accreditations of clients’ information 
technology systems (Tr. 44). 
 
 
2  Department Counsel’s December 14, 2007 motion asked that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts concerning the government of Nigeria. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were considered and included in the record as GE 3 for Identification. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant married his Nigerian wife in 1996, before he immigrated to the United 
States. While in Nigeria, she worked as a secretary for a privately owned company. She 
immigrated to the United States in April 2001, and is currently employed as a nurse (Tr. 
36-37). They have a three-and-one-half-year-old son born in the United States. She has 
applied for U.S. citizenship and is waiting to be called for the swearing in ceremony to 
complete her naturalization process.  
 
Applicant and his wife own their residence and three other investment properties 
in the United States, with an equity value of around $200,000. Additionally, he has a 
401(k) investment plan. Applicant and his wife have no financial assets, and own no 
property or investments in Nigeria (Tr. 39, 69). 
 
Applicant claimed that neither he nor his wife ever served in the Nigerian military 
forces, and that they never worked for the Nigerian government or for any government 
affiliated company (Tr. 38). Since leaving Nigeria, he has had no contact with any 
friends and coworkers in Nigeria, except those he visited with during his trips back to 
Nigeria.  
 
In February 2004, December 2004, and in November 2007 (Tr. 65), Applicant 
traveled to Nigeria for pleasure, and stayed for approximately two weeks during each 
trip. He renewed his Nigerian passport during his February 2004 trip to Nigeria at the 
instance of Nigerian border officials. Since then, he has used both passports, his 
Nigerian passport and his U.S. passport to enter and exit Nigeria (Tr. 63-65). As of the 
day of his hearing, Applicant was in possession of a valid Nigerian passport, which will 
not expire until February 2009.  
 
Applicant stayed with his older brother whenever he travelled to Nigeria. His 
mother, siblings, other relatives, and friends came to visit him at his brother’s home 
while he was in Nigeria. Applicant’s mother, his 13 siblings, his wife’s three siblings and 
her mother, as well as all of their extended families are citizens and residents of Nigeria. 
Applicant claimed that none of his or his wife’s family members are or have been 
members of the Nigerian military forces, or employed by the Nigerian government (Tr. 
55-58).  
 
While in the United States, he contacts his mother and his older brother 
approximately once a month to ask about his mother’s and siblings’ health (GE 2). He 
contacts his other siblings through his older brother (Tr. 59). Applicant has a close 
relationship with his mother and provides support for her occasionally (Tr. 51). She 
came twice to visit him in the United States after Applicant’s son was born. He believes 
all of his siblings and wife’s family support the general policies and interests of the 
United States. 
 
In December 2005, Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator 
concerning possible foreign preference issues (GE 2). At that time, he became aware of 
possible security concerns arising out of his dual citizenship and possession of a 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Nigerian passport. In his December 2005 statement, his answers to the SOR, and 
numerous times during his hearing, Applicant offered to surrender his Nigerian passport 
and to renounce his Nigerian citizenship. Applicant explained he was not under any 
obligation to Nigeria, and claimed the only reason he had not surrendered his passport 
or renounced his Nigerian citizenship was because no one had explained to him the 
process to do so.  
 
He claimed he asked several times to both personnel at the Nigerian embassy in 
Nigeria and in the Nigerian embassy in the United States for information on how to 
surrender his passport and renounce his Nigerian citizenship and received no help. He 
also claimed he asked his employers’ facility security officers and DOHA personnel for 
the same information, and that he performed Internet searches looking for such 
information to no avail (Tr. 68-69; 76-89). Other than his testimony, he presented no 
evidence of efforts he has taken to surrender his passport or renounce his Nigerian 
citizenship. 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Nigeria is a federal republic 
composed of 36 states and a capital territory. The government’s human rights record is 
poor, and government officials at all levels commit serious human rights abuses. Areas 
of the country are marked by serious instability and outbreaks of armed conflict between 
religious, political, and ethnic factions. The lack of law and order in the country poses 
considerable risks to travelers. 
 
The Nigerian government provides strong diplomatic support to U.S. government 
counter-terrorism efforts. It has condemned terrorist attacks against the United States 
and supported military actions against the Taliban and Al-Qaida. It also has played a 
leading role in forging an anti-terrorism consensus among states in their region. The 
United States provides the people of Nigeria with substantial financial assistance in 
areas such as public health, education, and in their efforts of developing effective 
institutions of democratic governance. Nigeria is an important trading partner of the 
United States. There is no evidence of economic competition with the United States, or 
that Nigeria has or ever had an intelligence gathering program targeting U.S. economic, 
industrial, or military critical technologies.  
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.3 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
3  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”4 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
4  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under Guideline C the government’s concern is “when an individual acts in such 
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he 
or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the 
interests of the United States.” AG ¶ 9. 
 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2003 and was issued a U.S. 
passport shortly thereafter. He renewed his Nigerian passport in February 2004, 
apparently at the instance of Nigerian border officials. He used both his Nigerian 
passport and U.S. passport to travel to Nigeria twice in 2004 and once in 2007 because 
of convenience, i.e., he did not have to go through the process of requesting a visa. At 
his hearing, he was in possession of a current Nigerian passport that does not expire 
until 2009. 
 
Foreign preference disqualifying condition AG ¶ 10 provides: “(a) exercise of any 
right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or 
through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) 
possession of a current foreign passport,” applies.  
 
After considering all the foreign preference mitigating condition under AG ¶ 11, I 
find that only AG ¶ 11(b): “The individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship,” applies. Applicant renewed and used his foreign passport after becoming a 
U.S. citizen, and receiving his U.S. passport. As of the day of his hearing, he was still in 
possession of his valid foreign passport. He presented no evidence to show that his use 
of the foreign passport was approved by a cognizant security authority. 
 
Notwithstanding Applicant’s expressed willingness to renounce his dual 
citizenship and to surrender his passport, two years after he was confronted with the 
security concerns raised by his possession of a valid passport and his exercise of dual 
citizenship he was still in possession of a valid Nigerian passport. Applicant’s claims, 
i.e., that he asked Nigerian embassy officials, a government investigator, his employer’s 
facility security officers, DOHA personnel, and that he researched the Internet looking 
for information about to how to renounce his foreign citizenship and to surrender his 
passport, are not credible.  
 
Applicant was confronted about his possession and use of a foreign passport at 
least three times, i.e., by a government investigator (GE 2), through the DOHA 
interrogatories, and by the SOR allegations. Applicant is 37 years old, and holds a 
master’s degree in computer management and information systems with a 
concentration on networks security. He was provided a copy of the Directive outlining 
the government’s security concerns. With a little diligence, Applicant would have been 
able to mitigate the government’s security concerns raised by his use and possession of 
a current foreign passport. He did not provide copies of any correspondence sent to 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
security officials, DOHA, or the Nigerian government offering to relinquish his clearance. 
Considering the totality of the circumstances presented by Applicant’s case, he has 
failed to mitigate the security concerns raised under Guideline C.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Under Guideline B, the government’s concern is:  
 
 “foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.” AG ¶ 6.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.5 Applicant has frequent contacts (at least once a 
month) and a close relationship of affection and/or obligation with his mother and 
siblings, who are residents and citizens of Nigeria. These contacts create a risk of 
foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because there is always the possibility that 
Nigerian agents or criminals may exploit the opportunity to obtain information about the 
United States. His connection to his family members also create a potential conflict of 
5  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                          
interest because his relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about 
his desire to help them by providing sensitive or classified information.  
 
  The government produced substantial evidence raising these two potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. As previously indicated, the burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
 
  Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that mitigating condition AG ¶¶ 8(a) and (b) apply. Applicant has strong 
feelings of affection and a strong sense of obligation to his siblings. The closeness of 
the relationship is shown by Applicant’s telephone contacts with his siblings, the 
financial support provided to his mother, and his travels to Nigeria. Notwithstanding, 
Applicant established it is unlikely he will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of his family and the interests of the United States. Applicant’s 
family members in Nigeria live routine lives, they are not involved in politics, employed 
by the Nigerian government or its military forces. Applicant’s contact with his family is 
primarily through his older brother, who then relays family information back and forth. I 
do not believe Applicant’s relationship with his family in Nigeria creates a heightened 
risk for foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
 In deciding whether Applicant’s family members are in a position to be exploited, 
I considered Nigeria’s form of government.6 Nigeria is a developing country that, so far, 
 6  The focus is not the country or its people, but its rulers and the nature of the government they 
impose. This approach recognizes that it makes sense to treat each country in accordance with the level 
of security concern or threat it presents to the United States.  
 
9 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
possess no intelligence, economic, or industrial threat to the United States. 
Notwithstanding Nigeria’s poor human rights record, there is no evidence its 
government seeks classified and industrial/economic information from the United 
States. Nor is there evidence of the Nigerian government mistreating relatives of U.S. 
citizens or U.S. citizens to obtain such information. Additionally, given the existing 
relationship between the governments of the United States and Nigeria, it is unlikely 
Nigeria would risk loosing an important trading partner and the financial support of the 
United States. 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) applies because Applicant has developed a sufficient relationship and 
loyalty to the United States, that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States’ interests. He has lived in the United States for approximately 
11 years. He is a naturalized U.S. citizen and all of his financial and business interests 
are in the United States. Applicant has established himself as an American citizen. He 
has worked hard for several government contractors, and at the university earning a 
master’s degree. He continues this track record of diligent labor in his current 
employment. 
 
 Considering the totality of the circumstances, the evidence shows it is unlikely 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of his 
mother, siblings, or in-laws and the interests of the United States. He has mitigated the 
Guideline B security concerns. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has been in the United 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
States for about 11 years and a naturalized U.S. citizen for around five years. He 
attended college courses and received his master’s degree in the United States. His 
wife needs only to be sworn in to complete her U.S. naturalization process, and their 
son was born in the United States. He has many close relatives living in Nigeria with 
whom he has close ties of affection and or obligation. He and his wife own property and 
have financial interest only in the United States, and they have embraced the United 
States way of life. Applicant has worked for several defense contractors and there is no 
evidence that he has failed to comply with rules and regulations concerning the 
protection of classified information. 
 
After carefully considering Applicant’s circumstances, I conclude he is not in a 
position where he may be induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests. He is not vulnerable to pressure or 
coercion by his mother, siblings, or the government of Nigeria. 
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the concerns arising from 
his foreign influence security concerns, but failed to mitigate the foreign preference 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
