 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 07-05597 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
  Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns raised 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Her 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied.  
 
On November 6, 2006, Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On July 31, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines F and E 
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 13, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On December 6, 2007, 
 
2 
 
 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing nine 
Items, and mailed Applicant a complete copy on December 11, 2007. Applicant 
received the FORM on December 17, 2007, and had 30 days from its receipt to file 
objections and submit additional information. Applicant timely submitted additional 
information. On January 28, 2008, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Within the FORM, Department Counsel filed a Motion to Amend the SOR to 
change all references to July 10, 2007 in the subparagraphs concerning debts alleged 
under Guideline F to November 30, 2006, to conform to the record evidence. Applicant 
did not file an objection to said Motion. The Motion to Amend is granted.  
 
 The FORM also notes that this is a Co-Subject Case that was processed under 
DISCR Operating Instruction No. 5. The Co-subject is Applicant’s husband. The cases 
were assigned to the same Department Counsel. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, dated August 13, 2007, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in SOR ¶ ¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.l., and 1.m. She denied the 
remaining allegations under Guideline F. She admitted the allegation under Guideline E.  
 
 Applicant is a 36 years old, married and has three children. Since September 
2004, she has worked for a defense contractor. Prior to her current position, she worked 
for private companies, with periods of unemployment between positions. (Item 4). 
Previously, she submitted a Public Trust Position Application in November 2004. (Item 
8).   
 
 In October 1997, Applicant filed a Petition for Bankruptcy under Chapter 7 of the 
U.S. Bankruptcy Code. In February 1998, the Bankruptcy Court granted the petition and 
discharged her debts, the amount of which is not included in this file. 
  
 The SOR alleged that eleven debts, totaling approximately $16,094, are more 
than 180 days delinquent. Applicant admitted owing $13,454 of that amount. She 
denied owing three medical debts, totaling $983, and asserted that a debt for $1,657 
was her husband’s obligation.  
 
 In May 2007, Applicant consulted a credit counselor about her debts, who 
indicated that there were many discrepancies on her credit bureau reports, which he 
was investigating. None of those discrepancies were disclosed or noted to relate to the 
SOR allegations.  
 
 Applicant’s monthly budget notes a net monthly income of $3,711 and monthly 
expenses of $2,776. In addition, the budget indicates that she owes $5,047 in financial 
obligations on which she is making monthly payments of $572. She also submitted a list 
 
3 
 
 
of her husband’s financial obligations that totaled $6,567 on which he is making monthly 
payments of $752.  Together, their monthly debt reduction payment is $1,324, leaving a 
monthly shortage of approximately $400. (Item 5). None of the delinquent debts listed in 
the SOR are included in those monthly payments, nor is there any evidence 
documenting that any of the SOR debts, dating back to 2002, have been paid or 
resolved. (Item 7).          
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
4 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Behaving responsibility or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. A person’s relationship 
with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is uncovered demonstrating an 
inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed upon terms. Absent evidence of 
strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant, with a history of serious or 
recurring financial difficulties, is in a situation of risk inconsistent with the holding of a 
security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, but is required to 
manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant admitted that she filed a bankruptcy in 1997, indicating that 
her financial problems began prior to 1997. According to the November 2006 credit 
bureau report, Applicant’s subsequent debts began accumulating in 2002. The evidence 
is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer 
examination. 
 
The Government produced substantial evidence of those two disqualifying 
conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation. Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 may be 
applicable. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe 
behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
 
5 
 
 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Based on the 1997 bankruptcy 
petition and subsequent accumulation of significant debt, Applicant’s problems cannot 
be considered isolated; hence, the evidence does not support this potentially mitigating 
condition.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ There is no evidence in 
the record related to this condition. I find this potentially mitigating condition is not 
applicable. 
 
 Although Applicant submitted a letter from a credit counselor that she contacted 
one in May 2007, she did not provide any documentation noting what steps are being 
taken to address the specific debts listed in the SOR, other than mentioning that there 
are inaccuracies on her credit bureau reports. Thus, there is insufficient evidence to fully 
apply AG & 20(c) that requires a showing that she “has received or is receiving 
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control.”  
 
Evidence that Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts@ is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(d). 
However, Applicant did not provide any evidence that she paid or resolved any of the 
eleven debts listed in the SOR.  I conclude this potentially mitigating condition does not 
apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The security concern relating to the guideline for personal conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
One Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition is particularly relevant in this case. 
AG ¶ 16(a) provides that the “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of 
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities” may raise a security concern.  Based on Applicant’s admission 
 
6 
 
 
to SOR ¶ 2.a, alleging that she falsified her SF 86 because she failed to disclose debts 
more than 180 days delinquent, the Government raised this disqualification. 
The Applicant did not provide any explanation or documentation addressing the 
falsification allegation. Hence, none of the applicable mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
17 apply. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 36 years old, sufficiently 
mature to be fully responsible for her financial obligations. Additionally, she should have 
had enough familiarity with the significance of delinquent financial obligations as related 
to the security clearance application, having gone through the process previously. 
Although she sought financial counseling in May 2007, she did not present any 
evidence that she addressed the specific delinquent debts listed in the SOR. Until she 
establishes a budget a plan to manage all of her financial obligations and provides proof 
of a track record of consistent financial management, I am concerned that she will 
continue having financial difficulties.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
7 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.m:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
