 1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-06530 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on 
November 9, 2004. On September 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 31, 2007, and 
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. DOHA received the 
response on November 7, 2007. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on December 5, 2007, and I received the case assignment on December 6, 2007. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 18, 2007, scheduling the hearing 
for January 9, 2008.  The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which 
were received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through I, which were received without objection, and he testified on his own 
behalf. I held the record open until January 25, 2008 to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted AE J 
through Q without objection, which were forwarded to me by Department Counsel 
by letter dated January 28, 2008 (Exhibit I). DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on January 17, 2008. The record closed on January 28, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact.  After a thorough review of the evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old steamfitter foreman, who has worked for his 
defense contractor employer since January 2000. He previously held a security 
clearance from 1990 to 1999 while employed as a pipefitter for a defense 
contractor. Tr. 18-20, GE 1. Applicant has held and maintained an interim top 
secret clearance since 2005. Tr. 21-22, AE F.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1987. Tr. 17. Applicant has 
been married since June 1995. He and his wife have a four-year-old son. GE 1, 
Tr. 22. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his February 2007 credit bureau report, and Response to 
DOHA Financial Interrogatories dated July 10, 2007. GE 3, GE 2. 
 
Applicant’s SOR identified five separate line items to include a chapter 13 
bankruptcy filed in July 2007, a past due primary mortgage in the amount of 
$345,118, a past due secondary mortgage in the amount of $88,763, a past due 
credit union account in the amount of $3,541, a past due automobile loan in the 
amount of $1,061, and a 2005 non-federal income tax debt arrearage in the 
amount of $12,452. SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems began in the latter part of 2006. He 
purchased a new vehicle and used an existing vehicle as a trade-in. The unpaid 
balance on his trade-in vehicle was not paid off by the automobile dealer in a 
 3
timely manner requiring Applicant to make unplanned car payments for two 
vehicles. Applicant was also faced with an unplanned property tax increase, which 
required timely payment. Added to this, Applicant purchased a business and 
rented machinery with money he expected to receive from overtime from his 
existing job. The overtime did not occur as planned. In short, Applicant’s budget 
was sufficiently strained to the point that he was unable to make any unplanned 
adjustments. Tr. 62-69. 
 
With the exception of the past due automobile loan for $1,061 (SOR ¶ 
1.e.), the other four debts listed in SOR are included in Applicant’s chapter 13 
bankruptcy repayment plan. With regard to SOR ¶ 1.e., Applicant paid that debt 
off as of June 28, 2007. Tr. 32-35, 40, AE E. 
 
Applicant is on a five-year chapter 13 repayment plan. For the first three 
months following approval of his repayment plan which began in August 2007, 
Applicant paid $890 by check or money order to the bankruptcy trustee. Beginning 
in November 2007, Applicant’s monthly payments to the bankruptcy trustee 
decreased to $850 per month, which he is making and will continue to make for 
the duration of his repayment plan by automatic payroll deductions. He submitted 
post-hearing documentation verifying that fact. AE J, AE K.  
 
Applicant stated he was current on his debts until he ran into financial 
difficulty in 2006 as evidenced by his credit report. Tr. 74, AE H.  Applicant 
conceded he made some “bad decisions.” Rather than seek chapter 7 bankruptcy, 
he chose chapter 13 bankruptcy because he “[does] have a willingness to satisfy 
debts.” Tr. 87-90. 
 
Applicant is also making monthly mortgage payments of $2,287 to his 
primary mortgage of $345,118 and $867 to his secondary mortgage of $88,763. 
Applicant fell behind on these two payments following the approval of his chapter 
13 repayment plan as a result of bankruptcy attorney legal fees.  He submitted 
budget documentation during his hearing and post-hearing that he is current with 
his late monthly mortgage payments as of March 2007. Tr. 29-32, 71-73, AE B, 
AE G, AE P. 
 
As part of Applicant’s chapter 13 bankruptcy, he was required to undergo 
financial counseling, which he completed in July 2007. AE O. 
 
Applicant provided three work-related reference letters from supervisory 
personnel. The letters describe Applicant as a “valuable asset,” “ambitious to 
learn,” “[having a] willingness to go the extra distance,” “honest,” “hard working,” 
and “ambitious, dependable, trustworthy and willing to work the long and odd 
hours . . . to keep the facilities running during government business hours.” AE L, 
AE M, AE N. His post-hearing budget reflects he has a net remainder of $678 
after he pays all his monthly bills. AE P. 
 
 4
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which 
are useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with 
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-
arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number 
of variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG 
¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, 
logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have 
avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
Applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel. . . .” The Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as 
to obtaining a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently 
fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk 
of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 5
                                                          
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations),1 the Government’s concern 
is that an Applicant’s 
 
 “[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and 
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of 
which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to 
engage in illegal acts to generate funds.” 
 
 Applicant acknowledged he made some poor financial decisions. Part of 
his problems were due, in part, to anticipated overtime not materializing and his 
automobile dealer failing to pay off the note on his trade-in vehicle. These events 
created a financial tailspin from which Applicant was unable to recover. When 
faced with significant financial problems, Applicant made reasonable efforts to 
confront and resolve his financial problems. Rather than seeking a chapter 7 
discharge, he sought to repay his debts through a chapter 13 repayment plan. As 
of March 2008, he is current on his mortgage arrearages and has always been 
current on his payments to his chapter 13 trustee. He began his five-year 
repayment plan in August 2007. Since November 2007, these payments have 
been made to the bankruptcy trustee by payroll deduction. Applicant also sought 
counseling as required by the bankruptcy process.  
 
¶ 19. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying include: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt 
or establish a realistic plan to pay the debt. 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account 
fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial 
breaches of trust; 
1  Guideline ¶ 18. 
 
 6
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, 
high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis; 
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, 
gambling problems, or other issues of security concern; 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same; 
 
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of 
living, increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be 
explained by subject's known legal sources of income; and 
 
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful 
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets 
or returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of 
gambling losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay 
gambling debts, family conflict or other problems caused by 
gambling. 
 
Of the nine Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) 
listed supra, two are applicable: ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts; and FC DC ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
¶ 20. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Considering the record evidence as a whole,2 I conclude three of the six 
Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions (FC MC) are applicable: ¶ 20(b) the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances; ¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control; and ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial history before he encountered difficulty and favorable 
evidence supports a finding that he has established a track record of financial 
responsibility, and has taken control of his financial situation. Noteworthy is the fact 
Applicant has a 12-year history of successfully holding a security clearance. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant met his ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does support a favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”3 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
2  See ISCR Case No. 03- 02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 
at 4 (App. Bd. May 26, 2004)). When making a recency analysis for FC MC 1, all debts are considered 
as a whole. 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.f.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
