 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-00303 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on November 17, 
2004.  On October 9, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny 
his application, citing security concerns under Guidelines B (Foreign Influence) and E 
(Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 18, 2007; answered the 
SOR on October 22, 2007; submitted a clarification of his answer on October 29, 2007, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
October 31, 2007.  Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 30, 
2007, and the case was assigned to me on December 6, 2007. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on December 14, 2007, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 
 
2 
 
 
16, 2008. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, presented the testimony of one witness, 
and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through HH, which were admitted without 
objection. The record closed at the end of the hearing.  DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on January 22, 2008.  Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Sudan (Tr. 28). The request and the documents attached as enclosures were not 
admitted in evidence but are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits (HX) I and II.  I 
took administrative notice as requested by Department Counsel (Tr. 33-34).  The facts 
administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations under 
Guideline B and denied the allegation under Guideline E.  His admissions in his answer 
to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  I make the 
following findings: 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old native of Sudan. He completed high school in Sudan, 
attended a maritime college in Yugoslavia from 1980 to 1983, and worked as a third 
mate on a Sudanese ship after graduation. He came to the U.S. from Sudan in 
November 1987 (GX 3 at 9-10; Tr. 79), and he became a U.S. citizen in November 
1992, at which time he renounced his Sudanese citizenship and surrendered his 
Sudanese passport (GX 3 at 10).  From November 1994 to July 1997, he worked as a 
courier for a commercial parcel carrier.  He served as a seaman on various U.S. 
merchant ships from July 1997 to February 2002.  He has worked as a linguist for 
federal contractors from March 2003 until the present.  He worked in Kuwait in March 
2003, Iraq in June 2003, Guantanamo from March 2004 until March 2006, and again in 
Iraq from February to July 2007 (GX 2 at 5; AX K; AX P).  He has held a security 
clearance since May 2003.   
 
Applicant submitted his SF 86 in November 2004, seeking to obtain a top secret 
clearance (Tr. 8).  His application was supported with “utmost enthusiasm” by a Marine 
Corps captain, based on observation of Applicant’s performance for six months as a 
linguist at the Navy and Marine Corps Intelligence Training Center (AX A).   
 
Applicant’s supervisor at Guantanamo, a Navy lieutenant commander, described 
him as a talented, dependable linguist, a person of “highest caliber intellect and 
integrity,” and a trusted friend (AX B).  An Army first lieutenant commended him for his 
performance, dedication, and personal courage at Guantanamo (AX C). His civilian 
project manager described him as a “stellar and dedicated employee” who accepted 
difficult assignments and volunteered to be a team leader (AX L). One of his 
 
3 
 
 
subordinates in Guantanamo described him as “of the highest caliber” and “a positive 
asset” to any organization having the opportunity to utilize his skills (AX M). Another 
subordinate described him as an excellent leader, highly motivated, and enthusiastic 
(AX N). His performance reviews as a linguist at Guantanamo were outstanding (AX G, 
H, and I), and he received numerous commendations for his service (AX P, Q, R, S, T, 
and U). 
 
His supervisor in Iraq, an Air Force major, commended him for his outstanding 
duty performance and described him as a “true patriot” for volunteering for more than 80 
difficult and extremely dangerous assignments to counter-insurgency missions (AX D).  
One of his coworkers described his performance as a linguist in Iraq in glowing terms, 
describing him as “unquestionably one of the best,” and strongly recommending him for 
a position of trust (AX F). 
 
Applicant worked as a linguist at the U.S. Military Academy during cadet summer 
training in 2006.  A fellow linguist who worked with him described him as pleasant, hard 
working, dedicated, and professional (AX O). He received a certificate of appreciation 
from the Director, Department of Military Instruction (an Army colonel) for his 
“exceptional professionalism, motivation, and dedication to duty” during the summer 
training (AX V). 
 
 Applicant was married to a native-born U.S. citizen in March 1989 and divorced 
in May 1994.  He married his current spouse, also a native-born U.S. citizen, in 
November 1995. He has four sons from his current marriage, ages 11, 9, and 8 months, 
who are native-born U.S. citizens. The two youngest are twins (Tr. 81). 
 
 Applicant’s spouse testified he is a very honest, trustworthy person, and is very 
responsible and caring toward his family (Tr. 117-18).  She testified their marriage is 
built on commitment and sacrifice (Tr. 118).  Applicant is frequently away from home, 
but he calls frequently to check on the children (Tr. 118).   
 
 Applicant’s parents were citizens and residents of Sudan. His mother died in 
1993 and his father died in 1996.  His father owned a blacksmith shop, and his mother 
did not work outside the home (Tr. 83-84).  He has two brothers who are citizens and 
residents of the U.S. (Tr. 85).  One brother drives a vehicle for handicapped persons, 
and the other is a government contractor currently working for the U.S. in Iraq (Tr. 86).   
 
 Applicant declined to sponsor his two brothers for immigration to the U.S. 
because he was concerned about an appearance of a conflict of interest.  They made 
their way to the U.S. and became citizens without his help.  He testified he wanted to be 
“on the safe side” as far as his loyalty to the U.S. was concerned (Tr. 52). 
 
Applicant has three brothers who are citizens and residents of Sudan.  The 
oldest is a 55-year-old blacksmith and lives in Khartoum. He last saw this brother in 
2000. He rarely communicates with this brother and has had no contract for at least a 
year (Tr. 87).  His 49-year-old brother worked with the older brother as a blacksmith.  
 
4 
 
 
Applicant is unaware of this brother’s current occupation, but knows he lives in 
Omdurman (Tr. 88-89).  He rarely communicates with this brother and saw him last in 
2000 (Tr. 90). The youngest brother lives in Khartoum, previously worked as a 
blacksmith, and is now unemployed (Tr. 90-91).  None of his brothers served in the 
military or have ever been connected with the government, nor have they been detained 
or questioned by government authorities or subjected to violence by government 
authorities, rebels, or terrorists (Tr. 92).  None of his siblings in Sudan have ever visited 
him in the U.S. (Tr. 101). 
 
Applicant has four sisters who are citizens and residents of Sudan. The oldest 
lives in Al Ubayyid and is married to a tailor (Tr. 93).  Applicant does not know how 
many children she has (Tr. 93).  The second oldest is divorced and is unemployed (Tr. 
94-95). The third oldest is widowed and disabled.  The youngest sister is married, but 
Applicant knows little about her (Tr. 99). 
 
Applicant sent money to care for his widowed and disabled sister and his 
brother’s daughter, because he promised his mother he would make sure they were 
cared for (Tr. 126). The money was wired by Western Union by Applicant’s spouse, who 
has a power of attorney that enables her to send money to Applicant’s siblings on his 
behalf (Tr. 103-04, 119-20).  Until November 2007, he sent his disabled sister about 
$300 per month (Tr. 95, 98, 126). When Applicant learned that sending his disabled 
sister money raised security concerns, he broke the promise to his mother and stopped 
sending his sister money (Tr. 54).  He continues to send about $500 a month to his 
brother, a U.S. citizen working for the U.S. government in Iraq, for the care of his 
brother’s daughter, who lives in Sudan (Tr. 54, 96-97, 125-27). 
 
None of Applicant’s siblings know he works for the U.S. government.  They 
believe he works on a ship. He has intentionally concealed his occupation from them 
because he knows they can be threatened (Tr. 104).   
 
 Applicant traveled to Sudan in 1993 for his mother’s funeral and in January 1996, 
while on his honeymoon, to introduce his wife to his family (AX GG and HH).  He 
traveled to Sudan in March 1996 to attend his father’s funeral and be with his family for 
the mourning period (AX HH).  He visited Sudan for about three days in 2000 while 
serving on a U.S.-flagged ship that docked in Sudan to unload humanitarian aid 
supplies.  While the ship was in port, he visited some of his siblings who lived close to 
Khartoum (GX 2 at 5; AX FF; Tr. 100-01). 
 
 Applicant was sincere and scrupulously candid during the hearing, but he was 
puzzled and distraught about the security concerns raised in the SOR.  Several times 
he stated he could not understand what he had done to trigger any security concerns 
(Tr. 50, 52, 140). 
 
 I take administrative notice of the following adjudicative facts about Sudan.  
Sudan became an independent country on January 1, 1956 under a provisional 
constitution.  There were 17 years of civil war, ending in 1972 but beginning again in 
 
5 
 
 
January 1983.  After a series of regional efforts to end the civil war, a peace agreement 
was signed in January 2005, establishing a new Government of National Unity and an 
interim Government of Southern Sudan, and providing for a six-year period to 
implement the peace agreement.   
 
Implementation of the peace agreement has faltered. A rebellion in Darfur has 
caused deaths of tens of thousands. There are an estimated 2 million displaced persons 
in Sudan, and 234,000 refugees in neighboring Chad. The State Department has found 
the Sudanese government complicit in the bombing, murder, and rape of innocent 
civilians in Darfur, and the Sudanese president has refused to honor his commitments 
to end the violence in Darfur.   
 
Sudan has been designated as a state sponsor of terrorism since August 1993. It 
is under a broad U.S. trade embargo. In two executive orders, the policies and actions 
of Sudan have been declared by the President of the U.S. to constitute “an unusual and 
extraordinary threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United States” 
because of support for international terrorism, ongoing efforts to destabilize neighboring 
governments, human rights violations, and the pervasive role played by the government 
of Sudan in the petroleum and petrochemical industries in Sudan. 
 
Sudan has a poor human rights record. Serious problems include genocide in 
Darfur; extrajudicial killings; torture, beatings, rape, and other cruel and inhumane 
treatment by security forces; arbitrary arrest and detention; infringement of personal 
rights; and executive interference with the judiciary. The government and security forces 
monitor internet communications. Terrorist groups seek opportunities to attack U.S. 
citizens and interests.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has “the authority to . 
. . control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether 
an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to occupy a position . . . that will give that person 
access to such information.”  Id. at 527.  The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense or his designee to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. 
Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
6 
 
 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information.  This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information.  The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability.  See ISCR Case No. 95-
0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.”  ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002).  “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant has brothers and sisters who are citizens and 
residents of Sudan (¶ 1.a), he sends $200 a month to a sister in Sudan (¶ 1.b), and he 
traveled to Sudan in 1997 and 2000 (¶ 1.c).  He admitted all these allegations. 
 
The security concern relating to Guideline B is set out in AG & 6 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
 
7 
 
 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism.   
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case.  First, 
a disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(a).  Second, a disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information.”  AG ¶ 7(b).  The totality of an 
applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be 
considered.  ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003).  
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. 
 
 AG ¶ 7(a) differs from previous adjudicative guidelines in that it requires a 
“heightened risk.”  Applicant’s siblings do not live in Darfur, where the worst violence 
and human rights violations have occurred.  He has concealed his involvement with the 
U.S. government.  His siblings’ belief that he works as a crew member on a ship is 
plausible, because his siblings know he attended the maritime college in Yugoslavia 
and visited some of them in Khartoum when he was serving as a seaman on a U.S.-
flagged ship.  He has taken positive steps to minimize the risk posed by the presence of 
 
8 
 
 
his siblings in Sudan, but the risk is nevertheless “heightened” because of the internal 
turmoil, human rights violations, and activities of terrorists in Sudan.  I conclude AG ¶ 
7(a) is raised.   
 
The presence of Applicant’s siblings in Sudan also raises the “potential conflict of 
interest” in AG ¶ 7(b).  Thus, I conclude AG ¶ 7(b) also is raised. 
 
Applicant’s financial support of his widowed and disabled sister and travel to 
Sudan has no independent security significance other than as evidence of his ties of 
obligation to his family members. He terminated his financial support of his sister in 
November 2007. His travel to Sudan in 2000 was as crew member of a U.S.-flagged 
ship on a humanitarian mission, and it has no independent security significance. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.”  AG ¶ 8(a).   
 
 Applicant does not appear to have strong emotional attachments to his siblings in 
Sudan, but he has demonstrated a sense of obligation by his financial assistance to a 
disabled sister and his brother’s daughter and by his occasional contact with his 
siblings.  He has reduced the likelihood of a conflict of interest by concealing his work 
for the U.S. from his siblings.  However, due to the nature of the government of Sudan 
and the continuing terrorism and violence in that country, there is still some likelihood 
that he might have to choose between the interests of the U.S. and those of one or 
more siblings.  I conclude AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”  AG ¶ 8(b). 
 
Under the old adjudicative guidelines, a disqualifying condition based on foreign 
family members could not be mitigated unless an applicant could establish that the 
family members were not “in a position to be exploited.”  Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.3.1.  The 
Appeal Board consistently applied this mitigating condition narrowly, holding that an 
applicant should not be placed in a position where he or she is forced to make a choice 
 
9 
 
 
between the interests of the family member and the interests of the U.S. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2006); ISCR Case No. 03-24933 at 6 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 28, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2005); ISCR Case 
No. 03-15205 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005).  Thus, an administrative judge was not 
permitted to apply a balancing test to assess the extent of the security risk.  Under the 
new guidelines, however, the potentially conflicting loyalties may be weighed to 
determine if an applicant “can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest.”   
 
 Applicant’s sense of obligation to his siblings is more than minimal, but his 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S. are exceptionally strong.  He has lived in the U.S. 
for more than 20 years and has been a U.S. citizen for 15 years.  He has worked as a 
linguist for the U.S. for five years and held a clearance for most of that time. He is 
married to a native-born U.S. citizen and has four sons who are native-born U.S. 
citizens.  Two of his four brothers are U.S. citizens, and one is working for the U.S. in 
Iraq. He has put his life on the line for the U.S., volunteering for more than 80 
dangerous counter-insurgency missions in Iraq. He is trusted and highly regarded by his 
colleagues and supervisors.   
 
 Applicant has demonstrated by his actions that he will resolve a conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. He broke his promise to his mother and stopped sending 
money to his disabled sister, because he feared that sending money to his sister would 
jeopardize his security clearance.  He declined to sponsor his two brothers for 
immigration to the U.S. to avoid raising any question about his loyalty to the U.S.  I 
conclude AG ¶ 8(b) is established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by showing that 
“contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is 
little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”  AG ¶ 8(c).  
There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family member in a 
foreign country are not casual.  ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002).  
Although Applicant’s contacts with his siblings are infrequent, he has not rebutted the 
presumption that they are not casual.  I conclude AG ¶ 8(c) is not established. 
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
 The SOR alleges, “Your colleagues, with whom you worked at GTMO in Cuba 
from 2004 to 2006, were not entirely comfortable recommending you for access to 
classified information.” Applicant denied this allegation. At the hearing, Department 
Counsel announced that the government would not pursue this allegation and would not 
provide any evidence regarding it (Tr. 27). Accordingly, this allegation is resolved in 
Applicant’s favor. 
 
 
10 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has held a clearance for almost five years and volunteered for 
numerous dangerous assignments with U.S. military units. Paradoxically, the inquiry 
about his suitability for a clearance was triggered by an application for a higher level of 
clearance.  He was sincere and exceptionally candid at the hearing.  The intensity of his 
commitment to the interests of the U.S. is not fully reflected on the written transcript, but 
it was patently obvious from his tone of voice and body language at the hearing.  He 
has backed up his words with actions by breaking his promise to his mother to 
financially support his disabled sister and declining to sponsor his two brothers for 
immigration to the U.S. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence.  The government chose not 
to pursue the allegations under Guideline E and presented no evidence to support 
them.  Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him continued eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
