1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-14543
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se 
______________
Decision
______________
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge:
After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that
Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security concerns under
Guideline F, Financial Considerations.  His eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on July 28, 2006.
On November 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F,
Financial Considerations. DOHA’s action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 18, 2007, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested
that his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The government
compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 25, 2008.  The FORM
2
contained documents identified as Items 1 through 8.  By letter dated January 29, 2008,
a copy of the FORM was forwarded to Applicant, with instructions to submit any
additional information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. On December 19,
2007, Applicant timely filed a response and three exhibits, which I have identified as
Applicant’s Exhibit (Ex.) A, Ex. B, and Ex. C.  Department Counsel did not object to
Applicant’s exhibits or to his response to the FORM, and I have admitted them to the
record of this case. On March 10, 2008, the case was assigned to me for a decision.  
Findings of Fact
The SOR contains 20 allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial
Considerations. (SOR ¶¶I 1.a. through 1.t.) (Item 1.)  In his Answer to the SOR, dated
December 18, 2007, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.,
1.f. through 1.j., and 1.l. through 1.t.  He denied allegations in ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.k., with
explanations.  He also questioned whether ¶ 1.r. duplicated ¶ 1.s. and whether ¶ 1.f.
was a duplicate of ¶ 1.t.  In his response to the FORM, Applicant asserted that
allegations in ¶¶ 1.f. and 1.t. of the SOR were not duplicates but debts owed to separate
entities. He provided no credible evidence to corroborate his assertion that SOR
allegation 1.r. was a duplicate of SOR allegation 1.s.  (Response to FORM at 1.) 
Applicant, who was first granted a security clearance in 1982, is employed as a
systems analyst by a government contractor. From approximately 1980 to 1994, he
served in the U.S. military. (Item 4.) 
Applicant is 48 years old and has never married.  He shares his household with a
woman and her adult son. From approximately September 2003 to June 2006,
Applicant attended a university.  (Item 4.)
In October 1996, Applicant filed a petition for protection from his creditors,
pursuant to Chapter 7, U.S. Bankruptcy Code. He listed $6,625 in assets and $28,654
in liabilities.  In January 1997, his debts were discharged. (Item 8.)
Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection on November 4,
2004.  The terms of the bankruptcy obligated Applicant to pay his trustee $615 per
month for 57 months in order to satisfy his creditors. Applicant failed to make his
obligatory payments, and his petition was dismissed in December 2005.  (Item 6.)
In February 2006, Applicant’s automobile was repossessed.  At the time of the
repossession, Applicant owed the creditor $18,900. While the debt was apparently
reduced by the proceeds of the repossession sale, the actual amount Applicant still
owed was unclear. Applicant’s credit bureau report of October 25, 2007, indicated a
past-due debt of $9,958. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated the balance due
was $9,958. However, in a communication dated April 4, 2007, acknowledging a post-
dated check for $300 submitted by Applicant, the successor creditor responsible for
Applicant provided no proof that the post-dated check cleared his bank and was credited to his account.  1
3
collecting the debt identified the amount owed by Applicant as $13,751.82.   Applicant1
provided a statement from the creditor showing the repossession loss fee and the
recovery of principal received as of July 19, 2007, which totaled $10,237. This
statement included seven $300 payments made by Applicant between January and July
of 2007. In supplying these figures, the creditor noted they did not constitute full payoff.
(SOR, ¶¶ 1.h., 1.i.; Item 3 at 3, 11; Item 4 at 32-33 of 41; Item 5 at 2; Ex. B.)  
In addition to the debt owed for the repossessed automobile, Applicant admitted
responsibility for nine debts in collection status. These debts totaled approximately
$12,750.  Two of the debts had not been paid as of September 6, 2006.  Seven of the
debts were unpaid as of October 25, 2007.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d, 1.f., 1.g., 1.j., 1.l., 1.m.,
1.s., 1.t.) Applicant denied responsibility for debts of $128 and $194, which were listed
at ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.k. of the SOR.  He stated he was not living in the state where the debt
alleged at ¶ 1.e. accrued.  He stated he did not have an account with the creditor at the
time the debt alleged in ¶ 1.k. accrued.  (Item 3.)  He provided no credible information,
however,  in support of his denials. 
Applicant also admitted responsibility for one charged-off account, not paid as of
October 25, 2007, and four past-due debts, unpaid as of September 6, 2006. These five
debts totaled approximately $3,918.  (SOR ¶¶ 1.n., 1.o., 1.p., 1.q., and 1.r.; Item 3.)
In his response to the  FORM, Applicant provided documentation to show he had
qualified his delinquent student loan accounts identified on the SOR at ¶¶ 1.l. and 1.m.
for rehabilitation by paying $285 per month for nine consecutive months.  He provided
additional information that his loans had subsequently qualified for servicing by the
Student Loan Marketing Association.  His new payment schedule required 110 monthly
payments of $83.57 on an unpaid principal balance of $6,635.67. (Ex. A; Item 3 at 4, 6,
7-8.)
Applicant provided evidence he had sent a post-dated check for $100 to the
creditor holding the student loan account identified at SOR ¶ 1.j. However, he provided
no proof that the post-dated check had cleared his bank and had been credited to his
account.  (Item 3 at 10.)
Applicant provided no evidence that he had received financial credit counseling.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines. In addition to
brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, the guidelines take
cognizance of the complexities of human behavior and are applied in conjunction with
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s adjudicative
goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. The adjudicative process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.  See A G ¶
2(c).
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. A G ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk that the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Adjudicative Guideline F, & 18:      
5
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
& 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated multiple debts and was unable to pay his
financial obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise these
potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several conditions could mitigate the security
concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. Unresolved financial delinquency
might be resolved if it happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. (Guideline F, ¶ 20(a))  Additionally,
unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control, such as loss of employment,
a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation, and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. (Guideline F,
¶ 20(b))  Still other mitigating circumstances that might be applicable include evidence
the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control (Guideline F, ¶
20(c) or the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts. (Guideline F, ¶ 20(d).) 
Applicant’s acknowledged financial delinquencies are numerous, long-standing,
and continue to the present day. Applicant admitted 15 unpaid delinquencies and failed
to provided credible evidence to corroborate his denials of two additional debts. The
majority of his financial delinquencies remain unresolved and suggest that the
circumstances that caused these delinquencies are likely to continue in the future,
thereby casting doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good
judgment.  Accordingly, ¶ 20(a) does not apply as a mitigating condition.  Applicant
provided no credible evidence to support a conclusion that his financial delinquencies
were largely beyond his control or that he acted reasonably under the circumstances.
Accordingly, I conclude ¶ 20(b) does not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.
Nothing in the record suggests Applicant has sought or participated in financial
counseling or has in place a plan to avoid financial delinquencies in the future.
Accordingly, I conclude that ¶ 20(c) is inapplicable.  
6
While most of Applicant’s financial delinquencies remain unaddressed, he
deserves credit for rehabilitating two of his delinquent student loans and negotiating a
payment plan with the creditor. Applicant’s positive actions on his two student loans
reflect a good faith effort to mitigate long-standing financial delinquencies and resolve
debt.  I conclude that ¶ 20(d) is applicable in part to the facts of Applicant’s case.
Whole Person Concept
The revised adjudicative guidelines and the Directive require that the adjudicative
process in a security clearance case not only assess conduct under the adjudicative
guidelines, but it must also reflect a careful weighing of a number of variables known as
the whole person concept.  The factors to be considered in a whole person analysis
include the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; the frequency and
recency of the conduct; the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;  the
extent to which participation is voluntary; the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other pertinent behavioral changes; the motivation for the conduct; the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and, the likelihood for continuation or
recurrence.
Applicant is a mature adult who has a history of financial over-extension. His
history of not meeting his financial obligations and his inability to pay his debts over a
period of at least ten years raises a security concern because it suggests a lack of effort
or resolve. While he has made payments on the debt which arose from the
repossession of his automobile, he has not done so consistently. He has not sought
consumer credit counseling or assistance in learning how to manage his finances.
Despite a laudable attempt to establish a payment plan for two of his delinquent student
loans, Applicant has failed to demonstrate that the majority of his delinquencies will not
continue to be security concerns in the future. 
In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount
concern.  Security clearance decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose
further punishment for past transgressions.  Rather, the objective of the security
clearance process is the fair-minded, common sense assessment of a person’s
trustworthiness and fitness for access to classified information.  Indeed, the “whole
person” concept recognizes we should view a person by the totality of his or her acts
and omissions, including all disqualifying and mitigating conduct.  Having done so, I
conclude Applicant should not be entrusted with a security clearance.  In reaching my
decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including the appropriate factors
and guidelines in Department of Defense Directive, 5220.6., as amended.  I conclude
that Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations.
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.  through 1.k.: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.l.  and 1.m.: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.n. through 1.t.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
JOAN CATON ANTHONY
Administrative Judge
