 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-11429 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jason Thomas, PhD, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
History of Case 
 
On April 21, 2004, Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On August 18, 2004, she re-signed it. On September 25, 2007, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline C for Applicant. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 31, 2007. She answered 
the SOR in writing on November 9, 2007, and requested a hearing before an 
Administrative Judge. DOHA received the request on November 15, 2007. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 29, 2007, and I received the case 
assignment on December 3, 2007. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on December 20, 
2007, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 23, 2008. The Government 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were received into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through C into the record without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 1, 2008. The 
record remained open until February 14, 2008, to give Applicant additional time to 
submit documents.  She timely submitted five exhibits that I marked as AE D through I 
and admitted into evidence without objection.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
After Applicant testified, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by 
adding ¶1.g, alleging Applicant maintains an Israeli identification card. (Tr. at 46.) 
Applicant did not object to the motion. Said motion was granted.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Israel. (Tr. 11). The request and the attached documents were 
included in the record as Administrative Exhibits (AE) I through VIII. Applicant did not 
object to my consideration of those exhibits. Hence, the facts administratively noticed 
are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to reasonable 
dispute. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, dated November 9, 2007, Applicant admitted the 
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f and 1.g of the Amended SOR, with 
explanations. She denied the factual allegations in ¶ 1.e of the SOR. She also provided 
additional information to support her request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 35 years old and was born in the United States. She graduated from 
a U.S. university in 1994.  She earned her last semester of undergraduate college in 
Israel in 1993. After completing that semester, she traveled around Europe for a 
semester before going home. (Tr. 20). In June 1996, she returned to Israel to attend 
graduate school. In November 1999, she earned a Master’s Degree in Israeli Politics, 
with a focus on counter-terrorism. She chose to attend the Israeli university because of 
its renowned faculty and reduced tuition. After graduating, she came home for a couple 
months and then moved back to Israel to live and work, while pursuing a romantic 
interest with an Israeli man. (Tr. 22). For the next two years she worked for a 
 
3 
 
 
communications company. (Tr. 24).  She returned home in April 2002 where her family 
lives. Recently, she became engaged to an American citizen. 
 
 Based on her Jewish background, Applicant obtained Israeli citizenship in July 
2000. As a result of that citizenship, she received some tax advantages related to salary 
and health benefits. (GE 2 at 2; Tr. 32 and 37). In February 2001, she voted in the prime 
minister election, basing her candidate decision on the United States’ interest. (Tr. 33 
and 36). That was the only time she voted in an Israeli election. (Id.). She never 
obtained an Israeli passport, but traveled with her U.S. passport.  (Tr. 31). She still has 
an Israeli identification card that she used to travel within the state because she thinks 
she may need it to renounce her citizenship. (Tr. 39).  (At the hearing, she offered to 
tender the document for destruction.) (Tr. 45). The only property she held in Israel was 
a checking account for purposes of convenience.  (GE 2). 
 
 After working for the wireless communications company for a year, Applicant 
began searching for another job in September 2001. She saw a newspaper ad by an 
unnamed company that piqued her interest because it advertised for analysts, a position 
more suited to her background. (Tr. 25).  She and some of her friends thought the 
company might represent the Israeli Intelligence Service (Mossad).  She decided to 
submit a resume. Four months later, she received a call in response to her application 
and made an appointment for an interview.  The caller did not disclose the name of the 
company.  In the interim, her relationship with her boyfriend was not working out. After 
giving that situation more thought and considering the possibility that the potential job, if 
Mossad, could jeopardize her future and work at home, she decided to return home. 
She called the company and cancelled the appointment. (Tr. 27 and 34; GE 2 and 3; 
Answer). In April 2002, she returned home. (Tr. 23).  She never intended to live in Israel 
permanently. (Tr. 38). She has not visited Israel since then and has no plans to return. 
She maintains limited contact with four friends living in Israel, three of whom are U.S. 
citizens. (Answer). 
 
 Since April 2004, Applicant has worked as a research analyst for a federal 
contract that provides assistance to the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps. (Tr. 30).  She 
works on projects involving terrorism and natural disaster responses by the federal 
government. (Tr. 31).  She speaks a foreign language fluently and has done extensive 
work and research in the area of terrorist organizations, as noted in her extensive  
Master’s thesis on counter-terrorism. (AE A).  
  
Applicant submitted four letters of recommendation from colleagues in support of 
her security clearance application. One individual, a Director for a program with the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security, has worked with her over a year. He wrote that 
Applicant “demonstrated strong traits of leadership during this process and also 
maintained a high degree of loyalty toward the best interests of the U.S. Government.” 
(AE E).  Another colleague at that office, a retired Air Force member with 24 years of 
active duty service who held a Top Secret security clearance during his career, refers to 
Applicant as trustworthy and “a loyal U.S. citizen [who is] extremely passionate about 
her projects that support US homeland security.” (AE F).  He perceives no security 
 
4 
 
 
threats by her. (Id.). The president of a research institute, her current employer for the 
past three and a half years, noted in his letter that Applicant has been given principal 
roles in projects involving national planning and preparation for terrorist attack or natural 
disasters “because of her demonstrated ability, integrity, and interest in helping secure 
the nation’s homeland.” (AE G). A vice-president of that organization mirrored the 
president’s recommendation and confidence in her loyalty. He has “no qualms 
whatsoever in recommending [Applicant] for a Secret clearance.” (AE H).  
 
Throughout the investigation and during the hearing, Applicant indicated that she 
would willingly formally renounce her Israeli citizenship. (Answer; Tr. 32 and 53). In her 
May 2005 Affidavit she stated, “If asked by the United States Government or a 
perspective employer, I am willing to denounce my Israeli citizenship.” (AE 3). In March 
2007, she affirmed in her affidavit “I am willing to relinquish my Israeli citizenship if 
asked. I have never been asked to do so by anyone and as such have never taken any 
steps to relinquish my Israeli citizenship.“ (AE 2 at 2). Her November 2007 Answer 
reiterated her willingness to renounce the Israeli citizenship. “I told each interviewer that 
if my clearance was contingent on surrendering my Israeli citizenship, then I would 
gladly do so. However, I was told that citizenship itself is not the problem and that 
usually the issue is having dual passports.” At the hearing, she stated it was her 
intention to renounce her citizenship. (Tr. 49). On February 5, 2008, she flew to another 
city to file her renouncement papers with the Israel Consulate General. (AE H and I). 
She was informed that the process could take a year to complete. (AE D).  
 
 Applicant stated that her decision to travel to Israel was based on her 
desire to help the United States in its fight on counter-terrorism in the Middle East.  
“This is why I went to Israel to study, this is why. I was interested in counter-terrorism. 
It’s all because I want to perform a service for the United States, and I think at every 
turn I tried to do what you’re supposed to do to get that done.” (Tr. 58).   
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Israel is a stable parliamentary 
democracy whose prime minister heads the government and exercises executive 
power. Israel has a diversified, technologically advanced economy that is growing at 
about 5.2% per year, and the United States is Israel’s largest trading partner. Almost 
half of Israel’s exports are high tech and its major industrial sectors include high-
technology electric and bio-medical equipment. The Israeli government generally 
respects the human rights of its citizens and does not support or sponsor terrorism or 
terrorist organizations. It is a strong U.S. ally in fighting terrorism. Commitment to 
Israel’s security and well being has been a cornerstone of U.S. policy in the Middle East 
since Israel’s creation in 1948, and the two countries are bound closely by historic and 
cultural ties, as well as mutual values and interests.  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
 
5 
 
 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
AG ¶ 10 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern, two of 
which may be disqualifying in this case and are noted below: 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial, or business 
interests in another country; 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and, 
(7) voting in a foreign election; and 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
Applicant was born in the United States. From approximately 1996 until 2002, 
she lived and attended school in Israel. While there, she became a citizen, in order to 
receive educational, medical and economic benefits. She voted in one election and 
obtained citizenship identification. Based on that evidence in the record, including 
Applicant’s admissions to six of the SOR allegations, the Government produced 
substantial evidence of disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 10(a)(3) and 10(a)(7), and  
¶10 (b). 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those conditions, the 
burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a mitigating condition. AG ¶ 
 
7 
 
 
11 provides eleven conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Only one of the 
conditions is potentially applicable to the disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 11(b) applies 
when “the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.” 
Applicant expressed her willingness to renounce her Israeli citizenship after 
completing the security clearance application and learning that it could adversely affect 
her application. She repeated that willingness in May 2005, March 2007, November 
2007, and during the hearing in January 2008. Shortly after the hearing, she flew to 
another state to begin the renunciation process. Prior to that time, she did not fully 
appreciate the significance of formally renouncing her citizenship rather than informally 
volunteering to do so.  She understood that it was important to surrender a passport, if 
she possessed one, but not the importance of formally renouncing citizenship for this 
application.  
In addition to taking formal steps to renounce citizenship, Applicant has 
demonstrated her loyalty to the United States, based on many strong connections to it, 
intention to live here permanently, and a persistent desire to use her background and 
training to assist in the war on terror. As a result of her consistent willingness to 
renounce the Israeli citizenship and her longstanding ties to the United States, I 
conclude AG ¶ 11(b) applies.   
In support of its application, I cite the Appeal Board’s opinion in ISCR Case No. 
03-4300 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006) that held the following: 
In concluding Applicant had mitigated the security concerns raised 
by her acts of foreign preference by application of Guideline C Mitigating 
Condition 4, the Administrative Judge articulated a rational explanation for 
her determination—basing it on such factors as the Applicants’ strong ties 
and loyalties to the United States, the extensive effort undertaken by the 
Applicant to surrender her passport and renounce her Russian citizenship 
before the close of the record, and the fact that Applicant’s lack of 
awareness concerning the requirements expressed in the ASDC3I memo 
and the Guideline C Mitigating Conditions may have affected the timing of 
her renunciation actions. There are no stated requirements in Guideline C 
Mitigating Condition 4 concerning when an applicant is required to comply 
with its provisions.1  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
                                                          
1 Foreign Preference Mitigating Condition 4 under the previous adjudicative Guideline C, stated as 
follows: “Individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.” E2.A3.1.3.4. The ASDC31 
memo referenced does not have applicability to this case and pertained to the surrender of foreign 
passports. 
 
8 
 
 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation 
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.” 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant’s conduct of potential 
concern under Guideline C resulted from choices made by her while in graduate school 
and during a previous romantic relationship. She was 24 years old when she decided to 
move to Israel and 30 years old when she returned home.  For the past five years she 
has lived and worked in the United States her home country. One of the reasons she 
chose to attend school in Israel was its reputation and faculty that is world renowned for 
its expertise in counter-terrorism, her chosen area of study.  Her decision to obtain 
Israeli citizenship related to economic, educational and medical benefits afforded to her 
as a student and young person living there. She voted in one Israeli election and had 
the U.S. interests in mind.  While her inquiry into employment with a company that 
“could have been” the Mossad, may not have been prudent, given her goal to secure 
employment in the field of counter-terrorism and the United States, she cancelled her 
interview and returned to the United States before taking additional steps in that regard. 
Recently, she formally renounced her Israeli citizenship by filing appropriate documents 
with the Israeli embassy. Currently, four colleagues and supervisors, who have worked 
with her since she returned return, support her assertions of commitment to her job and 
preference for the United States.  I do not believe she is a threat to the United States, 
but rather an honest, hard-working woman, who possibly made uninformed decisions 
early in her career, which she will never repeat.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under foreign preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through g:  For Applicant 
   
 
 
9 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
