 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-15218 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the criminal conduct security concerns raised by his behavior 
under the whole person concept. His omission of material information from his security 
clearance application was not with the intent to deceive or to falsify his application. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted Security Clearance Applications on October 8, 1996, and 
May 9, 2007. On November 30, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the Government’s security 
concerns under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1  
1  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 4, 2008, and requested a hearing 
before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to me on January 31, 2008. 
The Notice of Hearing was issued on February 12, 2008, convening a hearing on March 
3, 2008. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government presented eight 
exhibits, marked GE 1-8, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf, and presented one exhibit, marked AE 1, which was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 11, 2008. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in all the 
SOR allegations and provided explanations. He denied, however, the validity of the 
charges reflected in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.e-1.h. Concerning the falsification 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b, he admitted his failure to disclose the required 
information, but claimed his omissions were an innocent mistake and not with the intent 
to mislead or falsify his application. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings 
of fact. After a thorough review of all evidence of record, including his demeanor, I make 
the following additional findings of fact. 
  
  Applicant is a 58-year-old systems engineer. He enlisted in the U.S. Navy the 
day after he graduated from high school. He served aboard submarines as a sonar 
technician from 1968 to 1974. He achieved the rank of E-6 (Tr. 61). Applicant was 
medically discharged with a 10% disability for suffering from an aggressive personality 
disorder (Tr. 66). His service was characterized as honorable (Tr. 66). From 1975 to 
1977, he completed a Bachelor of Science degree in Ocean Engineering (Tr. 61). In 
1977, Applicant was hired by a defense contractor, and he has been working basically 
the same job (testing computer hardware and software), albeit for succeeding 
companies, ever since (Tr. 33).  
 
Applicant had access to classified information while serving in the Navy. When 
he was hired by the defense contractor in 1977, he received access to classified 
information at the secret level. He has maintained his access to classified information to 
the present. There is no evidence Applicant has ever compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information. He has never been cited or reprimanded because of 
security issues, or for his failure to follow security rules and regulations (Tr. 61). 
 
Applicant has been married three times. He could not recall when he married or 
divorced his first wife. He married his second wife in 2000, and divorced her in 2002. He 
married his third wife in 2004 (Tr. 34-35).  
 
Criminal Conduct Allegations 
 
 From 1985 to 2006, Applicant was implicated in eight incidents involving criminal 
activity. In 1985, Applicant’s then wife requested police to open an investigation 
concerning Applicant’s hiring a person to murder her. Applicant denied the allegation. 
 
3 
 
 
He satisfactorily explained a 16-year-old foster child he and his wife were caring for 
started the rumor. After the allegation was investigated by the police, there were no 
charges filed against him, and the child was removed from the family’s care (Tr. 40).  
 
In 1985, Applicant also was charged with two counts of assault and battery on his 
spouse. Applicant admitted he was charged as alleged, but explained these were 
heated verbal arguments which involved no physical contact. Both charges were 
dismissed after the prosecutors interviewed his then wife (Tr. 41-43). 
 
In 1993, Applicant was convicted of assault and battery on his then girlfriend. He 
claimed that during a verbal argument she threw hot coffee at him, and he pushed her. 
She fell down against a kitchen cabinet and received a laceration to her head and broke 
a leg. He was sentenced to serve 60 days in jail, which was suspended on the condition 
that he attend an anger management training class (Tr. 43, GE 3).  
 
 In September 1996, Applicant was arrested and charged with domestic assault 
and battery. The following month, Applicant was issued a protective order requiring him 
to refrain from family violence and requiring him to undergo a mental evaluation. The 
charge was later dismissed, because it only involved a verbal altercation, and he 
complied with both protective order provisions (Tr. 45-46). 
 
 As a result of the court ordered mental evaluation, Applicant was diagnosed with 
a bipolar personality disorder with mood swings and manic depression (Tr. 62). He was 
prescribed two medications which he has been diligently taking since September 1996. 
Additionally, he sees a doctor every month to readjust his medications and to check for 
possible collateral adverse effects from the medications. Applicant repeatedly 
emphasized he takes the medications diligently and never skips them because the 
medications make him feel good (Tr. 47-49, 58).  
 
 Applicant explained he and his second wife had frequent heated arguments 
because of infidelity and other marital problems which were exacerbated by his mental 
condition. After he started his medications, his mood and demeanor changed and they 
stopped having so many arguments (Tr. 48). 
 
 In 2001, Applicant shoplifted an $11 item from a retail store. He was involved in a 
verbal argument with the store’s detective and was also charged with breach of peace. 
He was convicted and sentenced to three months in jail (suspended), placed on 18 
months probation, and released on his own recognizance (Tr. 49-51). Applicant was 
frank, candid, and forthcoming in his explanations of this incident.  
 
 In February 2004 and January 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
assault and battery on his brother-in-law. Both charges were latter Nolle Processed. In 
his response to the SOR, Applicant claimed his brother-in-law was upset at him and 
filed the allegations to get even. At his hearing, Applicant explained his brother-in-law is 
an alcoholic who lives with Applicant and his wife sporadically. His wife is trying to save 
her brother from his alcohol addiction (Tr. 64). Applicant claimed in 2004 and 2006, his 
 
4 
 
 
brother-in-law was drunk, rude, and verbally abusive towards Applicant’s wife. On both 
occasions, Applicant and his brother-in-law were involved in verbal arguments which 
escalated into a shoving and pushing match. Applicant’s brother-in-law filed charges 
against Applicant, failed to appear at the court proceedings, and the charges were 
dismissed (Tr. 51-54). 
 
 Since January 2006, Applicant has been involved in one more incident with his 
brother-in-law. In late 2007 or early 2008, Applicant’s brother-in-law was again drunk 
and abusive towards Applicant’s wife. Applicant claimed he has learned his lesson and 
he no longer resorts to pushing and shoving his brother-in-law (Tr. 56). He was able to 
control his brother-in-law by talking and reasoning with him. As a result of this last 
incident, Applicant received a subpoena to testify in court (AE 1). Since the January 
2006 incident, Applicant has not been arrested, charged, or involved in any other police 
related incidents (Tr. 54, 59).  
 
 Applicant has not consumed alcoholic beverages since he left the Navy. He is 
diabetic and requires shots to control the disease. His left hip was replaced and walks 
with a cane because he has a bad right hip (Tr. 57).  
 
Falsification Allegations 
 
SOR ¶ 2a and ¶ 2b alleged Applicant falsified his answers to question 23(f) of his 
May 2007 security clearance application. Question 23(f) asked whether in the last seven 
years he had been arrested, charged with, or convicted of any offenses not previously 
disclosed elsewhere in his application. Applicant failed to disclose that in January 2006 
(SOR ¶ 2(a)) and in February 2004 (SOR ¶ 2(b)) he was arrested and charged with 
assault on his brother-in-law.  
 
Applicant admitted his failure to disclose the required information. He 
satisfactorily explained his omissions were a mistake and not made with the intent to 
mislead the government or to falsify his application. He averred he misread the security 
clearance application. He believed that since the charges were dropped (Nolle 
Processed) he did not have to disclose them in response to question 23(f). He admitted 
he did not pay sufficient attention to his application when he was completing it due to 
interruptions at work (Tr. 36). However, Applicant took responsibility for his lack of 
diligence. He testified nobody rushed him to complete the application, that he rushed 
himself. He acknowledged that if he had questions about the application he should have 
asked for assistance, but he failed to do so (Tr. 38). 
 
Applicant’s prior security clearance application was submitted in October 1996. 
At that time, he properly disclosed in response to question 23(f) his 1993 arrest and 
conviction for domestic assault and battery. Moreover, in his response to question 23(c) 
(asking whether he had any charges pending against him for any criminal offenses), 
Applicant answer “Yes,” and disclosed his September 1996 arrest for assault and 
battery on his wife. He further disclosed his scheduled court date for December 1996, 
and the jurisdiction where the charges were pending (GE 1). 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 
Having observed closely Applicant’s demeanor, I find his testimony credible. I 
find his omissions were not made with the intent to mislead the government or to falsify 
his application. At his hearing, Applicant promptly answered all the questions asked. He 
was frank, candid, and forthcoming in his answers and explained his answers without 
hesitation. He readily admitted his bad behavior and apologized numerous times for his 
questionable behavior. Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his actions.  
 
Policies 
 
 The purpose of a security clearance decision is to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information.2 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). The 
adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, 
which are to be considered in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”3 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
2  See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
 
3  Egan, supra, at 528, 531. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 Under Guideline J, the security concern is that criminal activity “creates doubt 
about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30.  
 
 From 1985 to 2006, Applicant was involved in six criminal conduct related 
incidents. He was convicted of domestic assault and battery in 1993, and shoplifting in 
2001. Four of the remaining incidents involved charges for assault and battery on family 
members that were dismissed or not prosecuted.4 Taken together, these incidents 
create doubts about Applicant’s judgment, and his ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules, and regulations. Criminal Conduct disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 31(a) “a 
single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and AG ¶ 31(c) “allegation or 
admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, 
formally prosecuted or convicted,” apply. 
 
 Applicant’s last criminal related incident occurred in January 2006. The 2007-
2008 incident with his brother-in-law (disclosed at the hearing) did not involve 
questionable behavior and raised no further security concerns. Because of his history or 
episodic criminal behavior over an extended period of time, the passage of time 
mitigates his behavior but only to a certain extent. AG ¶ 32(a). 
 
 Most of Applicant’s aberrational behavior was evidently caused by his bipolar 
personality disorder. Although he has been diligently taking medication since 1996, it is 
possible that fluctuation in his mental condition related to his medicine could have 
4  I considered SOR ¶ 1d (the October 1996 protective order allegation) part and parcel of SOR ¶ 
1e (the September 1996 assault and battery charge). Concerning SOR ¶ 1h, I find Applicant satisfactorily 
explained it was investigated and dismissed by the police as a false allegation. 
 
7 
 
 
contributed to his questionable behavior. Applicant visits his doctor monthly to insure 
the proper balance of his medications. Since January 2006, Applicant has been able to 
control his impulses. For example, the 2007-2008 incident with his brother-in-law was 
resolved peacefully by Applicant, and he was not subsequently arrested or charged.  
 
 Applicant credibly testified he has learned his lesson and no longer will rely on 
violence to resolve problems with his brother-in-law. He also expressed sincere remorse 
for his questionable behavior. Applicant other afflictions, i.e., his diabetes and bad hip, 
will make it unlikely he will be able to rely on violence to resolve his disputes. Moreover, 
because of the DOHA hearing process, Applicant has come to realize for the first time 
the adverse impact his questionable behavior could have on his ability to have access 
to classified information, and to retain his employment. Mitigating condition AG ¶ 32(c) 
“there is successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse . . .,” applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the security concern is that “conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information.” AG ¶ 15.  
 
The government’s evidence established Applicant failed to disclose relevant 
information in his answer to question 23(f) of his security clearance application. 
Notwithstanding, I find Applicant’s omissions were not deliberate or with the intent to 
mislead or falsify his application. Considering the record as a whole, I find Applicant’s 
omissions were caused by his lack of diligence. He failed to carefully read and pay 
attention to the questions asked of him in his security clearance application. My findings 
are corroborated by his candid disclosure of adverse information in his 1996 security 
clearance application and his hearing testimony. Having observed Applicant’s 
demeanor, and weighing his testimony in light of all available evidence, I find him to be 
credible. His testimony refutes the allegation of deliberate falsification. Applicant’s 
testimony was frank, candid, and forthright. I also believe Applicant expressed sincere 
remorse for his omissions. Based on Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I believe he 
has learned his lesson from his past mistakes, and similar questionable behavior is 
unlikely. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
8 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
 From 1985 to 2006, Applicant was involved in six criminal conduct related 
incidents. He was convicted of domestic assault and battery in 1993, and shoplifting in 
2001. Four of the remaining incidents involved charges for assault and battery on family 
members that were dismissed or not prosecuted. 
 
I have carefully weighed all evidence, and I applied the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as listed under the applicable adjudicative guidelines in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and educated 
man. He served honorably in the Navy for approximately seven years. He has worked 
for the same defense contractor (albeit the contractor has changed names) and has had 
access to classified information at the secret level for approximately 31 years. He has 
received treatment for bipolar disease, and has responded to that treatment. He 
scrupulously takes his medications and meets with his doctor once a month to check 
the effectiveness of his medication. His current marriage and resolution of conflict show 
effective relationships and anger management. Except for the pending allegations, there 
is no evidence of Applicant’s questionable behavior or, more importantly that he has 
ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified information.  
 
Considering his demeanor and testimony, I believe Applicant has learned from 
his mistakes, and his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. He is now a more 
mature and savvy person as a result of his brushes with the law and the security 
clearance process. There is no credible evidence Applicant has been involved in 
additional misconduct or questionable behavior since January 2006. In sum, I find 
Applicant has presented sufficient evidence of rehabilitation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence convinces me of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns arising from his criminal conduct and personal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
_________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
