  
  
1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-13232 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by his foreign preference and 
foreign influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
On November 26, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
C, Foreign Preference and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 12, 2007, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On December 20, 
2007, Department Counsel requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge 
pursuant to ¶ E3.1.7 of the Directive. The case was assigned to another Administrative 
Judge on January 23, 2008, and reassigned to me on February 5, 2008. DOHA issued 
  
  
2
a Notice of Hearing on February 13, 2008, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
March 13, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called three witnesses, 
and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through N, without objection. I granted Applicant’s 
request to keep the record open until March 27, 2008, to submit additional matters. 
Applicant’s counsel submitted 11 pages of documents marked collectively as AE O, and 
received without objection. The attorney’s letter and fax cover sheet are marked 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) XIV. Department Counsel’s memo is HE XV. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 21, 2008.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to India. Applicant’s counsel did not object. The request and the 
attached documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as 
HE I through XIII. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, 
below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old engineer for a defense contractor. He was born in 
India. He has the equivalent to a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree from Indian 
universities and a master’s degree from an American university. He is married with a 
seven-year-old child and his wife is pregnant with their second child.1 
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 1992 to attend graduate school. He 
obtained permanent residence status (green card) and remained in the U.S. He became 
a U.S. citizen in June 2006. Applicant was married in 1996. His wife was also born in 
India. She became a U.S. citizen on the same day as Applicant.2 
 
 Applicant had an Indian passport that was issued on June 30, 1999, with an 
expiration date of June 29, 2009. He never used his Indian passport after he became a 
U.S. citizen. He obtained status as an Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) on December 30, 
2006, for convenience of travel to India. The OCI program is discussed below. As part 
of the process of acquiring OCI status, he had to send his Indian passport to the Indian 
Embassy, which cancelled the passport on January 17, 2007. When he realized the 
possession of the OCI card could be a security concern, he formally renounced his OCI 
status and surrendered the OCI card to the Indian Embassy. The card has been 
cancelled. His wife and child obtained OCI status at the same time as Applicant. Their 
OCI status has also been renounced.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 56-57, 59, 80, 83; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 78-79; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 57-60, 70-74, 79; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE H, I, K, O. 
  
  
3
 Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of India. His father is 80 years old 
and his mother is 69 years old. His father was an engineer for the state government 
before he retired about 21 years ago. He receives a pension based on that employment. 
His mother did not work outside the home. They visited Applicant in the U.S. in 1998.4 
 
 Applicant has two brothers and a sister. One brother is a citizen and resident of 
the U.S. He has OCI status. His sister is also a U.S. citizen and resident. His second 
brother is a citizen and resident of India. He is an engineer for the state government.5  
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of India. 
His father-in-law is 75 years old and his mother-in-law is 60 years old. He worked in 
private industry until he retired about 15 years ago. She has not worked outside the 
home.6 
 
 Applicant and his wife traveled to India in 2001, 2002, 2004, and 2007, to visit 
their parents. Because of the distance, all the trips were at least three weeks long. He 
did not see his brother during the trips. He talks to his parents about once or twice a 
month. He talks to his brother in India less frequently, about every three months. He 
does not send financial support to his parents or in-laws. Applicant has no intention of 
returning to India to live. He has no foreign assets. He owns a house purchased for 
around $600,000, with approximately $70,000 in equity, and he has about $170,000 in 
investments and retirement accounts.7  
 
 Witnesses on Applicant’s behalf testified that he is a man of integrity, very honest 
and trustworthy, with high moral ethics. Character letters state that he has been a very 
valued employee, who is hard working, mature, intelligent, professional, responsible, 
loyal, and honorable. He is strongly recommended for a security clearance.8 
 
India 
 
 According to its constitution, India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic 
republic. It is a multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament 
and a population of approximately 1.1 billion.  
 
The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but numerous 
serious problems remain. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial 
killings of persons in custody, disappearances, torture, and rape. The lack of 
accountability permeated the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere 
                                                          
 
4 Tr. at 65-66, 76-77, 80; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 66, 77, 83-84; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 67, 77-78; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 68, 74-76, 79; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE J, N. 
 
8 Tr. at 25-55; AE A-G. 
 
  
  
4
in which human rights violations went unpunished. A number of violent attacks have 
been committed in recent years by separatist and terrorist groups. 
 
The U.S. recognizes India as key to strategic interests and has sought to 
strengthen its relationship with India. The two countries are the world’s largest 
democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by representative 
government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, in fighting 
terrorism, and in creating a strategically stable Asia. However, differences over India’s 
nuclear weapons program and pace of economic reform exist. There are also concerns 
about India’s relations with Iran, including their increasing cooperation with the Iranian 
military. 
 
There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual use technology to India, including technology and equipment which 
were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Foreign 
government entities, including intelligence organizations and security services, have 
capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology, and acquisition of sensitive 
U.S. technology by foreign private entities does not slow its flow to foreign governments 
or its use in military applications. 
 
The U.S. views India as a growing world power with which it shares common 
strategic interests. There is a strong partnership between the two countries and they are 
expected to continue to address differences and shape a dynamic and collaborative 
future. The U.S. and India are seeking to elevate the strategic partnership further to 
include cooperation in counter-terrorism, defense cooperation, education, and joint 
democracy promotion. 
 
“Overseas Citizens of India” 
 
The Constitution of India does not allow one to hold Indian citizenship and 
citizenship of a foreign country simultaneously. India decided to grant Overseas 
Citizenship of India. Commonly, but incorrectly, known as “dual citizenship.” Persons of 
Indian origin who migrated from India and acquired citizenship of a foreign country other 
than Pakistan and Bangladesh are eligible for grant of OCI as long as their home 
countries allow dual citizenship in some form under their local laws.9 The U.S. 
Department of State Consular Information Sheet on India addressed dual nationality: 
 
In 2006, India launched the “Overseas Citizens of India” (OCI) program, 
which has often been mischaracterized as a dual nationality program, as it 
does not grant Indian citizenship. Thus, an American who obtains an OCI 
card is not a citizen of India and remains a citizen of the United States. An 
OCI card in reality is similar to a U.S. “green card” in that a holder can 
travel to and from India indefinitely, work in India, study in India, and own 
property in India (except for certain agricultural and plantation properties). 
                                                          
9 GE 3; AE L. 
 
  
  
5
An OCI holder, however, does not receive an Indian passport, cannot vote 
in Indian elections and is not eligible for Indian government employment.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
                                                          
10 HE II. 
 
 
6 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;  
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
 Applicant’s last Indian passport was issued in 1999, while he was still an Indian 
citizen. It was scheduled to expire in 2009. He continued to possess it after he became 
a U.S. citizen, but he never used it. India does not recognize dual citizenship, and the 
passport was cancelled in 2007, when Applicant obtained OCI status. AG ¶ 10(a) was 
applicable while the passport was valid. Applicant was subsequently granted status as 
an Overseas Citizen of India. Despite the misnomer, this is not citizenship. The U.S. 
State Department equated it to a U.S. green card. No Foreign Preference disqualifying 
condition has been raised by Applicant’s OCI status.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11, including: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
7 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
India does not recognize dual citizenship. When Applicant became a U.S. citizen, 
he in essence gave up his Indian citizenship. Like almost everybody else in his 
situation, he still had his Indian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen, but he did not 
use it. The passport was canceled by the Indian Embassy as part of the process for 
Applicant to obtain OCI status. He has formally renounced his OCI status and 
surrendered the OCI card to the Indian Embassy. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and (e) are applicable. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
8 
 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
Applicant’s parents, brother, and parents-in-laws are citizens and residents of 
India. His father worked as an engineer for the state government before he retired about 
21 years ago. He collects a pension based on that employment. His brother presently 
works as an engineer for the state government. India is the world’s largest democracy, 
works closely with the U.S. on many matters, shares common strategic interests, and 
generally respects the rights of its citizens. But it also continues to have some human 
rights issues, has been victimized by terrorist attacks, and restricted, dual use 
technology has been illegally exported to India. This creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential 
conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (d) have been raised by the evidence. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
 
9 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
Applicant came to the U.S. as a young man to further his education. He 
remained, obtained a successful career as an engineer, married, had a child with 
another on the way, and became a U.S. citizen. While he and his wife still have family in 
India that they love, their life and future are here. India is a democracy and strategic 
partner of the U.S. Technology has been illegally exported to India, but the documents 
provided by Counsel do not show that coercion was utilized. I find that it is unlikely 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the 
Indian government or his family members in India and the interests of the United States. 
I further find there is minimal conflict of interest, because Applicant can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8 (b) are 
partially applicable. Because Applicant has been a U.S. citizen for less than two years, I 
am unable to find the mitigating conditions fully applicable. No other mitigating condition 
is applicable. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born in India. He 
came to the U.S. in 1992 to further his education. He obtained permanent residency 
status, remained in the U.S., thrived and became an established, highly regarded 
engineer, with considerable U.S. ties and assets. He and his wife became U.S. citizens 
in June 2006. He has a seven-year-old child and his wife is pregnant with their second 
child. His life, immediate family, professional career, and future are now here.  
 
 
10 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to India. There is a strong 
partnership between the U.S. and India and they share common strategic interests. 
However, Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”11 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly 
governments must be made with caution. Relations between nations can shift, 
sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have 
profound disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to 
their vital interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged 
in espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with 
the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an 
applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. 
  
 India is a democracy that generally respects the rights of its citizens, but 
numerous serious problems remain. Like almost every country, including the United 
States, it has been victimized by terrorist acts. Restricted, dual use technology has been 
illegally exported to India, but there is no indication that India utilizes coercion against its 
citizens for espionage purposes. Many of our allies conduct intelligence gathering 
against the U.S. India would be risking a great deal by raising the stakes, and 
attempting to use duress against one of its citizens in an attempt to coerce a U.S. 
citizen to commit espionage. Applicant is obviously closer to his parents than his 
brother. He speaks to him much less frequently and did not see him on any of his recent 
visits to India. Applicant’s father is 80 years old and has been retired for 21 years. While 
his brother does work for the state government and his father receives a pension, 
Applicant’s position, assets, and ties in the U.S. make economic coercion through his 
brother or father extremely unlikely to happen and even less likely to succeed.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence security 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
11 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.h:  For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
