 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 07-13491 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on May 10, 2005.  
On September 27, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and 
E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 2, 2007; answered it on 
November 13, 2007; and requested a decision on the record without a hearing. On 
December 7, 2007, Department Counsel requested a hearing.  Department Counsel 
was ready to proceed on January 2, 2008, and the case was assigned to me on that 
date. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 8, 2008, and I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on January 29, 2008. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were 
 
2 
 
 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and she 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through E, which were admitted without objection. 
I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until February 15, 2008, to enable 
her to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AX F through R by 
facsimile transmission, and they were admitted without objection.  Original copies of AX 
G through R subsequently were received by mail and substituted for the facsimile 
copies. (AX F was a facsimile cover sheet and was not included in the submission by 
mail.) Department Counsel’s response to AX G through R is attached to the record as 
Hearing Exhibit (HX) I.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 7, 
2008. The record closed on February 15, 2007. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Counsel for Applicant 
 
 At the hearing Applicant stated she had an attorney assisting her with her 
financial problems. She stated her attorney was not able to attend the hearing but was 
available by telephone for consultation (Tr. 4). Her attorney had not filed a notice of 
appearance with DOHA regarding the hearing. I explained that the hearing would not go 
forward over her objection, and I asked her if she desired to proceed without her 
attorney present. She responded in the affirmative (Tr. 5-6).  Based on her affirmative 
waiver, I conducted the hearing with her attorney absent but available for consultation 
by telephone. Applicant submitted AX A, a narrative statement prepared by her attorney 
(Tr. 39). Her attorney prepared and submitted her post-hearing evidence (AX F through 
R). 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 On Department Counsel’s motion, without objection from Applicant, I permitted 
amendment of SOR ¶ 2.a by substituting the word and figure “Question 38” in place of 
“Question 28,” and amendment of SOR ¶ 2.b by substituting the word and figure 
“Question 39” in place of “Question 29” (Tr. 21-22). 
 
Post-hearing Submission 
 
On February 20, 2008, I received a copy of a two-page letter addressed to 
Department Counsel from Applicant’s attorney. I declined to consider this letter, 
attached to the record as HX II, because it was untimely and not addressed to me.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 
1.g, 1.h, and 1.i.  Her admissions in her answer to the SOR and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  I make the following findings: 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old administrative assistant employed by a federal 
contractor.  She has worked for her current employer since May 2005.  She has never 
held a clearance.   
 
 For the appraisal period ending in August 2006, Applicant was rated as 3.5 on a 
5-point scale.  This rating placed her midway between a 3-point rating (met all 
requirements and expectations) and a 4-point rating (frequently exceeded requirements 
and expectations) (AX D).  Her rating for the period ending in July 2007 was a 3.7 on 
the same scale (AX E). 
 
 Applicant was married in April 1983 and divorced in September 1988.  She 
married her current spouse in October 1991.  She has a 15-year-old daughter and a 10-
year-old son from her current marriage (Tr. 49). 
 
 Applicant’s spouse was a salesman for a telephone communications company. 
After the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, his company downsized and he lost 
his job (Tr. 43, 49). Her spouse is in poor health, with heart problems and severe spinal 
arthritis. He suffered a stroke last year (Tr. 43). He is now employed with a home 
appraisal company (Tr. 50). 
 
 Applicant was employed by an insurance company from December 1987 to 
November 2003 (GX 1 at 2).  She was laid off and unemployed until June 2004, when 
she began working at a golf club.  After seven months, she was laid off from the golf 
club job and was unemployed for about three and a half months.  She began her current 
job in May 2005 (Tr. 51-52). 
 
 As a result of their unemployment, Applicant and her spouse accumulated 
numerous delinquent debts. The SOR alleges six delinquent debts and three unsatisfied 
judgments totaling about $33,147. In the summer of 2003, they consulted an attorney 
about their financial situation, and they considered filing for bankruptcy (GX 5 at 2; Tr. 
52-53, 58).  After working with the attorney for about two years, they decided they could 
not afford to pay the fees involved in a bankruptcy (Tr. 59).   
 
 While considering bankruptcy and trying to save enough money to pay the fees, 
Applicant’s spouse contacted several creditors, attempting to resolve their debts.  He 
was unsuccessful, and they hired their current attorney about 18 months ago (Tr. 59).  
Their current attorney challenged several debts and negotiated settlements of the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.h. 
 
 At the hearing, Department Counsel announced that his investigation of the 
charge account debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a revealed that Applicant was an “authorized 
user” of the account but not legally obligated to pay it. Accordingly, Department Counsel 
announced that the government would not pursue SOR ¶ 1.a and asked that it be 
resolved in Applicant’s favor (Tr. 23). 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant stopped making payments on the credit card accounts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b through 1.f shortly after her spouse lost his job. In July 2007, Applicant’s spouse 
entered into a stipulation of settlement of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, providing for 
monthly payments of $50 (AX M), and Applicant produced evidence of two payments 
(AX B; Tr. 64)). They had not made any payments on the other credit card accounts as 
of the date of the hearing (Tr. 62). 
 
 Judgments were entered against Applicant in April 2005 and February 2006 for 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g. and 1.i.  No payments have been made on these 
judgments. 
 
 A judgment was entered against Applicant in August 2005 for the debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.h.  Applicant entered into a stipulation of settlement for this debt providing for 
payments of $100 per month (AX C).  She testified she started making payments in 
September or October 2007, but she produced no documentary evidence of payments 
(Tr. 70). 
 
 Applicant’s post-hearing submission reflects lawsuits arising from delinquent 
debts that were filed against Applicant’s spouse for $3,513 in January 2007 (AX R), 
$2,202 in February 2007 (AX P), and $5,220 in July 2007 (AX Q).  These lawsuits are 
not alleged in the SOR, and the record does not show the disposition of these cases.   
 
 The evidence concerning the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR is summarized 
in the table below. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Credit card $2,008 Not Applicant’s debt Tr. 23 
1.b Credit card $4,916 Unpaid GX 2 at 2; GX 4 at 4; Tr. 62 
1.c Credit card $2,490 Making payments GX 4; AX B; AX M; Tr. 64 
1.d Credit card $5,375 Unpaid GX 2 at 2; GX 3 at 2; GX 4 at 5 
1.e Credit card $2,255 Unpaid GX 2 at 2; GX 3 at 2; GX 4 at 5 
1.f Credit card $10,122 Unpaid GX 2 at 2; GX 3 at 1; GX 4 at 4 
1.g Judgment $2,218 Unpaid GX 2 at 2; GX 3 at 1; GX 4 at 3 
1.h Judgment $6,886 Making payments GX 2 at 2; GX 3 at 1; AX C 
1.i Judgment $2,877 Unpaid GX 2 at 2; GX 3 at 1 
 
 When Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in February 2006, she 
had a net monthly salary of $2,140, monthly household expenses of $1,150, and a 
mortgage payment of $1,100.  She was making no credit card payments, and she had a 
monthly shortfall of about $110. Her spouse was unemployed. Her mother provided 
financial assistance to cover the monthly shortfall (GX 5 at 2).   
 
At the time of the hearing, Applicant’s spouse had returned to work and was 
taking home between $1,500 and $2,000 each month.  In addition to other household 
expenses, they were paying about $200 per month for heating oil, and their mortgage 
 
5 
 
 
payment had increased to about $1,200. They still receive occasional financial 
assistance from her mother (Tr. 79-80). 
 
 When Applicant executed her security clearance application (SF 86) on May 10, 
2005, she answered “no” to question 38, asking if she had been more than 180 days 
delinquent during the past seven years, and “no” to question 39, asking if she was 
currently more than 90 days delinquent on any debt.  She did not disclose the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f. 
 
 In her answer to the SOR and at the hearing, Applicant denied falsifying her SF 
86.  She testified “I think the built up pressure of trying to keep the family together, 
starting a new job, sorting all this out, husband ill, my mother was ill at the time, I just 
think I didn’t read it correctly.”  She testified knew she had delinquent debts, and knew 
she had been working with a lawyer to resolve them (Tr. 73-74). She also testified she 
thought that old debts were “kind of like just washed” and no longer valid (Tr. 75). She 
testified she might have omitted the debts because she thought the question applied to 
debts like mortgage, but not credit card debts and the debts being handled by her 
lawyer (Tr. 75-76).   
 
 Applicant testified she was not worried about not getting a job when she filled out 
her SF 86 because she already had the job (Tr. 77-78).  She did not remember being 
told she needed a security clearance for the job, and she thought the SF 86 was “just 
something that had to be done,” like the insurance forms and other paperwork (Tr. 78). 
 
 Applicant testified as follows about her desire to have a clearance: 
 
 For me, to have a government clearance, for lack of a better word, would 
be like a dream come true. My father had one. He had a career with [a 
federal contractor], he was very proud of that. I remember as little girl 
hearing, my mother said that investigators were in the neighborhood 
talking to the neighbors to see what kind of family man my father was. So 
when I got this job . . . I felt he’d be very proud of me. 
 
(Tr. 44-45.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
 
6 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to Guideline F is set out in AG & 18 as follows: 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case.  AG ¶ 19(a) is raised where there is an 
Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.@ AG ¶ 19(b) is a two-pronged condition that is 
raised where there is Aindebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and 
the absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a 
realistic plan to pay the debt.@  AG ¶ 19(c) is raised when there is Aa history of not 
meeting financial obligations.@  AG ¶ 19(e) is raised when there is Aconsistent spending 
beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.@  
Applicant’s financial history raises AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e).  AG ¶ 19(b) is not raised 
because there is no evidence of frivolous or irresponsible spending. 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@  AG ¶ 20(a).  This is a compound 
mitigating condition, with three disjunctive prongs and one conjunctive prong.  It may be 
established by showing the conduct was Aso long ago,@ or Aso infrequent,@ or Aoccurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur.@  If any of the three disjunctive 
prongs are established, the mitigating condition is not fully established unless the 
conduct Adoes not cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.” 
 
 The first prong (“so long ago”) is not established because Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are not yet resolved. The second prong (“so infrequent”) is not established 
 
8 
 
 
because she has numerous delinquent debts. The third prong (“unlikely to recur”) also is 
not established because Applicant is still financially overextended and has not resolved 
many of her delinquent debts.  I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.@ AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the 
persons=s control and responsible conduct, must be established. 
 
 Applicant’s unemployment, her spouse’s unemployment, and her spouse’s illness 
were conditions beyond her control.  She and her spouse acted responsibly, contacting 
creditors and seeking legal advice.  They have successfully negotiated payment plans 
for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.h.  I conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.@  AG ¶ 20(c).  This 
mitigating condition also has two prongs that may be either disjunctive or conjunctive.  If 
the person has received counseling, it must also be shown that there are clear 
indications the problem is being resolved or under control.  However, if the person has 
not received counseling, this mitigating condition may still apply if there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or under control. 
 
Applicant and her spouse are receiving legal advice and assistance, but many 
debts are still unresolved and their financial situation is still not under control.  I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that Athe 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.@ AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith Arequires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.@  ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
Evidence of past irresponsibility is not mitigated by payment of debts only under 
pressure of qualifying for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant and her spouse lack the financial resources to resolve all their debts, 
but they have made good faith efforts to do so. They began their efforts in the summer 
of 2003, long before Applicant applied for a clearance.  I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is 
established. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.”  AG ¶ 16(a). 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s 
state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial 
evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 
02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).   
 
Applicant presented herself at the hearing as intelligent and articulate, but she 
gave conflicting explanations for answering the two financial questions in the negative. 
She was unable to articulate a plausible explanation for not disclosing her financial 
situation. The remainder of her SF 86 was meticulously and accurately executed. It was 
clear from her testimony she regarded a security clearance as a coveted badge of 
honor. I cannot determine whether she omitted the financial information because of 
embarrassment, a reluctance to explain a complicated situation, or fear that it would 
jeopardize her application for a clearance. I believe Applicant did not fully appreciate the 
gravity of her deliberate omission of relevant and material information on her SF 86. I 
am satisfied, however, that Applicant understood the questions, was aware of her 
numerous delinquent debts, and deliberately chose not to disclose them. Accordingly, I 
conclude the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 16(a) is raised, shifting the burden to 
Applicant to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). There is no evidence Applicant made any effort to correct her 
answers to questions 38 and 39 until she was interviewed by a security investigator in 
February 2006 and confronted with the evidence of her delinquent debts.  I conclude 
AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. 
 
10 
 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigating by showing “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  AG ¶ 17(c).  
Applicant’s intentional omission of relevant and material information from her SF 86 was 
a felony, not a minor transgression.  It involved her current application for a clearance.  
It is the only instance of its kind in her record.  It does raise doubt, however, about her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  I conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not established.  No 
other enumerated mitigating conditions under this guideline are established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has endured financial setbacks and family illness. She and her 
husband have tried for several years to overcome their burden of delinquent debt. They 
remain financially overextended and have no viable plan to get out of debt.  Further 
delinquencies are likely to occur. Some of the delinquencies are in the name of 
Applicant’s spouse, but they affect the entire family, making Applicant vulnerable to 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
 
 The three delinquent debts reflected in AX P, Q, and R are not alleged in the 
SOR, and they may not be considered as independent grounds to deny a clearance.  
However, conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered: (a) to assess an 
applicant=s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant=s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, 
or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated 
successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for the whole person analysis. ISCR 
 
11 
 
 
Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted).  I have considered 
AX P, Q, and R for the limited purpose of evaluating Applicant’s overall financial 
situation. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried her burden of showing 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
