1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-10118
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge:
After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that
Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security concerns under the
Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct adjudicative guidelines.  Pursuant to 50 U.S.C.
435b, Section 3002, Applicant does not qualify for a security clearance, and his eligibility
for access to classified information is denied. 
Applicant executed and certified a Security Clearance Application (SF 86)
electronically on August 18, 2006.  He provided a signed certification of his SF-86 on
August 22, 2007. On November 27, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns
under  Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). DOHA’s
action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant also provided a signature to certify his responses on August 22, 2007.1
2
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 20, 2007.  In his answer,
Applicant requested that his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing.  The
Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 24, 2008.  The
FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 5.  A copy of the FORM was
provided to Applicant on January 25, 2008, with instructions to submit any additional
information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the file on
February 28, 2008.  He filed a response to the FORM within the required time period.
Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s February 28, 2008 filing. On March 6,
2008, the case was assigned to another DOHA administrative judge. On March 12,
2008, the case was reassigned to me for a decision. I have marked Applicant’s
February 28, 2008, response to the FORM as his Exhibit A, and I have admitted it to the
record of this case.
Procedural Issues
SOR allegation 1.f. alleges a violation of 10 U.S.C. 986 because Applicant is a
present user and purchaser of marijuana, a controlled substance. On January 28, 2008,
the President approved the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2008,
which repealed 10 U.S.C. 986 and replaced it with 50 U.S.C. 435b, Section 3002. The
newly enacted statute states that a person who is an unlawful user of a controlled
substance or an addict cannot be granted a security clearance by any federal agency.
Since the prohibitions of 10 U.S.C. 986 and 50 U.S.C.435b, Section 3002 are the same,
there is no prejudice to Applicant and he has received adequate notice of the
prohibition. In this decision, the prohibition will be discussed under 50 U.S.C. 435b,
Section 3002 and not 10 U.S.C. 986.
  
Findings of Fact
The SOR contains six allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline H,
Drug Involvement, and one allegation of disqualifying conduct under Guideline E,
Personal Conduct. (Item 1.) Applicant admitted five allegations under Guideline H and
denied one Guideline H allegation, with explanation.  He also denied the one allegation
under Guideline E.  (Item 3; Ex. A.)  His admissions are incorporated herein as findings
of fact.
On March 22, 2008, Applicant will be 24 years old.  He is single and employed as
a software engineer by a Federal contractor.  He holds bachelor of science degrees in
applied mathematics and physics. (Item 4.)
Applicant completed a security clearance application (SF-86) and certified his
answers electronically on August 18, 2006.  Section 24 on the SF-86 is titled “Your Use1
of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity.” In response to Section 24, Applicant admitted illegal
use of marijuana from March 2005 to June 2006. He estimated he had used marijuana
eight times during the fifteen month period from March 2005 to June 2006. (Item 4.)
3
Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator and provided a
statement under oath on February 23, 2007. In the interview, Applicant admitted using
marijuana with his girlfriend during the period beginning in June 2006 and ending in
December 2006.  He stated he would continue to use marijuana if it was presented to
him in a social setting, and he speculated he might continue to smoke marijuana
monthly or every two months depending on his social contacts. He stated he was in
control of his use of marijuana and avoided smoking too much at a time. He stated he
was comfortable using marijuana while holding a security clearance. While he
recognized that the use of marijuana was illegal, he did not think there was a difference
between the use of alcohol and the use of marijuana.  Applicant stated that his twin
brother smoked marijuana about three times a week.  Applicant has frequent contact
with his brother, and he once bought marijuana from his twin brother’s friend. (Item 5 at
3-4.)
In September 2007, Applicant provided a sworn statement in which he admitted
marijuana use approximately once a week from June 2007 to July 2007.  He stated he
had not smoked marijuana in August 2007 but expected to continue to smoke marijuana
about once a month in the future.  (Item 5 at 5-7.)
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied that he was disqualified from holding
a security clearance under the provisions of 10 U.S.C. § 986 because he was ending
his use of marijuana immediately.  He attached the following statement to his answer to
the SOR: 
I intend to cease using marijuana from now (December 20, 2007) until at
least the expiration/termination of any security clearance I may be
granted.  I also will not use any other illegal substances.  I understand that
any usage would likely result in the termination of any security clearance I
may possess. 
I also indicate my willingness to sign a more formal statement if that is
required.
(Answer to SOR at 2.)
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied that his use of an illegal drug after
completing a security clearance application and his statement that he would feel
comfortable using an illegal drug while holding a security clearance raised any security
issues about his reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness under the Personal Conduct
adjudicative guideline.  (Answer to SOR at 1.)
In his response to the FORM, dated February 28, 2008, Applicant stated that he
had stopped using marijuana when he prepared his response to the SOR, which he
submitted to DOHA on December 20, 2007.  He stated he had not used or purchased
any illegal substances since responding to the SOR. He stated he intended to avoid all
illegal drugs during the time that he held a security clearance.  (Response to FORM at
1.)
4
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
10 U.S.C. § 986(c)(2) disqualified a person from being granted a security
clearance if he or she was “an unlawful user of, or . . . [was] addicted to, a controlled
5
substance (as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C.
802)).”  10 U.S.C. § 986(c)(2) was in effect at the time Applicant’s SOR was issued and
served on him.  On January 28, 2008, the President signed Public Law 110-181, which,
in pertinent part, repealed 10 U.S.C. § 986 and replaced it with a new statute, 50 U.S.C.
435b, Section 3002.  The new statute also prohibits granting a security clearance to an
individual who is an addict or an unlawful user of a controlled substance. The new
statute applies in this case. 
Analysis
           Guideline H,  Drug Involvement
An individual’s use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug raises
questions of reliability and trustworthiness because drug use or misuse can impair
judgment and raise questions about the person’s ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations.  Guideline H, ¶ 24.  Guideline H defines drugs as mood
and behavior altering substances. . . . Drugs include: (1) Drugs, materials, and other
chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as
amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.  Guideline H, ¶ 24(a)(1)
and ¶ 24(a)(2).  The Guideline further defines drug abuse as the illegal use of drug or
use of a legal drug in an manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
Guideline H, ¶ 24(b).
Applicant admitted using marijuana, an illegal drug, with varying frequency, from
March 2005 through December 2007. He used marijuana after submitting his
application for a security clearance in August 2006, after his interview with an
authorized investigator in February 2007, and after receiving the SOR.  He stated  in his
answer to the SOR that , as of December 20, 2007, he would no longer use marijuana
and would not use it again until he no longer held a security clearance. 
Applicant’s illegal drug use spanned approximately 2 ½ years of his post-college
professional life. During that time, he also purchased marijuana. Applicant’s statements,
when read as a whole, fail to demonstrate that he has clearly and convincingly
committed to discontinue his use of marijuana.  
Applicant’s conduct raises security concerns under Disqualifying Condition (DC)
25(a), (DC) 25(c), and (DC) 25(h) of Guideline H, and the provisions of 50 U.S.C. 435b,
Section 3002. DC 25(a) reads: any drug abuse. DC 25(c) reads: illegal drug possession,
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or
possession of drug paraphernalia.  DC25(h) reads: expressed intent to continue illegal
drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. Pursuant
to 50 U.S.C. 435b, Section 3002, an applicant who is an unlawful user of a controlled
substance may not be granted access to classified information.  
Several Mitigating Conditions (MC) under Guideline H might be applicable to
Applicant’s case.  If the drug abuse behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
Specific examples of demonstrated intent that might apply under MC26(b) are as follows: (1) disassociation2
from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) A signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation. 
In the FORM, the Government alleged that DC 16(d) also applied to the facts of Applicant’s case.  I conclude3
that DC 16(d) is inapplicable, since the credible adverse information about Applicant’s drug use was alleged
as disqualifying conduct under Guideline H.  DC 16(d) addresses “credible adverse information that is not
6
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, then MC 26(a)
might apply.  If Applicant intended not to abuse drugs in the future and demonstrated
that intent as specified in the Guideline, then MC 26 (b) might apply.   Additionally, drug2
abuse that is of security concern can be mitigated under MC 26(d) by satisfactory
completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including but not limited to
rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional.
The record shows that Applicant’s marijuana abuse began in about 2005 and
continued until at least December 20, 2007. Thus, his drug abuse is recent, and
Applicant provided no credible evidence to corroborate his assertion that he no longer
uses drugs and has no intent to use them in the future while holding a security
clearance. Applicant’s brother continues to use marijuana, and Applicant has on-going
contact with him. Applicant failed to provide evidence he had satisfactorily completed a
prescribed drug treatment program. While Applicant provided a statement that he would
not use drugs while he held a security clearance, he also limited his commitment to
abstinence to the duration of any security clearance granted to him. Applicant
presumably felt free to begin using illegal drugs again when he no longer held a security
clearance. Applicant failed to credibly demonstrate his intent not to abuse drugs again in
the future.  None of the Guideline H MCs apply to Applicant’s use of marijuana. 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
Applicant continued to use an illegal drug after submitting a security clearance
application, after an interview with an authorized investigator, and after receiving the
SOR.  Further, he stated to an authorized investigator that he would be comfortable
using marijuana while holding a security clearance. Applicant’s behavior demonstrates
questionable judgment, unreliability, and lack of trustworthiness.  His personal conduct
raises doubts about his ability to follow rules and regulations for the protection of
classified information. Moreover, his illegal drug use makes him vulnerable to
exploitation, manipulation or duress.  His drug use, if known, could affect his personal
and professional standing. 
A security concern under Guideline E is raised when an individual demonstrates
questionable judgment and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.  See
Guideline E, ¶ 15. Additionally, Applicant’s conduct raises a security concern under
Disqualifying Condition (DC) 16(e)(1), which reads: personal conduct, or concealment of
information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation,
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.    3
explicitly covered under any other guideline. . . .” 
7
     Under Guideline E, there are two Mitigating Conditions (MC) that might be
applicable to Applicant’s case. If Applicant has acknowledged the behavior and obtained
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur, then MC 17(d) might
apply.  If the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, then MC 17(e) might apply.
       Applicant has indicated he would forego marijuana use while he held a security
clearance. However, he continued his illegal drug use after applying for a security
clearance.  By his own admission, he continued to use marijuana until he prepared his
answer to the SOR. Applicant has not sought counseling for unreliable conduct, nor has
he taken any other positive steps to ensure that he will not use drugs in the future.  His
statement that he will abstain from marijuana use in the future is speculative and lacks
credibility when viewed in the context of his recent behavior.  I conclude that MC 17(d)
does not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.
        Applicant’s pursuit of illegal drug use after applying for a security clearance makes
him vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress and the subsequent compromise
of classified material, should he be granted a security clearance. He failed to
demonstrate that he had taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerabilities
deriving from the personal conduct that results in his use of drugs.  I conclude that MC
17(e) does not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.  No other MCs under Guideline E
apply. 
            
          Whole Person Concept
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.”  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I carefully considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
adjudicative Guidelines E and H in light of the whole person concept and the facts and
circumstances surrounding this case. 
8
Applicant’s admissions and the record evidence establish recent illegal drug
involvement and an absence of demonstrated resolve to cease illegal drug use
unconditionally. Applicant’s behavior raises concerns about his judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. While Applicant asserted he had not used illegal drugs since preparing
his Answer to the SOR, he failed to demonstrate credible rehabilitation and resolve to
avoid  illegal drugs in the future. 
In ISCR Case No. 98-0761 at 3 (Dec.27, 1999), DOHA’s Appeal Board states
that an administrative judge, in deciding an Applicant’s security worthiness, “must
consider the record as a whole (Directive Section F.3.) and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.”  I have
considered the record as a whole and have evaluated Applicant’s conduct under the
whole person concept of the Directive. 
I have also weighed Applicant’s drug behavior in light of 50 U.S.C. 435b, Section
3002.  Applicant’s use of illegal drugs is recent, and, while he recently expressed an
intention to cease illegal drug use in the future, he did so by limiting his abstinence to
the length of time he would hold a security clearance, thereby suggesting that his
promised avoidance of drugs was limited and conditional. Applicant has failed to
mitigate his recent use of marijuana and presents an unacceptable security risk.  I
conclude that, pursuant to 50 U.S.C. 435b, Section 3002, Applicant is an unlawful user
of a controlled substance and must be denied a security clearance.
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
____________________________
JOAN CATON ANTHONY
Administrative Judge
