 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-10408 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his financial history. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On October 28, 2007, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 30, 2007, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to another 
Administrative Judge on January 17, 2008, and reassigned to me on February 4, 2008. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 28, 2008. I convened the hearing as 
 
2 
 
 
scheduled on February 20, 2008. The government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Exhibit (AE) A, without objection. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the 
record open until March 3, 2008, to submit additional matters.  Applicant submitted eight 
pages of documents marked as AE B though F, and received without objection. 
Department Counsel’s memo is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The record closed on 
March 3, 2008. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 28, 2008.   
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated November 30, 2007, Applicant admitted the 
factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.k, and 1.r of the SOR, with explanations. He 
denied the remaining allegations. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is a high school 
graduate and attended technical school. He served in the U.S. military from 1989 to 
1996, and was honorably discharged. His marriage from 1989 to 1992 ended in divorce. 
He remarried in 1994. He and his wife have two children, ages thirteen and four. He has 
a 17-year-old child from a previous marriage and a 19-year-old stepchild.1  
 
 Applicant’s wife has owned a business since before they married. After they 
married, Applicant became an owner and worked for the business. They were not paid 
salaries; their income was dependent upon the profits from the business. In the summer 
of 2005, his wife was in a car accident and severely injured her right arm. She was out 
of work for two months following the accident. The company then lost two large 
contracts and lost 95% of its income. They were not able to pay their debts and many 
became delinquent. Applicant obtained a job outside the family business in the spring of 
2006, and obtained his current job in about September 2006. His wife still owns and 
runs the business, but the business has not recovered and her income is low. She has 
taken a part-time job as a waitress to supplement their income.2  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.r allege ten delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $44,854. SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.e, totaling approximately $19,363, reflect the 
amounts owed after two cars were repossessed. SOR ¶ 1.g for $14,416 is from a 
second mortgage taken out to install a swimming pool. Applicant admitted owing all the 
above debts and none of the ten debts have been paid. SOR ¶ 1.h alleges Applicant 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20, 37, 40-41; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 16-17, 27-28; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
was approximately $10,975 past due on his mortgage and it was proceeding to 
foreclosure. Applicant has reaffirmed the mortgage to the mortgagor’s satisfaction and 
established a new payment schedule.3  
 
 The debts as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k through 1.q reflect a series of state tax liens. 
The debts were for sales tax owed from the company’s sales of inventory. The sales tax 
was collected from the company’s customers but not fully paid to the state. Applicant 
admitted owing the state tax lien of $8,534 filed in December 2005, as alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.k, but he stated that the underlying tax debt was paid. Applicant submitted a copy of a 
paid check of $8,045 to the state. The check was dated December 28, 2004, and 
cleared the bank on January 13, 2005. The state verified that the payment had been 
received and that it was not posted due to an error in their system. Applicant denied 
owing the other sales tax allegations, stating the liens were “released due to incorrect 
calculations in amount.” He testified that he and his wife were waiting for documentation 
from the state but that he believed the amount they owed was approximately $2,500. 
Court records show state tax liens of $8,534 entered on December 15, 2005; $2,055 
entered on August 14, 2006; $11,938 entered on March 23, 2007; $1,346, $1,297 and 
$9,677 entered on April 3, 2007; and $4,548 entered on May 23, 2007. The court 
records do not reveal the tax periods the liens represent. Applicant submitted evidence 
that the $8,534 and the $9,677 liens were released. Letters from the state dated 
February 27, 2008, revealed a total of $3,092 owed for the period of April 2004 to May 
2006, and $2,447 owed for the period of August 2006 to November 2006, for a total 
amount owed to the state of $5,539.4 
 
 The debts as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.g all state that the debts have 
been “charged off.” Applicant was told that means “that it’s like they’ve written them off 
and closed the accounts,” and that they are no longer owed. He stated they intend to 
start paying off the state taxes and the other debts that were not charged off.5 
 
 Applicant received financial counseling in the late 1990s to address medical and 
credit card bills, but has not received any counseling since that time.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 21-23, 30; Applicant’s Answer to SOR. 
 
4 Tr. at 18, 23-27; Applicant’s Answer to SOR; GE 2; AE A, C-F. 
 
5 Tr. at 18-19, 22. 
 
6 Tr. at 37-38. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, Administrative Judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative 
Judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable to pay his 
obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above potentially 
disqualifying conditions. The debts as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k through 1.q reflect a series 
of state tax liens for unpaid sales tax. The records of the liens do not reveal what tax 
periods the liens represent. The tax liens reflected in SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.q for $8,534 and 
$9,677 were released. Applicant owes $5,539 to his state for sales tax. None of the tax 
liens are for the exact amount still owed.  I am attributing the unpaid balance to the lien 
that is closest in amount to, but less than, the figure still owed; that is the lien in SOR ¶ 
1.n for $4,548. The allegations of the other tax liens, as reflected in SOR ¶¶ 1.k through 
1.m, and 1.o through 1.q, are concluded for Applicant. 
 
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties resulted from his wife’s car accident in the 
summer of 2005, and the subsequent loss of business for their company. These are 
conditions that were largely beyond his control. Personal debts became delinquent and 
money collected for sales tax was not paid to the state. Applicant obtained his current 
job in about September 2006. Several of the personal debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g, 
1.i, 1.j, and 1.r were charged off by the creditors, but none have been paid. The 
evidence does not support an affirmative finding that Applicant acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. He received counseling in the late 
1990s for other financial problems, but has not received counseling for his current 
financial problems. There are not clear indications that his financial problems are being 
resolved or are under control. They continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable. No other 
mitigating condition is fully applicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s financial problems are 
related to his wife’s car accident and the loss of business for their company. Personal 
debts became delinquent and they failed to pay the state all the sales tax they collected 
from their customers. The personal debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.r 
have not been paid since Applicant started working for his current employer in 2006, 
and more than $5,500 is still owed to the state. Applicant appeared sincere at his 
 
7 
 
 
hearing and I also gave weight to his honorable military service. However, he has not 
submitted sufficient evidence to prove that he has control of his finances.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
issues.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i and 1.j:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k-1.m:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o-1.q:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.r:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
