1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 16-03472 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GARCIA, Candace Le’i, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct, use of information technology, 
and foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
Statement of the Case 
On February 14, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline E (personal 
conduct), Guideline M (use of information technology), and Guideline B (foreign 
influence). The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG).1 
1 I decided this case using the AG implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. However, I also considered this 
case under the previous AG implemented on September 1, 2006, and my conclusions are the same using 
either set of AG. 
12/27/2018
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 15, 2017, and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on November 9, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing (NOH) on December 8, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for January 22, 2018. A notice of cancellation for that hearing 
was issued on January 19, 2018, due to the U.S. Government shutdown. A second 
NOH was issued on April 9, 2018, scheduling the hearing for May 18, 2018. I convened 
the hearing as scheduled.2 
 
I marked the Government’s discovery letter, request for administrative notice, 
and exhibit list as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I, II, and III, and Applicant’s exhibit list as HE 
IV. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, called one witness, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through N, which were admitted in evidence without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 6, 2018.  
                                                                                                                                                       
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 3.a, 3.b, and 3.c. He denied 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 2.a. He is 50 years old. He married in 2000, divorced in 2009, and 
remarried in 2010. He has four minor children. All are native-born U.S. citizens. His 
eldest child is from a prior relationship. His second child is from his prior marriage. His 
youngest two children are from his current marriage.3  
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in 1986. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
1990 and a master’s degree in 2002. He served in the U.S. Navy from 1990 to 1994, 
when he was honorably discharged. He has since worked for various defense 
contractors. As of the date of the hearing, he worked as a senior engineer for his current 
employer, for whom he has worked since late February 2015. He previously worked for 
the same company from June 2007 to February 2009. He was first granted a security 
clearance in 1990.4  
 
 Applicant’s wife was born in Russia. She is 33 years old. She earned a 
bachelor’s and a master’s degree from a university in Russia in around 2002 and 2009, 
respectively. She first immigrated to the United States in 2004. She then returned to 
Russia, where she married her first spouse, who was then a Russian citizen, in 2005. 
Her first spouse is now a U.S. citizen residing in the United States. They immigrated to 
the United States in 2005 and divorced in 2007. She remarried a Ukrainian national in 
2009 and they lived together in the United States. She then returned to Russia in 2009 
for one month to finish her master’s degree, after which time she returned to the United 
States. She divorced her second spouse in 2010.5 
                                                     
2 Tr. at 7-8. 
 
3 Response to the SOR; Tr. at 36, 39-41, 75, 77, 85; GE 1, 2; AE D, K, N.                    
 
4 Tr. at 36-39, 43-51, 97-98; GE 1, 2; AE A, D, F. 
 
5 Tr. at 78-90, 94-97, 105-112; GE 1, 2; AE B, D, K, L, M, N. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s wife became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2014. She renounced her 
Russian citizenship in 2016. She has worked as a business financial manager for an 
engineering firm since May 2015. The company’s partner, who is also the facility 
security officer (FSO), indicated that while Applicant’s wife does not need a security 
clearance, she has received security training like those who do. He described her as a 
valued and trusted employee who safeguards the company’s confidential, sensitive, and 
proprietary information. He also indicated that she appears to be a loyal American 
citizen.6 
 
 Applicant’s parents-in-law and brother-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Russia. His parents-in-law divorced in 2010. His father-in-law is 60 years old. Applicant 
testified that his wife’s father is estranged from the family. She talks to her father several 
times yearly, and she has seen him three times between 2008 and 2018. Her father met 
her during one of her trips to Russia so that he could meet his grandson. Applicant has 
never met or talked to his father-in-law. Applicant is unaware whether his father-in-law is 
currently employed, and his wife believes her father is retired. Applicant’s father-in-law 
is a former Russian military officer. Applicant testified that his father-in-law served in the 
Russian military for several years from around 1983 to 1985, before he was discharged 
for stealing rubbing alcohol.7 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is 60 years old. She works as an accountant for a 
brewery. His brother-in-law is 24 years old. After Applicant’s brother-in-law graduated 
from college, he completed one year of mandatory service in the Russian military in 
around December 2017. He works as a chemist for a private pharmaceutical company. 
Applicant was unaware if his brother-in-law had any ongoing affiliations with the 
Russian government or military. Applicant’s wife video chats with her mother once 
weekly. She is close to her brother and talks to him more frequently, at least several 
times weekly and most recently because of his imminent wedding. His mother-in-law 
speaks “very little” English and Applicant speaks “very little” Russian, so he simply says 
“hello” and ensures that his children do the same on the occasions that his wife talks to 
her mother. He has a similar relationship with his brother-in-law.8 
 
 Applicant traveled to Russia in 2010, 2011, 2013, and 2014. He followed security 
clearance protocol and reported such travels to his FSO. His wife travels to Russia once 
yearly, and she stays with her mother during such visits. Though Applicant planned to 
travel to Russia with his family to attend his brother-in-law’s wedding and celebrate his 
50th birthday, he elected not to do so while his clearance decision was pending. His wife 
and two children planned to attend her brother’s wedding in Russia, where they would 
stay in a condominium paid for by her brother. His mother-in-law and brother-in-law 
have visited and stayed with them in the United States. They did so before Applicant 
and his wife married, and his mother-in-law did so again after the birth of their son in 
                                                     
6 Tr. at 78-90, 94-97, 105-112; GE 1, 2; AE B, D, K, L, M, N. 
 
7 Tr. at 78-90, 94-97, 105-112; GE 1, 2; AE D, L, M, N. 
 
8 Tr. at 78-90, 94-97, 105-112; GE 1, 2; AE D, L, M, N. 
 
4 
 
2013 for six months. She has attempted to revisit them since but her visa has been 
denied at least three times.9 
 
 In around 2013, Applicant’s mother-in-law sold her condominium in Russia, and 
gave $90,000 of the proceeds to Applicant and his wife, which they used as a deposit 
for their home in the United States. Applicant reported this monetary gift to his FSO. 
They have not received any additional money and his wife does not have standing to 
inherit any money from anyone in Russia. They do not have any assets, obligations, or 
affiliations in Russia. Their assets in the United States total around $1,840,000.10 
 
 Applicant’s in-laws in Russia are aware that he works as an engineer. He has not 
told them that he holds a security clearance or works on U.S. Government contracts. He 
is unaware if his wife has ever disclosed this information to them; she indicated that she 
has not shared information about Applicant’s work or need for a clearance to any 
foreign national, to include her mother and brother. Applicant is unaware whether his in-
laws in Russia have ever been approached by anyone in the Russian government or 
military seeking information about him or his employment. He testified that he would 
report to his FSO and the proper authorities any attempts by anyone in Russia to 
blackmail him.11 
 
 Applicant looked at pornography on his work computer from around February 
2014 through February 2015. At the time, he had been working for a subcontractor 
since 2008. He attributed his actions to the “gross miscalculation” he made as a result 
of an “extreme amount of stress” from 2013 through 2015. His eldest child was born in 
2013 with a medical condition requiring multiple surgeries through 2015, as well as 
continuous checkups every six months indefinitely. He described this experience as a 
“traumatic” one. In addition, he and his wife “were not in a good spot at all” after she had 
disclosed to him that she had multiple affairs between 2013 and 2015.12 
 
 Initially, Applicant only looked at pornography at home. When he became 
addicted to it, he also looked at pornography at work. He testified that pornography:   
 
[w]as my outlet, that was my release. Whether it was five, ten minutes, 
you know, before work started. Ten, 20, 30 minutes after work . . . before I 
went home . . . It relaxed me. It prepared me for going home and having to 
work through everything that was going on in the house. 
 
He also acknowledged that he looked at pornography at work at lunch time. He 
estimated that he looked at pornography at work an average of 15 to 30 minutes daily. 
                                                     
9 Tr. at 78-90, 94-97, 105-112; GE 1, 2; AE D, L, M, N. 
 
10 Tr. at 78-90, 94-97, 105-112; GE 1, 2, 5; AE A, D, E, L, M, N. 
 
11 Tr. at 78-90, 94-97, 105-112; GE 1, 2, 5; AE A, D, E, L, M, N. 
 
12 Tr. at 36-77, 90-93, 98-99; GE 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; AE G, N. 
 
5 
 
He maintained that it never interfered with his work. He did not tell anyone at the time 
that he was looking at pornography at work because he knew it was improper.13 
 
 In early February 2015, the primary defense contractor removed Applicant from 
the U.S. Government contract to which he had been assigned through his subcontractor 
company. His program manager informed him that computer monitoring revealed that 
he had been accessing pornography on his work computer. He immediately reported his 
removal and the reason for his removal to his company’s President, Vice President, and 
FSO. He was placed on administrative leave by his company during the two-week 
period in which the primary contractor conducted its investigation, then he was 
terminated by his company in around mid-February 2015.14  
 
 The investigation conducted by the primary contractor, summarized in an April 2, 
2015 letter, consisted of a forensic examination of Applicant’s computer, an interview of 
the contract’s technical lead, and a review of Applicant’s time sheets, contract 
documents, and internet logs. Applicant was never interviewed. The investigation 
determined that Applicant viewed pornography during periods that were billed to the 
U.S. Government. As such, the primary contractor indicated that it would issue to the 
U.S. Government a credit of $21,577.15 
 
 Applicant denied that he ever mischarged to the government contract any time in 
which he looked at pornography at work. He testified that he was aware that the primary 
defense contractor paid $20,000 to the U.S. Government agency in association with his 
alleged mischarging; his company repaid the primary contractor $20,000 at the latter’s 
request; he was unaware how the amount of $20,000 was quantified; and he was never 
asked to repay any money. He acknowledged during his July 2016 background 
interview that the $20,000 was restitution for an established 100 hours of computer use 
during work hours for personal purposes. A May 2016 letter memorializing a meeting 
between Applicant, his attorney, and debarment officials, reflects that “it was clear that 
[Applicant] has accepted responsibility for mischarging a government contract for 
misspent time.”16 
 
 Applicant was placed under surveillance for one year by his company’s ethics 
committee from 2016 to 2017. He was required to report his time and his computer was 
monitored, as further discussed below. He has had no other unfavorable issues. He 
testified that it was not easy for him to stop looking at pornography at work. Once he 
was terminated by his prior company, he sought help for the first time. He voluntarily 
attended multiple Sex Addicts Anonymous (SAA) meetings for two and a half years to 
address his addiction. He no longer feels he is addicted to pornography, he intends to 
continue to attend SAA meetings in the future, and he does not intend to look at 
                                                     
13 Tr. at 36-77, 90-94, 98-101; GE 2, 3, 4, 5. 
 
14 Tr. at 36-77, 90-93, 98-101; GE 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; AE A, F, G, H, I. 
 
15 Tr. at 56-77, 90-94, 98-101; GE 2, 3; AE H, I, J. 
 
16 Tr. at 36-77, 90-94, 98-104, 113-115; GE 1, 2, 3; AE A, F, G, H, I, J. 
 
6 
 
pornography on his work computer in the future. He eventually disclosed his conduct of 
viewing pornography at work and his consequent termination to his wife, who supports 
his SAA attendance and has herself attended such meetings. He handles stress by 
working out, playing games on his phone, and keeping busy with his family.17 
 
 Applicant’s character witness was a vice president for the defense contractor for 
whom they worked. He was also Applicant’s division director and direct supervisor of 
three years. He has held a security clearance at various occasions over a 30-year-
period. Though the witness was not involved in rehiring Applicant, he testified that 
Applicant had self-reported his issue with his prior defense contracting company to both 
the witness and his predecessor, and despite such knowledge, the predecessor chose 
to rehire Applicant. He testified that he was aware that Applicant viewed pornography 
on his work computer during his off hours while employed by the prior defense 
contractor; he self-reported his conduct to his then-employer; and Applicant had to 
leave that company after he was consequently removed from the contract. The witness 
testified that he was unaware that any allegations were ever substantiated concerning 
Applicant mischarging his prior employer for time associated with his pornography 
usage at work.18 
 
 The witness testified that he discussed the matter with an individual from 
Applicant’s prior employer, who described Applicant’s conduct as a mistake and 
indicated that Applicant had otherwise been trustworthy. The witness also testified that 
he discussed the matter directly with Applicant and brought it to the attention of their 
employer’s ethics committee. The committee, noting that Applicant did not have any 
unfavorable issues during his previous employment with their company, placed 
Applicant on a one-year observation period beginning in around July 2016, which 
coincided with Applicant’s proposed debarment period.19  
 
 During this time, Applicant reported his time to the witness daily, his computer 
access was monitored, and the government contractor to which he was assigned was 
asked to provide any relevant observations. At the year’s conclusion, the committee 
determined that there was no longer a need for further observation of Applicant and the 
proposed debarment had also ended. Applicant continued, however, to report to the 
witness. The witness has received favorable reports of Applicant’s performance, and 
rated Applicant outstanding in his performance evaluations. He testified that Applicant 
has complied with annual security and ethics trainings, and he considers Applicant 
trustworthy, of good judgment, and capable of following rules and regulations. 
Applicant’s FSO since 2010 described Applicant as an individual who follows security 
rules and procedures. His FSO also indicated that Applicant has completed his annual 
security training requirements. 20 
                                                     
17 Tr. at 36-77, 90, 98, 104-105, 112-113; GE 1, 2, 4; AE C, G, I, N. 
 
18 Tr. at 17-35. 
 
19 Tr. at 17-35. 
 
20 Tr. at 17-35; AE A. 
 
7 
 
Russia 
 
 In 2016, Russia continued to be a leading state intelligence threat to U.S. 
interests. Its intelligence services target U.S. and allied personnel with access to 
sensitive computer network information. It is assuming a more assertive cyber posture 
based on its willingness to target critical infrastructure systems and conduct espionage 
operations, even when detected and under increased public scrutiny. It has developed a 
ground-launched cruise missile that the United States has declared is in violation of the 
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty. 
 
 Russia remains one of the top two most aggressive and capable collectors of 
sensitive U.S. economic information and technologies, particularly in cyberspace. Non-
cyberspace collection methods include targeting of U.S. visitors overseas, especially if 
the visitors are assessed as having access to sensitive information. Russia’s highly 
capable intelligence services are using human intelligence gathering, cyber, and other 
operations to collect economic information and technology to support its economic 
development and security. It continues to take information warfare to a new level, 
working to fan anti-U.S. and anti-Western sentiment both within Russia and globally.  
 
 The most significant human rights problems in Russia in 2015 involved 
restrictions on the ability to choose one’s government and freedoms of expression, 
assembly, association, and the media, as well as internet freedom; political 
prosecutions and administration of justice; and government discrimination against racial, 
ethnic, religious, and sexual minorities. Other problems included allegations of torture 
and excessive force by law enforcement officials; executive branch pressure on the 
judiciary; electoral irregularities; and extensive official corruption. The government failed 
to take steps to prosecute or punish most officials who committed abuses. 
 
 Although Russian law prohibits officials from entering a private residence except 
in cases prescribed by federal law or when authorized by a judicial decision, 
government officials entered residences and premises without warrants. While Russian 
law also prohibits government monitoring of correspondence, telephone conversations, 
and other means of communication without a warrant, government officials engaged in 
electronic surveillance without appropriate authorization.  
 
 In October 2016, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and Office of 
the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) issued a Joint Statement on Election 
Security, stating that the U.S. intelligence community was confident that the Russian 
government directed recent compromises of emails from U.S. persons and institutions, 
including from U.S. political organizations. In December 2016, the DHS, ODNI, and the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation released a Joint Analysis Report stating that activity by 
Russian intelligence services has been part of a decade-long campaign of cyber-
enabled operations directed at the U.S. Government and its citizens. The campaign 
included spear phishing; targeting of government organizations, critical infrastructure, 
think tanks, universities, political organizations, and corporations; theft of information 
from these organizations; and the recent public release of some of this stolen 
information.  
 
8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Exec. Or. 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Exec. Or. 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I considered the following relevant: 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or government protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a foreign 
intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct includes: 
 
10 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant looked at pornography on his work computer from around February 
2014 through February 2015. He estimated at the hearing that he looked at 
pornography at work an average of 15 to 30 minutes daily. He did not tell anyone at the 
time that he was looking at pornography at work because he knew it was improper. 
While he denied that he ever mischarged to the government contract any time in which 
he looked at pornography at work, the investigation conducted by the primary defense 
contractor concluded that he had. The primary contractor paid $21,577 to the U.S. 
Government for Applicant’s mischarged time and his then-employer had to repay the 
money to the primary contractor. He acknowledged during his July 2016 background 
interview that the $20,000 was restitution for an established 100 hours of computer use 
during work hours for personal purposes. Finally, the letter memorializing his meeting 
with the debarment officials indicates that he accepted responsibility for mischarging a 
government contract for misspent time. AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d), and 16(e) apply. 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 and considered 
the following relevant:  
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur. 
 
Applicant’s conduct of viewing pornography on his work computer daily from 
February 2014 through February 2015 was a serious offense. He immediately 
acknowledged his conduct once it was discovered through computer monitoring, and he 
then immediately reported such conduct to his then-employer as well as his current 
employer. He complied with all requirements imposed on him by his current employer 
and he has not had any other unfavorable issues. He attended SAA meetings, and he 
disclosed his conduct and consequent termination to his wife.  
 
Applicant has not, however, taken full responsibility for his conduct. Again, he 
denied that he ever mischarged the government contract to which he was assigned for 
time spent viewing pornographic material on his work computer. Yet, the investigation 
conducted by the primary defense contractor concluded that he had. Moreover, the 
letter memorializing his meeting with the debarment officials clearly states that he had 
accepted such responsibility. As such, his reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness 
remain questionable. I find that AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) are not established. 
 
 
11 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology 
 
AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern for use of information technology:  
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information. This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations. 
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I considered the following relevant: 
(e) unauthorized use of any information technology system. 
 
Applicant looked at pornography on his work computer from around February 
2014 through February 2015. He did not tell anyone at the time that he was looking at 
pornography at work because he knew it was improper. AG ¶ 40(e) applies. 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 and considered 
the following relevant:  
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
For the same reasons set forth above in my Guideline E analysis, I find that AG ¶  
41(a) is not established. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern for foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
 
12 
 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I considered the following relevant: 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, 
and its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the 
United States. In considering the nature of the government, an administrative judge 
must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where 
family members resided). 
 
AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
Applicant’s parents-in-law and brother-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Russia, and his father-in-law is a former officer in the Russian military. While Applicant 
testified that his father-in-law is estranged from the family, his wife talks to her father 
several times yearly and she saw him in Russia so that he could meet his grandson. 
Applicant’s wife is close to her mother and brother. She talks to them frequently. She 
visits them in Russia once yearly, and she most recently traveled to Russia in 2018 for 
her brother’s wedding.  
 
 
13 
 
Russia is one of the leading state intelligence threats to U.S. interests. It remains 
one of the top two most aggressive and capable collectors of sensitive U.S. economic 
information and technologies, particularly in cyberspace. Non-cyberspace collection 
methods include targeting of U.S. visitors overseas, especially if the visitors are 
assessed as having access to sensitive information. It continues to take information 
warfare to a new level, working to fan anti-U.S. and anti-Western sentiment both within 
Russia and globally. Russian government officials enter private residences and premises 
without warrants, and engage in electronic surveillance without appropriate authorization. 
Applicant’s in-laws in Russia create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply. 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 and considered 
the following relevant:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant’s parents-in-law and brother-in-law are Russian citizens residing in 
Russia. Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(a) is not established for the reasons set out in the 
above discussion of AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e). Applicant’s wife maintains regular 
contact with her family in Russia. She also travels to Russia once yearly to visit them. 
AG ¶ 8(c) is not established. 
 
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen residing in the United States. He served 
honorably in the U.S. military from 1990 to 1994. His wife became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 2014 and renounced her Russian citizenship in 2016. Their children are 
native-born U.S. citizens. Though Applicant received $90,000 in 2013 from the sale of 
his mother-in-law’s condominium in Russia, neither he nor his wife have received or 
expect to receive any additional money from anyone in Russia. Applicant has 
substantial financial interests in the United States and neither he nor his wife have any 
such interests in Russia. He has complied with security requirements and reported his 
foreign travels and receipt of money from his mother-in-law to his FSO. These are all 
 
14 
 
factors that weigh in Applicant’s favor. However, his ties to his family in Russia through 
his wife are also as strong. As such, Applicant has not met his burden of 
demonstrating that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
AG ¶ 8(b) is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E, M, and B in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I assessed Applicant’s credibility at the hearing. He has not taken responsibility 
for mischarging a government contract for time spent viewing pornographic material at 
work. As such, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the personal conduct, use of information technology, and foreign influence 
security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
 
 
15 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.c:    Against APPLICANT 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Candace Le’i Garcia 
Administrative Judge 
