 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03124 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 13, 2015. 
On November 15, 2016, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent her a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guideline F.1 Applicant responded to the SOR on December 2, 2016, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 25, 2018. 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on June 
12, 2018, and the hearing was convened on July 11, 2018. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
through 5 were admitted in evidence. Applicant testified. The record was held open so 
that Applicant could submit additional evidence. She submitted Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, 
her Chapter 7 bankruptcy case number, and Department Counsel submitted GE 6, the 
bankruptcy filing. Both were admitted into evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on July 24, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old custodian employed by a defense contractor since 2013. 
She graduated from high school in 2011. She married in 2014 and divorced in 2015. She 
has no children. She previously held an interim security clearance granted in 2016, but it 
was revoked in 2018. 
 
The SOR alleges seven delinquent debts totaling over $11,962. In her answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR debts except for SOR ¶ 1.f, a small collection 
account. Applicant testified that she worked part time from February 2013 to January 
2014, and full time beginning in February 2014. She admitted owing between $10,000 
and $20,000 in debt, and began the process of filing a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in March 
2017 but owed documentation to her attorney. She completed the bankruptcy filing on 
August 8, 2018, and declared $23,116 in liabilities with an annual income of $23,712. The 
record is devoid of a final disposition of the bankruptcy.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e are unpaid medical debts. Applicant has not made 
any inquiries about these debts, nor has she instituted a payment plan. SOR ¶ 1.c is a 
vehicle loan debt. Applicant bought the car with her husband, and became responsible 
for the debt after the divorce. The car was repossessed. Applicant was paying a 
settlement amount to recover the car, but she stopped payments when they became too 
difficult. The debt remains unresolved. SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g remain unresolved and no 
inquiries have been made to settle the debts. Applicant’s debts date back to 2014 and 
2015, and are documented in credit bureau reports. 
 
In testimony, Applicant indicated that she lives paycheck-to-paycheck, with take-
home pay of $706 per month, and monthly expenses of $1,140. She has a negative net 
income of -$434. Applicant avoids buying clothes and entertainment to meet her monthly 
expenses. Applicant has no savings or checking account funds, and was unaware of the 
balance on her 401k. She has not sought independent financial counseling, although it is 
presumed she completed the online court mandated counseling required before filing 
bankruptcy. 
 
Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, on June 8, 2017. The revised guidelines are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
 
3 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
4 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s admissions, testimony, and the documentary evidence in the record 
are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial irresponsibility that dates back to at least 2014. 
Despite full-time employment since 2014, she has not responsibly addressed her 
delinquent debts in a good faith or timely manner. Her delinquent debts may have been 
incurred under circumstances that were beyond her control, to include underemployment 
and a 2015 divorce, but she has not shown sufficient evidence of attempts to resolve the 
debts over the past three years and any movement toward their resolution. Her 
bankruptcy filing may give her a clean start in the future, however it is unresolved and has 
come too late to consider for mitigation in this case at this time. I am not convinced that 
Applicant has control of her finances, can live within her means, and that further 
delinquencies are unlikely to recur. There is insufficient evidence of debt resolution or 
financial responsibility. No mitigating condition fully applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Applicant is young and a relatively new entrant in the workforce, however she 
incurred debts that she should have addressed over the past several years, especially 
given the time since they were first raised under her security clearance processing. She 
has not shown that she is now financially stable and able to adequately address her 
financial responsibilities in a timely manner. Accordingly, I conclude she has not carried 
her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of 
the United States to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
