1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) 
           --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-03361 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leon J. Schachter, Esq.  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KATAUSKAS, Philip J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for access 
to classified information. He presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concern stemming from his use of information technology. 
Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 17, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
his circumstances raised a security concern under Guideline M for his use of his 
employer’s information technology.1 Applicant answered the SOR on November 17, 2017, 
and requested a hearing.  
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended, as well as Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive). In 
addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), 
effective within the Defense Department on June 8, 2017, apply here. 
 
 
2 
 
  
 On August 15, 2018, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held. 
Applicant and one character witness testified, and the exhibits offered by the Government 
and by Applicant were admitted into the administrative record without objection. 
(Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2; Applicant Exhibits (AE) F through L.)2 The transcript 
of the hearing (Tr.) was received on August 21, 2018. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 At the outset of the hearing, counsel for Applicant moved to dismiss the SOR on 
the grounds that the SOR, the Answer, GE 1, and GE 2 failed to state a prima facie case 
for disqualification under Guideline M. The Government objected on a number of grounds, 
principally that administrative judges do not have the authority under the Directive to grant 
motions to dismiss and that Applicant’s admissions in the Answer and GE 2 made out a 
prima facie case. Applicant’s counsel countered that the Directive is silent on whether 
administrative judges have the authority to grant such motions, but it does expressly grant 
the authority to rule on matters of procedure.3 The Directive does expressly grant judges 
the authority to “rule on questions on procedure, discovery, and evidence . . . .”4 I denied 
the motion on the grounds that a motion to dismiss is not a question of procedure but 
rather goes to the merits of the case.5 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
            Applicant is 58 years old, married, and has two adult children, a son and a 
daughter. He has a Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering and Mathematics, a 
Master of Science in Electrical and Computer Engineering, and a Doctorate in 
Engineering Sciences. Applicant is a nationally known expert in electronic security. He 
has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since February 1991.6 
 
             The SOR made two allegations under Guideline M. First, it alleged that Applicant 
used his company laptop to view pornography from about December 2015 to December 
2016. Second, it alleged that Applicant violated his employer’s policy when he used his 
home network, instead of his employer’s virtual private network (VPN) to establish a 
network connection on his company network, from about December 2015 to December 
2016.7 Applicant admitted that he viewed pornography on his company laptop but did so 
                                                          
2 Applicant attached to his Answer documents that he marked as AE A through AE E.   
 
3 Tr. 9-15.  
 
4 Directive ¶ E3.1.10.  
 
5 Tr. 16. 
 
6 Tr. 20-23; AE A; AE F.  
 
7 SOR ¶ 1. “A virtual private network (VPN) extends a private network across a public network, and 
enables users to send and receive data across shared public networks is if their computing devices were 
directly connected to the private network. Applications running across a VPN may therefore benefit from 
3 
 
at home, during non-workhours and that at the time he did not believe his company’s 
policy prohibited such use. Applicant denied that establishing a network connection using 
his home network instead of using his employer’s VPN violated company policy.8 As a 
result of those alleged security violations, Applicant was given a warning, a two day 
suspension (unpaid leave), and his access to classified information was taken away.9 
 
             In his Answer, Applicant cited a number of extenuating circumstances he faced 
during the time he was viewing pornography, which he claimed caused him to suffer from 
“a temporary lapse of judgment.” First, there was “great personal loss” caused by the 
deaths of two very close family members. Second, Applicant and his wife were 
experiencing a “particularly challenging time in their marriage.” Third, he was managing 
his career and his diabetes diagnosis. Applicant very much regrets his behavior. He and 
his wife are seeing a marriage counselor, and Applicant is also seeing a counselor on his 
own.10 
 
             Applicant submitted his company performance evaluations for 2014 through 
2017. He is regularly praised for his technical expertise, his broad knowledge, and his 
interpersonal and communication skills. Applicant displays an “engaging ability to explain 
complex topics in understandable terms.”11  
 
             Applicant submitted three character affidavits of professional colleagues who 
have known him for 10 to 20 years. Each affiant had reviewed the SOR. Nonetheless, 
they uniformly praised his reliability, integrity, and trustworthiness and that Applicant is 
worthy of holding a security clearance.12  
 
            Applicant’s spouse of more than 30 years also submitted an affidavit. While she 
knows that Applicant has viewed pornography and finds it offensive, it is not a significant 
factor in their marriage difficulties. She also observed that the recent deaths of two close 
family members caused Applicant stress and deep grief. She said that Applicant’s sense 
                                                          
the functionality, security, and management of the private network.” 
https:en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_private_network, citing Mason, Andrew G., Cisco Secure Virtual Private 
Network at 7 (Cisco Press 2002). 
 
8 Answer ¶¶ 1.a-1.b. Applicant viewed pornography about three to four times per week. GE 2, p. 1.   
 
9 GE 2, pp. 5-6. Applicant was allowed to serve the suspension during the Christmas holidays. Id., p. 3.  
 
10 Answer ¶ 1.a. Applicant’s wife knows about his viewing of pornography but has no interest in participating. 
GE 2, pp. 1-2; AE C5. Applicant also told his children and certain co-workers about security issues. GE 2, 
p. 6. 
 
11 AE B1-B3; AE I.  
 
12 AE C1-C3. Applicant’s character witness testified and simply adopted his character affidavit, AE C3. Tr. 
43-46. AE C4 was identified on the exhibit list as being attached to the Answer, but it was not in the Answer 
that I was provided. 
  
4 
 
of duty, patriotism, and personal honor would never let him improperly divulge classified 
information.13  
 
             After losing his access to classified information, Applicant began seeing a clinical 
therapist in about February 2017.14 Applicant submitted a July 26, 2018 letter from his 
licensed clinical therapist, whom he had been seeing weekly since March 16, 2017. The 
therapist reported that Applicant sought her help so that his viewing of pornography would 
not recur. She stated that he is “committed to the therapeutic process” so that he would 
not revert to viewing pornography. In her opinion, Applicant does not have any mental 
health disorder or personality traits that warrant any concern for his ability to function in a 
work environment.15  
 
             Applicant submitted a March 15, 2018 report of an evaluation conducted on 
February 2, 2018, by a licensed psychologist who was retained by Applicant’s counsel. 
The psychologist reviewed the SOR, interviewed Applicant for about three hours, and 
administered a well-known psychological test. Applicant produced valid test results, from 
which the psychologist concluded that Applicant is “honest, regardless of incentives and 
temptations to be dishonest.” The psychologist also found that Applicant does not warrant 
any mental health diagnosis and that he “does not suffer from an addiction to 
pornography, and his inappropriate use of pornography is something he has already 
discontinued without problem.” The final psychologist’s conclusion was that Applicant is 
“fit to hold any security clearance that is relevant for his job duties and that he will not 
deviate from expected procedures in the future.”16 
 
            Applicant testified about his viewing of pornography on a company laptop. He was 
authorized to take his company laptop home, when he was on business travel, and to use 
it after work hours. He rationalized viewing pornography on his company laptop, because 
he was at home, after work, was not connected to his office network, and was not sending 
out any confidential information. In addition, Applicant’s home network is password  
protected. It was as if he had simply inserted a DVD containing pornography on his 
company laptop after work hours. Applicant presumes, but does not know, that his 
company monitored its laptop’s logs to keep track of network transactions, and that his 
transactions viewing pornography were in those logs. It was only after that discovery that 
he was made aware that viewing pornography was contrary to company policy. Applicant 
will never again view pornography on his company laptop. At the time, however, he did 
not believe that viewing pornography outside of work hours, at home, on a company 
laptop not connected to the company network, was a security violation.17 
                                                          
13 AE C5.  
 
14 GE 2, p. 4.  
 
15 AE G2. 
  
16 AE G1.  
 
17 Tr. 25-27, 33-34. This is consistent with Applicant’s May 16, 2017 Affidavit. GE 2.  
 
5 
 
             Applicant testified about his use of his home network instead of his company’s 
VPN to establish a network connection on his company laptop. He believed that the use 
of the company VPN was optional, not mandatory. In fact, his company’s IT department 
and its cybersecurity staff recommended that he not use the company’s VPN so he could 
access certain sites that were blocked on the corporate network. Using his own network 
instead of his company’s network was not an attempt to evade discovery of his viewing 
of pornography. Applicant knew at all times that his use of the company laptop would be 
monitored by the company. If he wanted to evade discovery, he could have deleted or 
edited the logs on his company laptop or used anonymous sources. He did neither.18 
 
             Applicant explained several reasons for not using the company’s VPN. First, 
although the VPN works fine when in the home office, during business travel it is 
unreliable. He travels extensively and not being able to work on his company laptop two 
weeks out of a month because the VPN is not functioning is a hindrance. Second, certain 
applications do not work on the VPN. For example, one application (web conferencing) 
works while at the home office, but outside of the home office it does not work on the 
VPN. Third, when the VPN breaks down, there is a risk to the entire system. Once when 
that happened, it wiped out his computer, and they had to reinstall the entire operating 
system. On another occasion, there were some incorrect settings, and for two weeks the 
VPN did not work.19 
 
            The following are the pertinent provisions of the company’s VPN Policy (called 
“Wireless Networking and Mobile Device Practice”):20  
 
             • The policy covers “Wireless devices” (which includes laptop computers) (section 
1.2). 
 
             • The policy covers “Wireless networks” (section 1.2). 
 
             • The policy applies to both company-owned and personally-owned equipment 
(section 1.3).  
 
             • When the employee is away from the home office, the policy states: “You may 
use all forms of wireless communications devices. To reduce risk, we recommend that 
you: • Connect to known, password-protected networks where possible;   
 
        • If using a [company computer], immediately establish a VPN connection to the 
[company] network. This will encrypt all data traffic and will provide [company] network 
protections” (section 2.2). (Emphasis added.)  
 
                                                          
18 Tr. 27-29.  
 
19 Tr. 29-30.  
 
20 AE E.  
6 
 
             • Personal Use: You are permitted to use [company] wireless devices for 
incidental personal activities, provided you follow the prohibitions on accessing 
pornography, gambling, etc. . . . (Appendix A, section 2.7.) (Emphasis added.) 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individuals are eligible for access to classified information 
“only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to authorize 
such access. E.O. 10865 § 2; SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶¶ 2(c), 2(d). 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” SEAD-4, Appendix A, ¶ 2(b). See also SEAD-4, ¶ E.4. 
Moreover, the Supreme Court has held that officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Discussion 
 
Guideline M – Use of Information Technology 
 
The security concern for the use of information technology is set out in AG ¶ 39:   
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, mobile, 
or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, manipulate, 
protect, or move information. This includes any component, whether 
integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, software, or 
firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 40. One is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
 (e) unauthorized use of any information technology  system.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
under AG ¶ 41. One is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
              
Applicant admitted that he viewed pornography on his company laptop from 
December 2015 to December 2016. That does not, however, settle the issue. The SOR 
did not allege that viewing pornography on a company laptop violated company policy.  
Nor did the parties address the applicability of the company VPN Policy to pornography.  
Indeed, one of Applicant’s defenses was that until his viewing was discovered, he was 
unaware that such conduct violated company policy. The VPN Policy, however, has a 
clear, express prohibition on accessing pornography using company devices. Therefore, 
disqualifying condition AG ¶ 40(e) is triggered. The question is whether the security 
concern it implicates is mitigated.  
 
There are a number of extenuating circumstances working in Applicant’s favor. 
First, he has been employed by his current employer since 1991. Not only is that rare in 
the defense industry, it speaks to the high value his employer places on Applicant’s work. 
Second, Applicant’s past four years of performance evaluations have been stellar. Third, 
Applicant’s four character affidavits were written by individuals who have known him 
personally and professionally for 10 years or more and who had read the SOR. They 
speak highly of his reliability, integrity, and trustworthiness. Fourth, at the time, two very 
close family members had died. Applicant felt deep sorrow for that loss. Fifth, he was also 
dealing with his own demanding career and with his diabetic condition. Sixth, there were 
8 
 
problems with his marriage, which Applicant and his spouse were addressing. Even 
before the SOR was issued (in October 2017), of his own volition, Applicant began weekly 
counseling sessions with a clinical therapist in March 2017. Her diagnosis is that he has 
no mental health disorder, and her prognosis is that Applicant will not revert to viewing 
pornography. Finally, an independent examination by a licensed psychologist found no 
basis for any mental health diagnosis and that Applicant is not addicted to pornography. 
 
The picture that emerges is a concatenation of circumstances that overtaxed 
Applicant’s judgment, and for a year (after more than 30 years as a professional), he 
resorted to pornography for relief. It was not secret or hidden from his wife or two adult 
children. Such a chain of circumstances is so unusual that it is unlikely to recur, and this 
episode does not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
AG ¶ 41(a) applies. I find in favor of Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleged that Applicant violated company policy by using his company 
laptop using his home network instead of his employer’s network. Applicant denied that 
allegation, thereby putting the burden on the Government to prove that allegation. The 
VPN Policy addresses those instances when an employee is away from the home office. 
In those cases, the Policy counsels employees that they may use “all forms of wireless 
communication devices.” It goes on to make four recommendations. The first 
recommendation is to connect “to known, password-protected networks where possible.” 
That is exactly what Applicant did – he connected to his home network, which is 
password-protected. In plain English, to “recommend” something does not mandate it. In 
fact, when the VPN Policy wanted to mandate something, it did so clearly by prohibiting 
the accessing of pornography. It did not mandate the use of the company VPN when 
employees were out of the office. It merely recommended that. The Government has not 
met its burden proof. I find in favor of Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.b.  
 
 Applicant’s testimony was thoughtful, candid, and credible, often on a difficult 
subject. The record does not raise doubts about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, 
I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed 
the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-
person concept.21 Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met his ultimate burden of 
persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M (Information Technology):         For Applicant 
                                                          
21 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)-(9). See also, ISCR Case No. 17-00506 at 3 (Aug. 7, 2018) (Administrative Judges must 
consider the evidence as a whole and not in an isolated or piecemeal fashion). 
 
9 
 
 
      Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:                     For Applicant 
 
    Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information.  
 
 
Philip J. Katauskas 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
