 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
---------------- )       ISCR Case No. 17-01396 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
December 7, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On December 8, 2015, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On May 23, 2017, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) 
and G (Alcohol Consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on August 1, 2017, and 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) prepared by Department Counsel, 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
consisting of Items 1 to 5, was provided to Applicant on September 6, 2017. Applicant 
received received the file on September 21, 2017.1 
 
 Applicant was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not submit additional 
information. The case was assigned to me on January 17, 2018. Based upon a review 
of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions2 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG 
promulgated in SEAD 4. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 58 and single. He has an associate’s degree and has been 
employed by a defense contractor since 1982 as a production planner. He has held a 
security clearance since approximately 1984 and seeks to retain national security 
eligibility for access to classified information in connection with his employment. (Item 3 
at Sections 12, 13A, and 25.) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
1 Department Counsel submitted five Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 4 is inadmissible. It is 
the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of 
Personnel Management on March 25, 2016. Applicant did not adopt the summary as his own statement, 
or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation (ROI) 
summary is inadmissible in the Government’s case in chief in the absence of an authenticating witness. 
(See Executive Order 10865 § 5.) In light of Applicant’s admissions, Item 4 is also cumulative. Applicant 
is not legally trained and might not have understood Department Counsel’s FORM footnote 2, which 
described the potential admissibility of Item 4. I therefor reviewed it for any potentially mitigating 
information that Applicant might have thought would be considered. Any such mitigating information will 
be discussed later in this decision. 
2 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J: Criminal Conduct)  
 
 The Government alleged in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for national 
security eligibility because he has a history of criminal conduct. Applicant admitted all 
three allegations under this paragraph. 
 
 1.a. Applicant was arrested for Driving While Intoxicated (DWI) in April 2011. 
Applicant pled guilty and was sentenced to two years of probation, and 12 months and 5 
days in jail, with 11 months and 25 days suspended. Appellant stated that he spent two 
weekends at the city jail farm. (Item 3 at Section 22.) 
 
 1.b. Applicant was arrested a second time for DWI on December 18, 2015. This 
was about a week after signing his e-QIP (Item 3), in which he discussed his first DWI 
arrest. He pled guilty on April 19, 2016, and was sentenced to spend ten days in jail, 
three years of probation, suspension of his driver’s license for three years, and he was 
required to take and complete an Outpatient Substance Abuse Program. His probation 
will end in approximately April 2019. (Item 5.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted that he drank alcohol on July 22, 2016, while taking a 26-
week substance abuse program. His alcohol use was discovered because Applicant 
was tested by the program. His treatment program was extended from 26 weeks to 36 
weeks. Applicant stated in his response to DoD CAF interrogatories that he completed 
the program on March 23, 2017. Applicant has been diagnosed with Moderate Alcohol 
Use Disorder. He further stated that he goes to Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) one to two 
times a week. Applicant submitted no documentary information from the counseling 
program to support his statement that he had successfully completed it. (Item 5.) 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 The Government alleged in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for national 
security eligibility because he abuses intoxicants to excess. Applicant admitted the sole 
allegation under this paragraph, which states that the conduct set forth under Paragraph 
1, above, is cognizable under this paragraph as well. 
 
 Applicant stated in his response to interrogatories that he stopped drinking 
alcohol on July 22, 2016. He further stated that he stopped using alcohol because he 
had received a second DWI, and his personal health. Applicant also stated that he had 
no intention of using alcohol in the future. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant did not submit any evidence concerning the quality of his job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that, AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, “The 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J, Criminal Conduct) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 31 contains five disqualifying conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three conditions apply: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness;  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; 
and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Applicant had alcohol-related arrests and convictions for Driving While 
Intoxicated in 2011 and 2015. He is currently on probation for the 2015 arrest until April 
2019. All three of these disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 32 contains four conditions that could mitigate criminal 
conduct security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense;  and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct, as described in the Findings of Fact, was serious, recent, 
and criminal. He is on probation until April 2019. He has introduced insufficient evidence 
to support a finding that he has mitigated his misconduct under this guideline. 
Paragraph 1 is found against Applicant. 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption) 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 22 contains seven disqualifying conditions that could raise 
a security concern and may be disqualifying. Six conditions possibly apply to the facts in 
this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g., physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical 
social worker) of alcohol use disorder; 
 
(e) the failure to follow treatment advice once diagnosed;  
 
(f) alcohol consumption, which is not in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, after a diagnosis of alcohol use disorder; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Applicant has a history of drinking to excess, as shown by the two alcohol-related 
incidents set forth in the SOR and discussed above. The last incident was in December 
2015. He entered treatment in 2016, and the treatment was extended from twenty-six 
weeks to thirty-six weeks because he drank while in the program, which violated 
program rules and the pertinent court order.   
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 23 contains four conditions that could mitigate alcohol 
consumption security concerns.  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations;  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
 None of the mitigating conditions were established in this case. Applicant had 
two alcohol-related arrests for Driving While Intoxicated, the last in December 2015. He 
states he successfully completed his outpatient treatment, but did not provide any 
supporting documentation. He states that he has been abstinent from alcohol since July 
2016, but once again we have no evidence to support Applicant’s statement. Applicant 
appears to have difficulty accepting or admitting he has a problem with alcohol. 
Considering all the available evidence, I find that not enough time has passed without 
an incident to be confident that he will not resume drinking and acting irresponsibly 
while under the influence. Paragraph 2 is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d): 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility and a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence as 
described above leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as to Applicant=s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. In sufficient time has passed since his 
second DWI conviction to demonstrate rehabilitation, and the likelihood or recurrence 
remains significant. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guidelines for Criminal Conduct and Alcohol 
Consumption. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
