 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03929 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 30, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 5, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
 
2 
 
 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on March 29, 
2018. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant did not submit a response to the 
FORM or object to the Government’s documents. Items 1 through 6 are admitted into 
evidence. The case was assigned to me on June 29, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a. In the FORM, the 
Government put Applicant on notice that it amended the SOR and added allegations ¶¶ 
1.b and 2.b. They are as follows:  
 
1.b: You are indebted to Bank of America for an account that has been charged 
off in the approximate amount of $9,841. This account remains delinquent. 
 
2.b: You falsified material facts on a Questionnaire for National Security Positions, 
executed by you on June 22, 2016, in response to “Section 26-Financial Record. In the 
past seven (7) years, have you had a judgment entered against you?; have you had a 
lien placed against your property for failing to pay taxes or other debts?; Have you had 
any possessions or property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed?; have 
you had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency?; have you had any account or 
credit card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed?; have you 
been over 120 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” You deliberately failed to disclose that 
which is set forth in subparagraph 1.b, above.  
 
Applicant did not respond to the amended allegations. His failure to respond is 
construed as denials to these allegations. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old. He earned an associate’s degree in 2005 and a 
bachelor’s degree in 2011. He married in 1995 and divorced in 1999. He remarried in 
2001. He has a 15-year-old child from that marriage. He has worked for the same federal 
contractor since 2003.1  
 
 Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA) in June 2016. Section 
26 of the SCA asked if in the past seven years he had a judgment entered against him?; 
had a lien placed against his property for failing to pay taxes or other debts?; had any 
possession or property voluntarily or involuntarily repossessed or foreclosed; had bills or 
debts turned over to a collection agency?; had any account or credit card suspended, 
charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed?; had he been over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt(s); or was he currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt(s)? 
Applicant responded “no.”  
 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in July 2017. He told the 
investigator that his financial situation was good. He was maximizing his 401K 
contributions and utilizing a health spending account. He was paying his bills on time. He 
was asked to confirm his response of “no” on his SCA under Section 26, which he did. 
He was then confronted with the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a that is a $22,982 charged-off 
account in collection.2  
 
Applicant explained he did not disclose this debt because he did not believe there 
was any negative entry on his credit report within the last seven years. He further stated 
that in 2008, his wife was self-employed in a business and they established a line-of-
credit for the business. In 2010, the business was closed. The monthly payments on the 
line-of-credit account were high. His spouse contacted the creditor to work out a different 
payment plan, but the creditor declined. His spouse stopped making payments and the 
account was charged off and sent to collection. Applicant told the investigator that he had 
no intention of paying the account because the creditor was not willing to negotiate with 
his spouse. He further stated that he would research his options and resolve the debt if 
he deemed it was the best option. The debt is listed as a joint account.3 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR he stated when he responded to the inquiry on 
the SCA that he did not intentionally falsify his answer. He said: 
 
When answered with the best of my knowledge at the time I felt without a 
doubt the debt was not on my credit report. This answer was close[,] so 
close that only a mere 8 months separate the timeline.4  
 
He further stated:  
 
When I signed the information, I signed it to the best of my knowledge. And 
to the best of my knowledge at the time I actually believe[d] the debt was 
already removed from my credit report based on the last credit report I 
remember getting (2013) and the time in which I applied and answered the 
question presented to me. I have provided supporting documentation to 
help assist in this matter.5  
 
Applicant provided an additional clarification statement. He said: 
 
During this time, I filled out the questionnaire online I do remember the 
question and at the time and to the best of my knowledge I believed the 
debt was already off my credit report otherwise I would have most certainly 
                                                          
2 Item 5. 
 
3 Items 3, 5. 
 
4 Item 3. 
 
5 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
 
halted the application process at that time. I have provide[d] a credit report 
from 2013 which describes or estimates when this charge off would be 
removed from my credit report (March 2017). The time frame of the estimate 
of removal on the 2013 credit report and actual date March 2017 is roughly 
8 months. I do not see the debt on these reports in October 2017 which tells 
me in fact that the debt was removed and de-obligated.6  
 
 Applicant provided a copy of his April 2013 credit report that shows under the 
section “adverse accounts” the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is a joint account that was closed in 
April 2010, with the last payment made in March 2010, and the original charged off 
amount was $21,782. Under the remarks sections it states: “Purchased by another 
lender-unpaid balance charged off. Estimated month and year that this item will be 
removed 03/2017.”7  
 
 The April 2013 credit report also lists under “adverse accounts” the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.b. It reports under “responsibility-authorized account.” It does not list Applicant as a joint 
owner or individual owner. Although the account was delinquent, charged off, and 
expected to be removed from his credit report in November 2016, Applicant is not 
responsible for the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Therefore, he also was not required to 
disclose it on his SCA as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b.8   
 
 Applicant’s September 2016 credit report indicates the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is held 
by a collection company.9 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he denied the debt, stating: 
“Credit reports attached from 2017 do not show this debt and to the best of my knowledge 
this debt has been de-obligated and charged off by the institution.” Applicant offered no 
evidence that he paid the debt, received an IRS form for cancelation of the debt, or made 
any effort to resolve the debt with the collection company. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
6 Item 3. 
 
7 Item 3 at pages 13-16. Specific pages of the credit report that reflect this debt are handwritten at the 
bottom of the page.  
 
8 Item 3 at 13-16. 
 
9 Item 6. 
 
5 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant completed his SCA in June 2016. He stated that he believed at the time 
he completed the SCA that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a had fallen off his 2013 credit report. 
The SCA asked if in the past seven years if he had a debt that was charged off?, had bills 
or debts turned over to a collection agency?; had any account or credit card suspended, 
charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed?; had he been over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt(s)? It did not ask about the status of a debt on his credit report. 
Applicant was confronted with the debt by the investigator. He admitted the debt was 
charged off and was in collection. He admitted he and his wife owed the debt, and he did 
not intend to pay it. He stated they stopped paying the debt in 2010, within the seven year 
period of the disclosure requirement. Even if Applicant’s explanation is believed, the fact 
is the delinquent debt was on his 2013 credit report that he reviewed when he completed 
the SCA. It was also within the seven-year disclosure period. He did not promptly advise 
the investigator of this information.  
 
Applicant’s explanation for not disclosing the debt was that “the time frame of the 
estimate of removal on the 2013 credit report and the actual date March 2017 is roughly 
8 months.” Presumably, he is referring to the date he completed his SCA in June 2016 
and the date the debt was to be removed from the credit report was eight months later. 
That statement confirmed that he was aware of the debt and calculating the date it would 
be removed from his credit report because he did not intend to pay it. His explanation was 
not credible. It appears Applicant was calculating dates and looking for a way not to report 
the debt. Applicant intentionally omitted and falsified information on his SCA. AG ¶ 16(a) 
applies to SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant was not required to report the debt in SOR ¶ 2.b because 
he was an authorized user and not responsible for the debt, so he was not required to 
report it. SOR ¶ 2.b is found in his favor.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
7 
 
 
The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 17(a). There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude that Applicant made a prompt, good-faith effort to correct his 
omissions. He was given an opportunity to report this information to the government 
investigator and did not. When confronted with the delinquent debt, he admitted he and 
his wife owed the debt and did not intend to repay it. He did not believe it was negatively 
reflected on his credit report.  
 
Applicant was aware of the delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and intentionally 
chose not to disclose it, as he was required to do. The government relies on people to be 
forthcoming and honest on their SCA, even when it is derogatory information. AG ¶ 17(c) 
does not apply because deliberately failing to disclose requested information and 
swearing to its accuracy are not a minor offenses. I find Applicant’s omissions are serious 
and cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.10 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so. 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant acknowledged he and his wife obtained a line-of-credit for her business. 
They suspended the business in 2010. The creditor would not negotiate a new payment 
agreement, so Applicant and his wife made a decision not to pay the debt. He was aware 
the debt was in collection status and told the investigator he did not intend to pay the debt. 
However, he stated he would research his options and resolve the debt if deemed to the 
best option. He provided no evidence that he made any effort to repay this debt. The fact 
it is no longer reported on his credit report does not mean he does not owe the debt. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying condition 
for SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant was an authorized user for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.b and not 
responsible for it. I have found in his favor on this allegation.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant told the investigator that he is in a good financial position and invests for 
his retirement. He told the investigator he did not intend to pay the debt that he admitted 
he owed. He did not provide evidence that he researched payment options, as he told the 
investigator. Nor has he paid the debt or initiated a plan to pay it. There is no evidence 
that this matter is under control. Applicant’s failure to pay his financial obligation casts 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. None of the above 
mitigating conditions apply. 
  
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 43 years old. He is the joint owner of a debt incurred when his wife 
started a business. They obtained a line-of-credit and stopped paying it in 2010. The debt 
was charged off and sent to collection. Applicant was aware of the debt’s status, but 
intentionally failed to disclose it on his SCA. He has not met his burden of persuasion. 
The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline E, personal 
conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 
10 
 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
