 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02979 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 6, 2014. 
On January 19, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines E, F, and J.1 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 20, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 17, 2018. The 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on June 12, 2018, 
and the hearing was convened on July 11, 2018. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 15 
were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant and a witness testified. The 
record was held open for Applicant to submit documentary evidence. He submitted 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, consisting of letters regarding debt resolution efforts and two 
character letters. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 24, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old aircraft mechanic for a defense contractor, employed 
since 2009. He was laid off in March 2018 pending security eligibility. He previously 
worked for another company from 1999 to 2009, until he was terminated for his 
involvement in an embezzlement scheme. Applicant graduated from high school in 1983, 
and honorably served in the U.S. Army from 1983 to 1998, including a deployment to 
Saudi Arabia during Operation Desert Storm. He was married in 1986 and divorced in 
2003. He reconciled with his spouse in 2013, but remains unmarried. He has two children 
and three step children; all but one is an adult. He does not currently hold a security 
clearance. 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline E, that Applicant was a defendant in a civil suit 
for embezzlement of $627,000 from his former employer. Applicant was terminated from 
employment as a result of his involvement in the theft. This incident was cross-alleged 
under Guideline J, for criminal conduct. Also, under Guideline E, the SOR alleges 
Applicant falsified his 2014 SCA by failing to disclose his arrests in 2002 and 2011 for 
driving while intoxicated (DWI), and the civil lawsuit described above. In addition, the SOR 
alleges Applicant deliberately falsified his 2010 and 2015 personal subject interviews by 
deliberately concealing the reason he was terminated from his job in 2009, claiming he 
was fired because of his connection to his co-defendant and that he was not involved in 
theft from the company. Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges the embezzlement incident, 
and three delinquent credit accounts that have been charged-off or are in collections, 
totaling approximately $20,000. 
 
Applicant worked for his previous employer from 1999 to 2009. In about 2000, he 
became friendly with a co-worker (B), who was the company comptroller. They eventually 
became romantically involved. Eventually B became pregnant with Applicant’s child, who 
was born in 2002. From about 2002 to 2008, B used company funds to pay for her 
personal expenses, credit cards, mortgage, utilities, and other items, and used company 
funds to buy items for Applicant, including an all-terrain vehicle (ATV) and two rifles. B 
provided a credit card to Applicant in furtherance of the crime. Applicant stated that B 
usually paid the credit card for him, but that he also contributed money to her on occasion, 
but was not sure how it was spent. Among other uses of the credit card, B instructed 
Applicant to use his card to purchase $27,800 in gift cards, and turn them over to another 
employee at the company. Applicant suspected B was stealing from the company and 
suspected his supervisor was involved.2 At one point, B took Applicant’s credit card from 
                                                     
2 Applicant also implicated the company president in a separate scheme to overcharge on aircraft parts, 
but the allegations were not supported nor are they relevant to Applicant’s case. 
 
3 
 
him during a dispute, but it was later returned to Applicant by his supervisor. Applicant 
did not question why his supervisor would have his credit card, nor did he question B’s 
extravagant purchases and credit card use even though he suspected she did not earn 
enough to afford them. At least a year before the company discovered the theft, Applicant 
acknowledged that he knew about the scheme, and maintained his involvement. When 
Applicant was confronted by the company president in 2009, Applicant admitted to the 
theft scheme, but maintained that he only received the property purchased with stolen 
funds. Applicant continues to assert that although he knew of the theft and purchases 
with stolen funds, he did not directly steal from the company. He stated that he never 
directly asked B about the origins of her money or questioned B about purchases and 
unusual credit card use. He suspected B and his supervisor in the theft scheme, but never 
reported his suspicions to company officials or law enforcement for fear of losing his job. 
On March 30, 2009, when confronted by the company president, Applicant acknowledged 
the theft scheme. He was fired. In October 2009, B moved into Applicant’s home with him 
and Applicant considered her his “common law wife.” (GE 4) 
 
Applicant and B were sued by the company in May 2009, for embezzlement, 
breach of fiduciary duty, fraud, conversion, theft, and falsification of records. In 2010, the 
court granted the company a partial summary judgment as to liability only. B was 
convicted and imprisoned for theft of approximately $627,000 from the company. 
Applicant’s attorney requested the company agree to allow Applicant to return property 
purchased with company funds in lieu of prosecuting him. This was considered a partial 
reimbursement. Although Applicant’s attorney told him that he was likely to be sued, 
Applicant claimed that he was never served with the complaint or appeared in court, nor 
was he aware of the lawsuit and summary judgment until he received the SOR in 2018. 
For these reasons, he asserted that he did not report the lawsuit on his 2014 SCA. 
 
In his 2014 SCA, Applicant listed that he was fired in 2009 “because of conflict of 
interest.” Applicant was interviewed several times by Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigators, including in 2010 and 2015. In those interviews, he claimed that he 
was fired for his personal connection to B, but that he was not involved in any theft of 
money from the company. In a 2012 OPM interview, Applicant became uncomfortable 
during questioning regarding the theft scheme. Applicant refused to answer questions 
related to B’s involvement, and he abruptly left the interview before it was complete. (GE 
4) In testimony, Applicant admitted that he was not fully truthful in the answers he provided 
the investigators with respect to his involvement in the company theft scheme, stating 
that he was only 50% honest. 
 
In 2002, Applicant was arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI). 
He was placed on probation and the charge was dismissed at its conclusion. In 2011, he 
was arrested for DWI while driving on a military installation. He was administratively 
barred from driving on base for one year. Applicant did not report these arrests or charges 
on his 2014 SCA. Despite discussing them in his 2012 interview, he again failed to report 
the charges on his 2014 SCA. He testified that he did not fully understand the SCA 
questions related to criminal charges involving alcohol. 
 
 
4 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to a credit card company on an account 
that has been charged-off for about $14,943. Applicant noted after the hearing, that he 
contacted the creditor and they were unable to find the account. Applicant’s credit report 
of November 2014 (GE 14) shows the account was opened in 2001 and the last activity 
was in 2012. Applicant is listed as an authorized user on the account and disputed his 
responsibility for it. Two other delinquent accounts placed in collection were resolved after 
the hearing. (AE A) 
 
During testimony, Applicant was less than forthcoming, guarded, often unclear and 
disjointed when answering direct questions related to his involvement in the theft scheme 
and his knowledge at the time. He asserted that he was trying to answer questions 
truthfully and did not want to give deceptive answers. Applicant’s current human 
resources and assistant facility security officer testified to Applicant’s trustworthiness and 
honesty. The witness also provided a positive character letter, claiming that Applicant has 
overcome his past behavior, and it is no longer a concern. Likewise, Applicant’s current 
site manager also attested to Applicant’s good standing with the company, and stated 
that Applicant has not acted in a way to raise questions about his judgment. Both 
references claimed in similar language, that Applicant misunderstood SCA security 
questions or answered in a manner unique to him when he felt that questions were 
“misleading, misinformed or accusatory.” They also claimed that Applicant “reached out” 
to all of his creditors to resolve his delinquencies. 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
5 
 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E; Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition are potentially applicable: 
 
 
6 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information . . .  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations;  
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s 
time or resources;  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes:  
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing; and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The personal conduct alleged is generally sufficient to implicate 
AG ¶¶ 16 (a), (b), (d), (e), and (g). 
 
 
7 
 
Guideline E includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 and 
found the following relevant: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
Applicant’s participation in the theft scheme over a period of years is not mitigated 
by time, circumstance, or other actions he asserts mitigates his behavior. Applicant has 
not fully acknowledged the full extent of his involvement, but claimed he was only a 
passive and mostly unwitting participation as a receiver of stolen property. The evidence 
does not support his assertions. Applicant’s suspicions of B’s criminal conduct were 
raised long before he was confronted by the company president. Based on his romantic 
involvement and fear of losing his job, he chose to bury his head in the sand and did not 
ask obvious questions about the source of B’s money. After eventually acknowledging 
that B was stealing from the company, he should have known that his involvement in 
receiving property bought with stolen funds and the unusual use of a credit card, 
implicated him in the scheme. I find that Applicant willingly participated in the theft 
scheme, and in another error in judgment, allowed B to live with him after the crime was 
discovered and he was fired. He has not offered evidence of counseling nor taken full 
responsibility for his actions. Based on his guarded answers to direct questions during 
the hearing, he has not shown sufficient evidence of acknowledgment of his behavior and 
efforts in rehabilitation. I am not convinced that this incident is behind him or that similar 
irresponsible behavior will not recur. No mitigation fully applies to SOR ¶ 1.a. 
Applicant deliberately failed to provide truthful answers regarding his DWI arrests 
in his 2014 SCA. He has not shown sufficient evidence of misunderstanding the SCA 
questions or his inability to recall previous arrests and charges. No mitigation is fully 
applicable to SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant was unaware of the lawsuit filed against him as it was 
apparently resolved with his return of property purchased with stolen funds as a partial 
 
8 
 
reimbursement, and he was not criminally charged. I am convinced that, based on 
Applicant’s testimony that he did not knowingly fail to report the lawsuit in his 2014 SCA. 
However, the record evidence is sufficient to show that Applicant was intentionally 
untruthful when he failed to fully describe his involvement with B, the theft scheme, and 
reason for his firing, during his 2010 and 2015 OPM interviews. No mitigation fully applies 
to SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e. 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, employee 
theft, check fraud, expense account fraud, mortgage fraud, filing deceptive 
loan statements and other intentional financial breaches of trust. 
 
Applicant’s admissions, testimony, and the documentary evidence in the record 
are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
9 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s involvement in a financial theft scheme from his company was fully 
detailed above, and has not been mitigated by his partial reimbursement of property 
purchased with stolen funds. He has failed to fully acknowledge his involvement and 
instead chose to bury his head in the sand. Rather than cutting off his relationship once 
the theft scheme came to light and he was fired, he instead chose to live with B. He 
continues to assert his minimal participation, and has not shown rehabilitative actions. 
SOR ¶ 2.a has not been mitigated. The debts remaining under SOR ¶¶ 2.b-2.d, were 
addressed post-hearing and have been resolved. Mitigation credit for these allegations is 
appropriate. 
 
Overall, Applicant’s involvement in the theft scheme and debts that remained 
unresolved until after his hearing, reflect poorly on his overall financial management 
decisions and raise significant concerns about his personal financial responsibility. I am 
not convinced Applicant is financially responsible or makes good financial decisions. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for criminal conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(d) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant’s admissions, testimony, and the documentary evidence in the record 
are sufficient to establish the disqualifying condition above. 
 
10 
 
Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s involvement in the theft scheme spanned a considerable period of time. 
During that time, he chose to ignore the scheme and participated in its commission. At no 
time did he raise his suspicions with company officials or law enforcement for fear of his 
own job and relationship with B. Despite the discovery of the scheme and his firing, he 
permitted B to move in with him and considered her his “common law wife.” Applicant’s 
criminal behavior has not been mitigated by time, circumstance, or personal actions 
showing responsibility or rehabilitation. Despite the support of his current co-workers, he 
has not taken full responsibility for his actions and I am not convinced that his criminal 
behavior is behind him. No mitigation fully applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of fact 
and comments under Guidelines E, F, and J, in my whole-person analysis. I also 
considered his military service and partial reimbursement to the company by turning over 
property purchased with stolen money. However, his knowing involvement in the theft 
scheme and efforts to protect himself and B have not been overcome by evidence of 
mitigation. I remain unconvinced of his financial responsibility, good judgment, and ability 
to resist further criminal activity.  
 
Applicant’s reprehensible track record and continued efforts to minimize his 
involvement in the criminal scheme are expressly contrary to the behavior expected of 
clearance eligible personnel. Accordingly, I conclude Applicant has not carried his burden 
 
11 
 
of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United 
States to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b – 2.d:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
