 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 17-02438 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
December 26, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 20, 2016, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On August 4, 2017, the Department of 
Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and 
Substance Misuse). (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on June 8, 
2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on August 21, 2017, and 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) prepared by Department Counsel, 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
consisting of Items 1 to 4, was provided to Applicant on September 7, 2017. Applicant 
received received the file on September 25, 2017.1 
 
 Applicant was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted additional 
information in approximately November 2017. Department Counsel had no objection 
and the information is marked and admitted into evidence as Applicant Exhibit A. The 
case was assigned to me on January 17, 2018. Based upon a review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 25 and single. He has a bachelor’s degree and has been employed 
by a defense contractor since 2015. This is his first application for a security clearance. 
He seeks to obtain national security eligibility for access to classified information in 
connection with his employment. (Item 3 at Sections 12, 13A, and 25.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H – Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he has used illegal drugs. Applicant admitted all the allegations 
under this paragraph.  
 
 1.a. Applicant began using marijuana as a sophomore in college in November 
2012. He used it at least monthly until March 2017, two years after he began working for 
a defense contractor. Applicant purchased marijuana during the period he was using it. 
Applicant stated in his Answer and in Applicant Exhibit A that he last used marijuana in 
March 2017. (See Item 3 at Section 23.) 
 
 Applicant stated in Applicant Exhibit A that he has remained friends with people 
he used marijuana with in the past. He stated, “I believe I can still see these guys on an 
occasional basis and not use drugs again.”  
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted using cocaine twice in his life. The first time was in 2012, 
and the second time was in 2015 about a month before he graduated from college. He 
                                            
1 Department Counsel submitted four Items in support of the SOR allegations. Item 4 is inadmissible. It is 
the summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the Office of 
Personnel Management on March 24, 2017. Applicant did not adopt the summary as his own statement, 
or otherwise certify it to be accurate. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this Report of Investigation (ROI) 
summary is inadmissible in the Government’s case in chief in the absence of an authenticating witness. 
(See Executive Order 10865 § 5.) In light of Applicant’s admissions, Item 4 is also cumulative. Applicant 
is not legally trained and might not have understood Department Counsel’s FORM footnote 1, which 
described the potential admissibility of Item 4. I therefor reviewed Item 4 for any potentially mitigating 
information that Applicant might have thought would be considered. Any such mitigating information will 
be discussed later in this decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
stated that he has not used cocaine since 2015, and does not intend to use cocaine in 
the future. (Answer; Item 3 at Section 23.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted using hallucinogenic acid on a single occasion in 
approximately June 2016. This was about a year into his employment in the defense 
industry. He stated that he was offered some acid at a music festival and used it on an 
experimental basis. He does not intend to use acid in the future. (Answer; Item 3 at 
Section 23.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant stated in Item 3 at Section 23 that he intended to continue to use 
marijuana into the future. He also stated: 
 
I never had any intention of using marijuana after graduating college 
because of my career goals. For about the first year of being employed I 
didn’t use any drugs.2 Now that attitudes in the nation are changing 
towards marijuana use I haven’t really seen an issue in continuing 
smoking weed. If having a security clearance would require me to stop 
then I definitely would. 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted making this statement. He further stated, 
“However, since March of 2017, I have not used marijuana and I do not intend to use 
marijuana while under consideration for and if granted a security clearance.” 
 
 Finally, in Applicant Exhibit A Applicant wrote, “I would like to formally state that I 
do not intend to use illegal drugs while under consideration for and in possession of a 
security clearance.” 
 
 Applicant did not submit any evidence concerning the quality of his job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                            
2 Applicant also stated in Section 23 that he was using marijuana on a monthly basis up to September 20, 
2016, the date he completed the e-QIP. He did not reconcile this discrepancy. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that, AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, “The 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H – Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse) 
 
 The security concern relating to Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse is set 
forth in AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. §802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above.  
 
 I have examined the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and especially 
considered the following: 
 
 (a) any substance misuse (see above definition);  
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia, and; 
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse. 
 
 Applicant has a history of using illegal drugs both before and after beginning 
work in the defense industry. Applicant admitted using marijuana for about five years. 
He also used cocaine and acid on an experimental basis. 
 
 I have examined the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and especially 
considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment: 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
problem and has established a pattern of abstinences, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Applicant allegedly last used marijuana less than a year before the record closed 
in this case. While he stated twice that he would abstain from drug use in the future if 
required for national security eligibility, he continues to socialize with the friends with 
whom he used multiple illegal drugs. There is no evidence from which to determine his 
reputation for truthfulness, or even that his employers know of his drug use history. 
Applicant has not mitigated the security significance of his recent drug use. Paragraph 1 
is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility and a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Overall, the record evidence as 
described above leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as to Applicant=s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Insufficient time has passed since he 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
last used marijuana, and the likelihood of recurrence remains significant. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
   
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                   
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
