1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-03974 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle P. Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns, and he mitigated the 
foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On March 12, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and E (personal conduct). Applicant responded to the SOR on April 20, 2018, 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to 
another administrative judge on July 13, 2018, and reassigned to me on July 26, 2018. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled on August 14, 2018.  
Evidence 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, but he did not submit any documentary evidence.  
12/18/2018
 
2 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Iraq. Without objection, I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in 
the request. The facts are summarized in the written request and will not be repeated 
verbatim in this decision. Of particular note is the significant threat of terrorism and 
ongoing human rights problems in Iraq. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2015. He seeks to obtain a security clearance. He has a 
master’s degree, which was awarded in 2013. He is married with three children.1 
 
 Applicant was born in Iraq to Iraqi parents. He attended college in Iraq. He then 
performed his mandatory service in the Iraqi military for two years. He worked under 
dangerous conditions as a linguist with the U.S. military in Iraq from 2005 to 2007. 
Because of his work with the military, he was eligible for a special immigrant visa. 
Applicant and his immediate family immigrated to the United States in 2007. He became 
a U.S. citizen in 2013, while maintaining his Iraqi citizenship. His wife and three children 
also became U.S. citizens.2 
 
Applicant’s father is deceased. His mother, four siblings, and parents-in-law are 
citizens and residents of Iraq. His mother has never worked outside the home. His 
brother is a music teacher. His three sisters are married and do not work outside the 
home. Their husbands have no direct connection to the Iraqi government. Applicant’s 
father-in-law retired from the Iraqi military. He receives a pension for his service, but he 
has no other ongoing connection to the Iraqi military or the Iraqi government.3 
 
 Applicant’s grandfather passed away in 2007 or earlier. Before he immigrated to 
the United States, Applicant bought the family home in Iraq for the equivalent of about 
$15,000. His mother was living in the house at the time. He bought the house so that his 
brother could live in the house and take care of his elderly mother. Applicant has no 
intention to ever return to live in the house. He estimated the current value of the house 
to be between about $40,000 and $45,000. He also owns a house in the United States 
that he purchased in 2009.4 
 
Applicant regularly contacts his mother by telephone. He will speak to his brother 
and sisters when he calls his mother. His wife regularly contacts her parents by 
telephone. Applicant will usually get on the phone to say hello. He sends his mother 
about $200 to $300 per month to help with her living expenses.5 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 47-48; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 19, 47-48, 51-53; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 18-27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 19-21, 28-29, 51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 18, 21-22, 26-27; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2 
 
3 
 
 Applicant voted in an Iraqi election while in the United States in 2014. He wanted 
to promote democracy in Iraq. He returned to Iraq to work for defense contractors in 
2009, 2010 to 2011, and periodically since 2015. He does not visit his family while he 
works in Iraq. He periodically visits his mother and other family members in Iraq during 
periods he is not working in Iraq. He credibly testified that his family in Iraq could not be 
used to coerce or intimidate him into revealing classified information.6 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
September 2015. He answered in the negative to questions about foreign military 
service; real estate in a foreign country; financial support for a foreign national; and 
voting in a foreign election. Applicant testified that he did not intend to provide false 
information. He did not think he had to report the information about Iraq, because as an 
Iraqi citizen, Iraq was not a foreign country to him.7 One of the primary definitions of 
foreign by Merriam-Webster’s dictionary is “situated outside one’s own country.” Since 
Iraq was one of Applicant’s two countries, his interpretation is not unreasonable. In any 
event, I find it was honest and genuine. 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
                                                          
6 Tr. at 18, 20-21, 45-49, 60-61; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 17-20, 30-45, 49-51, 56; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
 
5 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology;  
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant’s mother, four siblings, and parents-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Iraq. His father-in-law retired from the Iraqi military. Applicant owns a house in Iraq. The 
potential for terrorist violence against U.S. interests and citizens remains high in Iraq, 
and it continues to have human rights problems. Applicant’s foreign contacts and 
property create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. The above disqualifying 
conditions have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Iraq. Guideline B is not limited to 
countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
 
6 
 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, 
organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United States.8  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense. He stated that his family in Iraq could not 
be used to coerce or intimidate him into revealing classified information. The Appeal 
Board has stated that such a statement, standing alone, is of limited value, unless there 
is record evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner in the past in 
comparable circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous track record of 
complying with security regulations and procedures in the context of dangerous, high-
risk circumstances in which he made a significant contribution to the national security.9 
In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the Appeal Board discussed 
this issue as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
9 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
7 
 
Applicant’s work under dangerous conditions as a linguist with the U.S. military in 
Iraq from 2005 to 2007 earned him a special immigrant visa. He has returned to Iraq to 
work for defense contractors in 2009, 2010 to 2011, and periodically since 2015. I find 
that Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the 
United States. I further find that the property in Iraq is unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure Applicant. AG ¶¶ 8(b) 
and 8(f) are applicable.  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant did not intentionally provide false information about his “foreign” 
contacts on his 2015 SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) has not been established. SOR ¶¶ 2.a through 
2.d are concluded for Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
8 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant’s work with the U.S. military in Iraq earned him a special immigrant 
visa. He returned to Iraq several times since his immigration to work for defense 
contractors. The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s proven record of action in 
defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an 
applicant in a Guideline B case.”10 The complicated state of affairs in Iraq places a 
significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his foreign family 
members do not pose an unacceptable security risk. He has met that burden.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns, and he mitigated the foreign influence security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
10 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
