 
1 
 
 
-            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 17-03212 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew H. Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On May 3, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant timely answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM) on July 18, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on July 24, 2018, and had 30 
days to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence, and he provided a one-page 
response to the FORM dated August 15, 2018. He attached a two-page Security Title 
Agency, Inc. borrower’s settlement agreement concerning the refinancing of his 
mortgage loan. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 through 7, is admitted 
into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on November 19, 2018.  
 
 
2 
 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 54 years old. He graduated from high school in 1982. Applicant has 
been employed as an assembly technician by a federal contractor since 1985. He had a 
security clearance since then with no issues. Applicant reports no military service and 
he has been married since June 1993. Previously, he was married in 1983 and divorced 
one year later. He reports one adult daughter, and three adult step-children.  
 
Applicant reported delinquent debts in section 26 of his security clearance 
application (SCA),2 including failure to file his 2008 federal income tax return, and failure 
to file and pay his 2009 federal income taxes as required.  Applicant stated he did not 
have enough money to pay $12,000 for 2009 income taxes, and he did not remember 
the circumstances why he forgot to file.3 He stated that he has now entered into a 
repayment plan with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Applicant also reported credit-
card debt and a Nissan automobile loan that he had cosigned for his step-son who was 
unable to make payments. The loan went into default and the vehicle was subsequently 
repossessed. He ascribes his wife’s loss of employment in April 2015 as the reason for 
these debts.4 She had produced 40% of their household earnings.  
 
In his enhanced subject interview (ESI) conducted by an Office of Management 
Personnel (OPM) investigator on July 20, 2017, Applicant stated that the 2007 vehicle, 
for which he cosigned, was repossessed in 2015.5 He received notice of a default 
judgment entered against him, in the amount of $7,584, on April 4, 2017. This was a 
result of the repossession of his 2005 Ford. The creditor obtained a writ of garnishment 
against Applicant in June 2017. He claimed that this judgment at SOR ¶ 1.a was 
satisfied when the garnishments of $400 or $500 per month from his paycheck ended in 
June 2016.6 He produced no documentary evidence to substantiate this claim.  
 
Applicant’s wife went to the emergency room at a hospital in February 2016, and 
her treatment was out of network or part of their deductible. Again, the delinquent debt 
escalated to a judgment against Applicant in the amount of $1,430 and a writ of 
garnishment by the creditor was filed at SOR ¶ 1.i. Applicant and his wife both had 
medical issues. Applicant claims he does not have the money to pay his uncovered 
medical debts at SOR ¶¶ 1.i to 1.o because he is only earning 60% of his ordinary 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s September 2, 2016 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 2).  
 
2 Item 2.  
 
3 Item 2, p. 30. 
 
4 Item 2, p. 34. 
 
5 Item 3. 
 
6 Item 3, p. 3, and Item 7. 
 
 
3 
 
 
income while he is out on disability since December 2016 for back related issues.7 The 
debt placed for collection in the amount of $2,576 at SOR ¶ 1.p arose from a credit-card 
linked to his store-0club membership. Applicant stated that the debt in the amount of 
$781 at SOR ¶ 1.q was for an old cell-phone account that he thought he had paid off. 
The debt in the amount of $600 placed for collection at SOR ¶ 1.r was for an apartment 
that he cosigned with his step-son. Applicant admits owing the latter debt for cleaning 
fees, but he can not afford to pay it.  
  
 Applicant’s financial difficulties started in late 2016 after his wife lost her job and 
he went out on disability for a back injury, thereby losing the opportunity for overtime 
earnings. Applicant’s stepson is living with him due to his own difficulties, and Applicant 
is also raising two grandchildren, including one with a disability. (Item 3) This has 
caused enormous financial strain and Applicant stated he is “robbing Peter to pay 
Paul.”8 He decided it was more important to pay his mortgage and put food on the table, 
and he let the credit card and medical debts go into arears. (Item 3) Applicant stated he 
was planning to meet with a bankruptcy attorney in July 2017 and discuss filing a 
bankruptcy petition. However, no documentation has been provided to reflect that he 
actually filed for bankruptcy protection, except for documents produced by the 
government to show an earlier Chapter 7 petition was filed by Applicant in 1994.9 
Applicant stated that he has no discretionary income left over at the end of each month 
and he is “drowning in debt.” (item 3) He hopes to retire debt-free in three or four years.  
 
In 2008, Applicant changed his IRS Form W-4 withholdings to 10. Thus, he was 
not paying enough federal income taxes and he owed the IRS $12,000 in back taxes. 
He started a repayment plan with the IRS but did not follow through. For the last several 
years, he was supposed to get a $3,000 to $5,000 income tax refund, but the IRS 
withheld these payments and applied them to his tax debt. (Item 3) He started a new 
repayment plan with the IRS on July 25, 2017, and he is supposed to send the IRS $25 
a month for one year.10 He attached to his answer proof of only one payment to the IRS 
of $100 on April 2, 2018. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted owing the $3,000 federal income 
tax deficiency, the three judgements, and all the other alleged consumer or medical 
debts totaling $20,535. He provided no evidence of payment plans, except with the IRS, 
or financial counseling. He did not demonstrate a stream of payments of $25 made to 
the IRS in compliance with the purported repayment plan. Instead, he provided 
evidence of one payment of $100 to the IRS made in April 2018. Applicant provided no 
performance evaluations, character reference letters, or evidence of community 
involvement.  
                                                          
7 Item 3, p. 4. 
 
8 Item 3, p. 4. 
 
9 Item 6.  
 
10 Item 3, p. 5. 
 
4 
 
 
 
                                              Policies 
 
 This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the new Administrative Guidelines (AGs) 
promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful 
weighing of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. Decisions 
include consideration of the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial considerations is set out in AG ¶18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance abuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following 
apply here:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;   
 
           (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
           (f) failure to pay or fraudulently filing annual federal, state, local income tax 
               returns or failure to pay annual federal, state, or local income tax as  
     required.          
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are confirmed by his credit 
reports, answer to the SOR, and response to the FORM. The Government produced 
substantial evidence to support the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), 19(c), 
and 19(f), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
 
6 
 
 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts.11 Applicant has not met that burden. Most of the 
delinquent debts have not been addressed.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control . . . , and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;     
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
  Applicant has made little or no progress in resolving his delinquent debts. He 
has only provided evidence of one payment to the IRS and scant explanation how he 
became delinquent on these debts in the first place, aside from his wife’s job loss, and 
his own back problems and lost overtime opportunities. Applicant has known about 
these tax problems and delinquencies for over two years since he self-disclosed them to 
his facility security officer, who made a Joint Personnel Adjudicative System (JPAS) 
entry in August 2016. (Item 7) The back taxes were from tax years 2008 and 2009, 
before his back injury. He has done nothing to address these tax delinquencies aside 
from two half-hearted repayment plans with the IRS. He did not follow through with his 
obligations to the bankruptcy trustee in 1994. His wife’s unemployment and his own 
health issues were issues beyond his control. He has produced no relevant or 
responsive documentation either with his answer to the SOR, or in response to the 
FORM, to show that he acted responsibly under these adverse circumstances. 
Applicant has the burden to provide sufficient evidence to show that his financial 
problems are under control, and that his debts were incurred under circumstances 
making them unlikely to recur.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s credit reports and 
answer to the SOR reflect delinquent tax debts and three unsatisfied judgments. 
Applicant did not provide enough details with documentary corroboration about what he 
did to address his SOR debts. He did not provide documentation relating to any of the 
                                                          
11 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep 22, 2005) (An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government). 
 
7 
 
 
SOR debts: (1) proof of payments, such as checking account statements, photocopies 
of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any payments to the 
creditors; (2) correspondence to or from the creditors to establish maintenance of 
contact;12 (3) credible debt disputes indicating he did not believe he was responsible for 
the debts and why he held such a belief; (4) more evidence of attempts to negotiate 
payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was attempting 
to resolve these debts; or (5) other evidence of progress or resolution. Applicant failed 
to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because he did not provide documented proof 
to substantiate the existence, basis, or the result of any debt disputes. 
 
 In the FORM, Department Counsel informed Applicant that it was important for 
him to provide corroborating or supporting documentation of resolution of the debts in 
the SOR. (FORM at 3) Aside from Applicant’s single payment to the IRS, there is no 
documentation that he has arranged for repayment of the consumer debts, medical 
debts, or judgments. There is no documentary evidence that Applicant paid, arranged to 
pay, settled, compromised, or otherwise resolved the SOR debts. The record lacks 
corroborating or substantiating documentation and detailed explanations of the causes 
for his financial problems and other mitigating information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
                                                          
12 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current.  
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant has reached out to the IRS to 
attempt a repayment plan, but he provided no concrete evidence of any follow-through 
stream of payments. Most importantly, Applicant has not addressed the delinquent tax 
allegation and judgments in the SOR or the medical delinquencies. He has not met his 
burden of production.  
 
Applicant’s finances remain a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He has not met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.r:               Against Applicant  
  
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                   Administrative Judge 
 
