1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
)    ISCR Case No. 17-02962 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol 
consumption). Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
     Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 21, 2016. 
On September 13, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G. The DOD CAF acted 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 5, 2017, admitting the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case 
was assigned to me on October 16, 2018. On November 20, 2018, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
December 5, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
12/27/2018
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted into evidence without 
objection. At the hearing, Applicant testified on his own behalf and provided four character 
reference letters that were marked as Appellant’s Exhibits (AE) A - D. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on December 14, 2018.  
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 39 years old. He graduated from high school in 2003 and he completed 
some college.  He enlisted in the Air National Guard (ANG) in 2003 and served honorably 
for 13½ years until late 2016.  Applicant was married in February 2018 and he reports no 
children. (Tr. 40-46) He deployed three times overseas  Qatar (2005), Kyrgyzstan (2009), 
and Qatar again (2011). (Tr. 42) He attained the rank of staff sergeant (E-5) and served 
as a warehouse supervisor and logistician. Applicant earned numerous military awards 
including two Air Force Achievement Medals. (Tr. 44) In February 2018, he moved with 
his wife from state A to state B  for a pending job offer with a federal contractor in state 
B, which is why he needs a security clearance. (Tr. 24, 56)  
 
On November 21, 2016, Applicant signed a Security Clearance Application 
(SCA),2 and in section 22 (Police Record) he disclosed an arrest for driving under the 
influence (DUI) of alcohol in state A in July 2009. In his Answer to the SOR ¶ 1.a, Applicant 
stated that he was drinking to celebrate a friend’s birthday, after a military trip. Applicant 
made a mistake in driving his friend to various bars while consuming alcohol. Applicant 
drove into a DUI checkpoint one mile from his home, where he was arrested and charged 
with DUI, first offense. He obtained an attorney and pled guilty to a reduced charge of 
reckless driving. Nonetheless, he was required to have an interlock device installed on 
his vehicle for nine months, to insure no recurrences.  
 
 Applicant disclosed his arrest for DUI, second offense, in September 2010, as 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. He was out partying with friends in a bar, but he had pre-established 
his girlfriend as his designated driver for that evening. (Tr. 49-50) However, after several 
rounds of drinks, Applicant noticed that she was also drinking and unable to drive them 
all home in her van. Applicant ingested several beers and shots of whiskey. (Answer) 
They tried to call a taxi cab, but it was 4 a.m. After trying unsuccessfully for several hours, 
Applicant decided he could drive his girlfriend’s van (sans interlock device) himself. (Tr.  
50) He was stopped and arrested for DUI. He pled guilty to DUI, first offense, since the 
earlier charge was reduced to reckless driving. (Tr. 50) He disclosed that he was ordered 
to seek alcohol counseling, which he completed, and pay court costs and a fine. 
 
Applicant’s third alcohol-related incident occurred in October 2015 when he was 
arrested and charged with DUI and driving on a revoked license. The latter charge was 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s November 21, 2016 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) (GE 1) and his summary of clearance interview by a background 
investigator. (GE 4).  
 
2 GE 1.  
 
3 
 
dismissed as a mistake since Applicant’s license had merely expired. (Answer) Applicant 
had recently lost his best friend to addiction and he was grieving. He went to a local bar 
within two miles of his home to watch football and play in a fantasy football league. (Tr. 
51) He was there for seven hours and ingested five beers and two shots of whiskey. He 
had eaten lunch, and an appetizer later. When he left, he was pulled over by a police 
cruiser while turning into his housing development. Applicant testified that he respectfully 
declined the field sobriety test because he had recently had knee surgery. (Tr. 77) This 
was immediately reported to Applicant’s chain of command at the ANG, and he was 
forced to resign his full-time position while being discharged after 13 ½ years of service 
with a general under honorable conditions discharge. Applicant was in the process of 
having a home built with his fiance’ (now wife) and he did not have the funds available to 
vigorously contest the DUI charge.  
 
Although he was adamant that he was not intoxicated in the October 2015 incident, 
Applicant pled guilty to DUI. Applicant was sentenced to five days in jail. He also paid 
court costs and fines, was ordered to install an interlock device until 2019, and attend a 
state A DUI safety and treatment program. He started the education component of that 
program in January 2016 and completed six weeks of three-hour lectures. Then, he 
completed six weeks of the intervention portion, completing the entire program in June 
2016. He was diagnosed as alcohol use disorder (AUD) moderate during his treatment. 
(records attached to Answer) Applicant also voluntarily attended Alcoholic’s Anonymous 
(AA) meetings, and he intends to continue to attend AA meetings in his newly adopted 
home state. (Tr. 58)  
 
Applicant testified credibly that he had his last drink in November 2016 and he is 
a changed man since getting married and moving. (Tr. 82) He is no longer exposed to a 
culture of profligate alcohol consumption. It broke his heart to get discharged and lose his 
chosen career. (Tr. 85) He is coaching baseball and football and hopes to start a family 
soon in his recently purchased home in state B.  He self-reported all of his offenses, and 
he has cooperated fully in the background investigation. Applicant provided four favorable 
character reference letters, which all attest to his integrity, work ethic, and trustworthiness. 
(AE A-D) He fully disclosed his offenses to his new federal contractor employer. (Tr. 85)  
 
                                           Policies 
 
 DOD took action in this case under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 10, 2016, the Director of National Intelligence signed Security 
Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), implementing new AGs effective within the DOD 
on June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have applied the June 8, 2017 AGs in this decision.  
 
4 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weighing 
of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that 
the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under  
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder. 
 
 Applicant had three alcohol-related incidents in a six-year period from 2009 – 2015.  
In 2015, he was diagnosed with alcohol use disorder (AUD), moderate, based on his 
voluntary disclosures. He complied with all recommendations for treatment.  AG ¶¶ 22(a) 
and (d) are applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations.  
 
6 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related arrest was in October 2015. He had recently lost 
his best friend and was grieving. He has been sober for more than two years. Although 
he was diagnosed with AUD, moderate, during his treatment program, he has complied 
with all treatment recommendations and continues to attend AA meetings. He has 
completed all recommended lifestyle adjustments. He recently married and moved to 
state B where he purchased a new home. He is committed to his new wife and job and 
leads a life of abstinence. An inference can be drawn that Applicant has confronted his 
proclivity for alcohol, and he is appropriately coping with his diagnosed disorder. He has 
met his burden in establishing that his excessive drinking occurred under unusual 
circumstances, and that it is unlikely to recur. It does not cast doubt on his trustworthiness, 
reliability,  or judgement. The above-mentioned mitigating conditions apply with respect 
to SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.c.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Notably, Applicant served in the Air National Guard 
for 13 1/2 years. He paid a high price for his mistakes in losing his chosen career. He has 
completed counseling and all other requirements. He purchased a new home in a different 
state and recently married. He has matured and is committed to his sober lifestyle. Most 
importantly, Applicant resolved the specific violations alleged in the SOR and he no longer   
consumes alcohol.  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.c:                          For Applicant 
 
  
                              Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                   
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
 
