1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-04160 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant mitigated the concerns 
raised by an investigation into her travel and time reporting by her former employer. 
Clearance is granted.  
Statement of the Case 
On April 30, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the personal conduct guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke Applicant’s 
security clearance.  
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on June 8, 2017.   
12/27/2018
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing, 
convened on November 27, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, 
and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through M, without objection. Applicant and her 
daughter testified. DOHA received the transcript on December 6, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 49, has worked for her current employer, a federal contractor since 
October 2016. She was initially granted access to classified information in 1997 when 
she began her career with a different federal contracting company. She held a 
clearance without incident until August 2016, when her former employer filed an incident 
report in the Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS), reporting that Applicant was 
under investigation for time card fraud and fraudulent expense reports.3  
 
 On June 7, 2016, Applicant received an email from the accounts payable 
department about a travel expense reimbursement request that required additional 
information before it could be paid. Upon reviewing the document, Applicant realized the 
voucher was for her daughter, an employee who worked in a different state for another 
division of the company. Applicant did not supervise her daughter, approve her travel 
claims, or have any involvement in the details of her daughter’s employment. However, 
Applicant ordered accounts payable to reject the claim. She then called her daughter to 
ask about the reimbursement request. That same day, Applicant sent an inquiry to the 
company’s ethics department asking how to handle the situation. The ethics department 
instructed Applicant to elevate the issue and report it to all parties who needed to be 
informed. From the emails in the record, Applicant’s direct supervisor was aware of the 
situation.4  
 
 When Applicant spoke to her daughter, she claimed that the reimbursement 
request was a mistake. Applicant was unsatisfied by the conversation and suspected 
something else was amiss. Applicant decided to go to her daughter’s home. When 
Applicant arrived, she discovered that her daughter was addicted to opioids. Her 
daughter’s home was in disarray and her 2-year-old grandson was not being properly 
cared for. Days after Applicant’s arrival, her daughter resigned her job and entered a 
30-day in-patient drug-treatment program. Applicant returned home with her grandson. 
After completing treatment, Applicant’s daughter moved in with Applicant to continue 
with aftercare and counseling. Applicant’s daughter, now 27, has been sober for two 
years. She works for a national retailer and attends college. At the hearing, she 
described the details of her fraudulent activity.5  
 
                                                          
2 Department Counsel provided discovery to Applicant on June 22, 2018. The discovery letter is 
appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
3 Tr. 81; GE 1, GE 3. 
 
4 Tr. 28, 48, 71-73; GE 2, AE H. 
 
5 Tr. 22, 26, 41-42, 48-52, 61. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s daughter’s job involved traveling at least twice per month. Her 
expenses ranged from a few hundred dollars to several thousand dollars depending on 
the length of her project. After each trip she would send an expense report to her 
supervisor, who, after approving the report, would send it to the accounts payable 
department for payment. In 2014, Applicant’s daughter began abusing opioids and 
became addicted. As her addiction grew, she needed more money to buy pills. After 
examining emails related to older travel claims, Applicant’s daughter devised a plan to 
submit fraudulent vouchers. Instead of sending the expense report to her supervisor for 
approval, Applicant’s daughter, who knew her mother had the authority to approve 
travel vouchers, electronically copied her mother’s signature from personal documents 
and signed the expense reports. She then emailed the approved expense report directly 
to the accounts payable department, which would, seeing Applicant’s authorization, pay 
the claim. Because Applicant and her daughter do not share the same surname, 
Applicant’s daughter figured that no one would discover their relationship.6  
 
At first, Applicant’s daughter would submit a legitimate expense report to her 
supervisor and also submit a second voucher with some variations, bearing her 
mother’s stolen signature, directly to accounts payable. Soon, she began creating 
expense reports for fake trips or resubmitting paid vouchers with minor changes. As she 
filed more reports they became internally inconsistent, for example, reporting air travel 
to one city, but lodging expenses in another city. It is unclear from the record how or 
when the internal audit and legal departments learned about Applicant’s daughter’s 
fraudulent expense reports, though it is likely the alert came from the accounts payable 
department after Applicant rejected the June 2016 claim. From the emails in the record 
between Applicant and her supervisor, it appears that the issue was being investigated 
before Applicant’s June 28, 2016 meeting with the general counsel. During the meeting, 
Applicant learned that her daughter received over $96,000 from fraudulent travel claims. 
Applicant also learned that the company also audited her travel claims and time cards 
and discovered three duplicate travel claims for almost $7,000. One claim was filed in 
2015, two were filed in 2016. The investigation did not find any evidence of time card 
fraud.7  
 
Between 2013 and 2016, Applicant lived in another state, and traveled to the 
company’s headquarters every week. The company reimbursed her weekly travel and 
lodging expenses. In addition to her weekly travel to headquarters, Applicant also 
traveled extensively for her job. Between 2006 and 2016, she estimates that she 
submitted over 100 travel expense reports each year. Sometimes Applicant submitted 
the reports herself and sometimes her assistant submitted reports on her behalf. She 
believes that miscommunication between them may have led to the duplicate expense 
reports. Applicant admits that she was aware of one 2015 duplicate report, but failed to 
report it because she was distracted by the events in her personal life, specifically, her 
                                                          
6 Tr. 18, 28-29, 33-34, 37-49.  
 
7 Tr. 36-40; GE 2.  
 
 
4 
 
husband’s diagnosis and treatment for a serious medical issue. She was unaware of the 
two 2016 duplicate claims.8  
 
After being presenting with the results of the internal audits, Applicant tendered 
her resignation to her supervisor. Her supervisor discouraged her from doing so, but 
Applicant, who was embarrassed by the extent of her daughter’s fraud and her own 
negligence, believed that resigning was the only ethical option. When the company filed 
the incident report in JPAS, the report indicated that Applicant resigned before the 
internal investigation was complete. Applicant focused her efforts on protecting her 
daughter from criminal liability. To that end, she agreed to repay the $96,000 received 
by her daughter and the $7,000 of her own duplicate expenses, if the company agreed 
not to press criminal charges against her daughter. Applicant and the company entered 
into a settlement and restitution agreement in August 2016. She resolved the debt using 
proceeds from her retirement and other cash savings. In September 2016, the company 
reached out to Applicant about a job opportunity, which she declined.9  
 
Applicant began working for her current employer in October 2016 in a similar 
role as her former employment. She disclosed the events at her prior employer to her 
current employer.10  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
8 Tr. 53-55, 62-63, 87; GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. 23-24, 47, 64-67; GE 2. 
 
10 Tr. 43-48, 68,  
 
5 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
` 
Analysis 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant resigned from her position in August 2016 while 
under investigation by her former employer for time card fraud and fraudulent expense 
reports. She became the object of investigation because of her daughter’s misconduct, 
not any misconduct of her own.11 Given the extent of her daughter’s fraud, the 
daughter’s use of Applicant’s signature to perpetuate the fraud, and the large number of 
travel reimbursement claims Applicant filed in the execution of her duties, the internal 
audit of her travel claims and time cards was appropriate. Ultimately, the investigation 
revealed that between 2015 and 2016, Applicant submitted three duplicate travel claims 
and that she received $7,000 to which she was not entitled. The investigation did not 
reveal any time card fraud. Applicant admits to knowing about the 2015 duplicate claim 
and that she did not alert her employer to the mistake.  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. 
Applicant’s relationship with her daughter, who was involved in criminal activity, raised 
concerns about her own possible misconduct.12 Applicant’s failure to report and remedy 
the 2015 duplicate travel reimbursement is evidence of misuse of her former employer’s 
resources and may support a whole-person assessment of questionable judgement, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that Applicant may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information.13 However, the record contains sufficient evidence to 
mitigate these concerns. 
 
The circumstances prompting the investigation occurred under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on her ongoing 
security worthiness.14 Applicant’s daughter engaged in fraudulent activity facilitated by 
the unauthorized use of Applicant’s signature. Applicant acted appropriately and 
responsibly in light of these circumstances. She prevented payment of the daughter’s 
                                                          
11 The allegation on its face does not allege any disqualifying conduct, but was enough to put Applicant 
on notice that the adverse information prompting the investigation raised potential security concerns. 
 
12 AG ¶ 16(g).  
 
13 AG ¶ 16(d).  
 
14 AG ¶ 17g).  
 
6 
 
June 2016 travel claim upon receiving a notification from accounts payable. She 
immediately sought guidance from her company’s ethics committee, reported the 
incident to her immediate supervisor, and participated fully in the company’s 
investigation. It does not appear that Applicant’s employer took any issue with her 
handling or reporting of her daughter’s fraudulent activity.  
 
The investigation into Applicant’s daughter’s misconduct, revealed three 
duplicate travel vouchers belonging to Applicant. However, she provided a reasonable 
explanation for the three duplicate travel claims – miscommunication between herself 
and her assistant. Though the time period covered by the investigation is unclear, the 
audit resulted in three duplicate reports in a population of hundreds of claims filed by 
Applicant. It does not appear that the company viewed the three duplicate claims as a 
serious offense on its own, as the company attempted to re-hire Applicant a month after 
she tendered her resignation. While Applicant’s actions may have been negligent, they 
are not indicative of a pattern of misconduct. The offense is minor and does not reflect 
negatively on Applicant’s current security worthiness.15  
 
Applicant promptly repaid her daughter’s fraudulent claims and her three 
duplicate claims. She reported the incident to her current employer. While Applicant is 
embarrassed by her daughter’s misconduct and her own acts of negligence, it is not an 
ongoing source of vulnerability for her.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ongoing security 
worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-person factors 
at AG ¶ 2(d). In the course of less than 60 days, Applicant resolved a difficult set of 
circumstances caused by her daughter’s misconduct. She successfully balanced her 
fiduciary duties to her employer while ensuring her daughter received proper medical 
care, and protecting her daughter from criminal liability. She candidly provided adverse 
information as required and took responsibility for her own negligence in the handling of 
her duplicate travel claims. The purpose of a security clearance adjudication is not to 
punish an applicant for past misconduct, but but rather to determine if an appellant’s 
past actions are indicative of a current inability to properly handle and protect classified. 
Here, Applicant demonstrated that she will seek guidance when confronted a 
problematic situation and that she will report adverse information as required, without 
regard for her self-interest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
15 AG ¶ 17(a). 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
