 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04347 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Gregg A. Cervi, Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 21, 2017. On 
March 26, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a statement of reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F.1 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel 
on May 7, 2018. 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM, but did not submit a response. 
Government exhibits (GE) 1 to 5 are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old engineering aid assistant employed by a defense 
contractor since April 2017. He was previously employed from 2007 to 2013, owned a 
restaurant from 2013 to 2016, was unemployed from December 2016 to February 2017 
when his restaurant closed, then employed again in April 2017 to present. Applicant 
graduated from high school in 2000 and completed an associate’s degree in 1994. He 
served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 2002 to 2004. Applicant has been married 
since 2012. He was previously married from 2002 to 2010. He has one child. He has 
never held a security clearance. 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant failed to timely file Federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2009, 2012-2014, and 2016. He is indebted to the IRS for approximately $10,418 
for tax year 2008; $10,165 for tax year 2010; and $2,328 for tax year 2011. He also failed 
to file state income tax returns for tax years 2008, 2012-2014, and 2016, which remain 
unfiled; and has five delinquent accounts placed in collection totaling approximately 
$4,774. Applicant admitted the SOR allegations with explanations. All of the SOR debts 
are supported by substantial evidence in the record. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he filed the delinquent Federal 
income tax returns, albeit late. He provided copies of his Federal tax returns. He noted 
that he is waiting for the IRS to provide him with an accurate accounting of the taxes, 
penalties and interest due, before settling the past-due taxes. With regard to his state tax 
returns, he is having difficulty with filing older returns and intends to address them when 
the current tax return is due. Applicant provided a letter from a tax accountant claiming to 
be finalizing the process of solving Applicant’s tax issues. SOR ¶ 1.a is resolved. 
 
Applicant stated he paid debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.i. He submitted 
documentation of the paid accounts. Applicant started payments on a debt listed as SOR 
¶ 1.h on April 2018, and has a preauthorization for automatic monthly payments to retire 
the debt in 10 weeks. He noted that debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.j are no longer listed 
on his credit report. Applicant presented sufficient evidence to show debts listed in SOR 
¶¶ 1.f, 1.h, and 1.i have been or are being resolved. 
 
Applicant stated that he did not file income tax returns when due or pay taxes owed 
because of forgetfulness, confusion as to the filing requirements and amount owed, and 
a dispute with the IRS over recognition of investment losses. Applicant did not provide 
documentation of debt counseling or the status of his current finances. 
 
3 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
4 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence in the record supporting the 
SOR allegations are sufficient to establish the disqualifying conditions above. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s tax delinquencies and other debts have been a recurring problem that 
have not been sufficiently addressed to show his taxes and other delinquencies are 
resolved and are unlikely to recur. Applicant’s failure to file tax returns when due and 
failure to pay taxes indicates a history of poor financial decisions, and demonstrates an 
inability to follow laws, rules and regulations. He has not sought financial counseling, but 
is working with an accountant to file overdue tax returns. 
 
Applicant’s financial history does not reflect the judgment and reliability expected 
of a person seeking security eligibility. I have insufficient evidence of his ability or 
willingness to file and pay the delinquent taxes for which he is responsible. Evidence of 
debts aging off a credit report does not indicate a reasonable resolution of those debts. 
Applicant is credited with filing his late Federal tax returns and resolving some debts. 
Overall, I am unable to find that his financial responsibilities have been adequately 
addressed or that his current financial status is under control and that similar problems 
are unlikely to recur. No mitigating condition fully applies except as noted below. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d).2 Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
                                                     
2 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to 
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age 
and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence 
or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
6 
 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s Federal 
and state tax delinquencies remain an ongoing concern. He has not shown evidence of 
whole-person factors sufficient to overcome the financial concerns.  
 
Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to grant him eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.f, 1.h and 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e, 1.g, 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
                                                     
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
