 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ADP Case No. 17-03627 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
December 26, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
 On November 27, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing 
trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued 
after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on December 19, 2017, originally 
requesting this matter be determined without a hearing. As a result, a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) was submitted by the Government on March 1, 2018. Applicant 
responded to the FORM on April 8, 2018. (Response) However, on June 15, 2018, 
Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to 
me on June 19, 2018. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
notice of hearing on August 8, 2018, scheduling the hearing for August 22, 2018. The 
  
 
 
2 
 
 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 
4, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and 
presented two documents, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A and B. The 
record was left open until November 26, 2018, for receipt of additional documentation. 
On October 22, 2018, and on November 21, 2018, respectively. Applicant offered AppXs 
C and D, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (TR) on September 4, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.d, with 
explanations. She denied SOR ¶ 1.a.   
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old, married and has two adult children. (GX 1 at pages 5 
and 18, and TR at page 16 lines 4~13.) 
 
 1.a. Applicant denies that she has a Federal tax lien, in the amount of about 
$30,000, entered against her and her husband in February of 2015. She avers that, as 
she now files separate tax returns from her husband, she is not responsible for his tax 
delinquencies. (TR at page 16 line 14 to page 21 line 20.) However, at her hearing 
Applicant also acknowledged her responsibility, as they owed back taxes, in part, as a 
result of their 2012 joint tax return filing. (Id, and Response at page 6.) Applicant also 
referred to her Response noting that her husband had intermittent tax levies filed against 
his separate Federal tax returns. (Response at pages 3 and 4.) At her hearing, Applicant 
averred that she would submit further documentation showing that her spouse is now 
paying $833, biweekly, to the Internal Revenue Service towards this tax lien. (TR at page 
18 lines 1~18.) Despite having been given more than three months to submit said 
documentation, Applicant has submitted nothing. This allegation is found against 
Applicant. 
 
 1.b.~1.d.  Applicant admits that she is indebted to the Navy Federal Credit Union 
for past-due debts totaling about $80,000. (TR at page 21 line 21 to page 26 line 19.) 
Applicant has submitted documentation showing she has begun to make monthly 
payments of $600 towards these admitted debts. (AppXs C and D.) I find she is making 
a good-faith effort to address these credit union debts; and as such, these allegations are 
found for Applicant.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
  The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.” 
 
 A person applying for a position of trust seeks to enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national security 
eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant 
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 
7 of EO 10865: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a 
determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination 
as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns and 
may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) . . . failure to pay annual Federal . . . income tax as required. 
 
 Applicant had significant credit union delinquencies, and has a significant Federal 
tax lien. The evidence raises the above trustworthiness concerns, thereby shifting the 
burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial problems: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
 
 
5 
 
 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
. . . to pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements. 
 
 Although Applicant is addressing the credit union debt, she has yet to address the 
$30,000 Federal tax lien. This Guideline is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has yet to address her 
significant Federal tax lien. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to 
Applicant’s judgment, reliability, eligibility, and suitability for a position of trust. She failed 
to meet her burden to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns raised under the guidelines 
for financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:               AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph: 1.a:    Against Applicant 
                    
                    Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
          Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant  
 
          Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant  
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. National security eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                               
  
 
                                              
 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
