 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00504  
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William R. Satterberg, Jr., Esq., Applicant’s Counsel 
 
 
December 18, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 31, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline B.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 13, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to another Administrative 
Judge, and the hearing originally convened on September 15, 2017. (Transcript 
(TR#1.)) As it was unclear if Applicant received the Government’s “discovery package,” 
the hearing was continued. (TR#1 at page 20 line 19 to page 23 line 16.) This matter 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
was subsequently reassigned to me on December 13, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) had already issued a notice of hearing on October 27, 
2017, scheduling the hearing for January 9, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
rescheduled. The Government reoffered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 3, which were 
admitted without objection, and GXs 4 and 5 for Administrative Notice. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf. The record was left open until February 9, 2018, for receipt 
of additional documentation.  DOHA received the second transcript of the hearing 
(TR#2) on January 18, 2018. Applicant offered three sets of documents, which I marked 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AppXs) A through C, which were admitted without objection. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested I take administrative notice of certain 
facts relating to Russia and to Ukraine, identified as GXs 4 and 5.  The documents 
provide elaboration and context for the summaries. I take administrative notice of the 
facts as they relate to Ukraine included in the U.S. Government reports. (After a careful 
review of the evidence, it is clear that Applicant, his siblings and his mother-in-law have 
no connection with Russia.) They are limited to matters of general knowledge, not 
subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, through 1.e, with some 
explanation. He denied SOR allegation ¶ 1.f. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 1 at pages 5 
and 12.) He has been employed with the defense contractor since 2010. (GX 1 at page 
12.) Applicant emigrated from what is now Ukraine (formerly part of the Soviet Union), 
and became a U.S. citizen in December of 1991. (GX 1 at pages 6~7, and TR#2 at 
page 7 lines 18~20.)  He is married to a naturalized U.S. citizen who also emigrated 
from Ukraine. (GX 1 at pages 20~21.) Applicant has four adult children, and a 13 year-
old son. (GX 1 at pages 23.) Both Applicant’s father and an uncle, because of their 
Pentecostal religious beliefs, were sent to Soviet prisons where they perished. (TR#2 at 
page 8 line 18 to page 9 line 23~27.) Applicant is a “deacon” for his Pentecostal church, 
as evidenced by a letter from his “Pastor.” (AppX C at page 2.) Applicant net worth in 
the United States is about $400,000. (TR#2 at page 40 lines 6~17.) 
 
 1.a. and 1.d. Applicant brother, who is married to a German national, is a dual 
national of Germany and Ukraine. (TR#2 at page 16 line 11 to page 17 line 10, and at 
page 17 line 25 to page 26 line 14.) This brother is a Pentecostal missionary, who at 
times travels to Russia, but presently resides “in Estonia or Latvia.” (TR#2 at page 26 
lines 7~14.) Since about 2007, Applicant has provided about $100 each month in 
financial support for his missionary brother. (TR#2 at page 16 line 11 to page 17 line 10, 
and at page 17 line 25 to page 26 line 14.) In 2013, Applicant also provided this brother 
with a lump sum, one-time $5,000 gift. (Id.) 
 
 
3 
 
 1.b. Applicant’s other brother, and his two sisters, are citizens and residents of 
Ukraine. (TR#2 at page 26 line 15 to page 33 line 5.) His brother “is working 
construction” in Germany.  (TR#2 at page 26 line 15 to page 27 line 22.) Applicant’s two 
sisters are both housewives living in the Ukraine. One is the mother of “18 kids,” and the 
other “had 11” children. (TR#2 at page 26 line 15 to page 33 line 5.) None of these 
siblings have any connection with the Ukrainian government. 
 
 1.c. and 1.e. Applicant’s 77 year-old mother-in-law is a “retired” citizen and 
resident of the Ukraine (TR#2 at page 33 line 7 to page 35 line 12.) Since about 1994, 
Applicant, through his wife, has provided about $100 each month in financial support for 
his mother-in-law. (TR#2 at page 17 lines 10~21.) Applicant’s mother-in-law has no 
connection with the Ukrainian government. 
 
 1.f. Applicant admits that he was investigated in 2015 for possible connections 
with a Russian/Armenian criminal organization. (TR#2 at page 22 lines 4~19, at page 39 
line 8 to page 40 line 5, and GX 2.) No such connection was found, and Applicant 
denies any such connection. (Id.) 
 
Notice 
  
 I take administrative notice of the following facts: Ukraine is a republic with a 
semi-presidential political system. In 2014, the Ukrainian parliament approved a new 
government, which caused Russia to respond by seizing Ukraine’s Crimean peninsula. 
Additional unrest occurred in 2014, involving thousands of pro-Russian protesters in 
eastern and southern Ukraine. In 2015, a ceasefire agreement established a de facto 
dividing line between Ukrainian government-controlled and separatist-held areas in 
Ukraine. (GX 5.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
 
4 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B - Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
5 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
  Applicant has three siblings and a mother-in-law who are citizens of and reside in 
Ukraine. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant’s loyalties are clearly to the United States, where his immediate family 
lives, and of which he has been a citizen since 1991. Guideline B is found for Applicant.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
well respected by those who know him in the workplace and in his community. (AppXs 
A~C.) He can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States 
due to his longstanding ties here.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
