 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                          1 )  ISCR Case No. 17-02200 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 7, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant responded to the SOR on September 28, 2017, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on November 9, 2017. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on December 18, 2017, 
scheduling the hearing for February 1, 2018. The hearing was continued at Applicant’s 
request. The hearing convened as rescheduled on July 9, 2018. Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 and 4 through 11 were admitted in evidence without objection. The objections to 
GE 2 and 3 were sustained. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 
                                                          
1 The Statement of Reasons was amended to reflect Applicant’s correct last name. 
 
2 
 
A through C, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted AE D, which was admitted 
without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2008. He served in the U.S. military from 1979 until he was 
honorably discharged in 1983. He has a master’s degree. He married in 1991 and 
divorced in 2015. He has an adult child.2 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems, which he attributed to the failure of 
his business, which he dissolved in 2008; his 2013 separation and 2015 divorce; and 
his employer making him a part-time employee and cutting his hours in half in June 
2016.3 
 
 Applicant moved out of his house when he and his ex-wife separated in 
December 2013. He stopped paying the mortgage loan. He was awarded the house and 
the mortgage obligation in the divorce, but his ex-wife was permitted to remain in the 
house until November 2014. The October 2014 property distribution order indicated that 
the mortgage loan at that time was “approximately $214,000, plus all interest, late 
charges, and fees.” The order stated that Applicant’s ex-wife would receive $1,000 in 
alimony per month from October 2014 through October 2022.4 
 
 Applicant did not maintain the mortgage payments on the house. In order to 
avoid foreclosure, he filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in September 2015. The 
bankruptcy petition listed the mortgage loan as $251,202, with the value of the property 
reported as $254,734. The petition also reported three liens against the property for 
$7,323 (SOR ¶ 1.c); $4,196; and $2,361. The petition listed debts totaling $22,360 
under Schedule F, Creditors Holding Unsecured Nonpriority Claims, which included the 
$717 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e and apparently the $302 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.f.5 
 
 Applicant reached an agreement to modify the mortgage loan, and the Chapter 
13 bankruptcy case was dismissed in April 2016. He had paid $3,400 to the trustee, of 
which $3,025 was paid to his attorney and $375 was paid to the trustee. No payments 
were made to his creditors. The trustee reported that $52,816 in mortgage arrearages 
had been claimed by the mortgage company. The November 2016 credit report noted 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 19, 23, 34-35, 53-54; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 18-22, 54; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE B, C. 
 
4 Tr. at 21, 44-45; GE 6-8; AE C. 
 
5 Tr. at 22, 28, 39; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 9. 
 
 
3 
 
the mortgage loan as $56,770 past due, with a balance of $251,759. It also annotated 
that “arrangements [were] made with credit grantor to make partial payments.”6 
 
 Applicant was unable to maintain the modified mortgage loan payments. 
Subsequent credit reports show the mortgage loan as $4,046 past due with a $261,273 
balance (October 2017); and $17,289 past due with a $284,424 balance (July 2018). 
Applicant has been making partial payments. A June 2018 mortgage statement appears 
to indicate that he had paid $9,495 year-to-date, which is consistent with Applicant’s 
testimony. It indicated that a payment of $20,829 was required to bring the loan 
current.7 
 
 The SOR alleges the dismissed Chapter 13 bankruptcy case; the mortgage loan 
that was $56,770 past due with a balance of $251,759; three miscellaneous delinquent 
debts with balances totaling about $9,600; and four delinquent medical debts totaling 
$650. The debts are established through credit reports, Applicant’s admissions, and the 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. 
 
 Applicant accepted a full-time position with his company in another state in May 
2017. His house is vacant. He stated that it requires improvements to be able to sell at 
his estimated value of $390,000. He testified that he would use the proceeds of the sale 
to pay his delinquent debts.8 
 
 Applicant did not provide proof that he paid any of the delinquent debts alleged in 
the SOR. In his post-hearing submission, he indicated that he was no longer planning 
on selling his house. He wrote that it “is currently under refinancing/loan modification.” 
No further information was provided about the mortgage loan. He indicated that he 
“started a new eQIP (Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing) 
investigation” and identified ten outstanding accounts “for re-investigation.” All of the 
non-mortgage debts alleged in the SOR are included, except for the $302 medical debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. That debt is not listed on the most recent credit report.9  
 
 Applicant wrote in his post-hearing response that he spoke with the district 
manager for the creditor for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, and that “it appears this 
account is in error.” He wrote that he was awaiting resolution. Applicant admitted owing 
this debt in his response to the SOR and at his hearing. He stated that the debt was for 
“a couple of televisions.” The debt is listed on the July 2018 credit report.10 
 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 26; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 6-9. 
 
7 Tr. at 28-34; GE 8, 11; AE A. 
 
8 Tr. at 23, 32-33, 36-41, 44; GE 1. 
 
9 AE D. 
 
10 Tr. at 45-47; AE D. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant traveled to a foreign country for tourism in July 2015, which was a few 
months before he filed his Chapter 13 bankruptcy case. He received financial 
counseling as a requirement of his bankruptcy case. His most recent credit report lists 
new delinquent debts that were not alleged in the SOR.11 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
11 Tr. at 54, 57-58; GE 1, 11. Any matter that was not alleged in the SOR will not be used for 
disqualification purposes. It may be considered when assessing Applicant’s overall financial situation, in 
the application of mitigating conditions, and during the whole-person analysis. 
 
 
5 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
  Applicant has a history of financial problems. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in order to avoid foreclosure. The 
bankruptcy case was dismissed after he reached an agreement to modify his mortgage 
loan. The Chapter 13 bankruptcy case does not raise security concerns independent of 
the delinquent debts that are alleged in the SOR. SOR ¶ 1.a is concluded for Applicant. 
The $302 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is not listed on the most recent credit 
report. That allegation is also concluded for Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant attributes his financial problems to the failure of his business, which he 
dissolved in 2008; his 2013 separation and 2015 divorce; and his employer making him 
a part-time employee and cutting his hours in half in June 2016. Those events qualify as 
conditions that were largely beyond his control. However, Applicant has done virtually 
nothing to actually pay any of his non-mortgage debts, and the status of his mortgage 
loan is murky at best. Moreover, he has accrued additional delinquent debts. He 
testified that he planned to sell his house and use the accrued equity to pay his 
delinquent debts. In his post-hearing submission, he indicated that he was no longer 
planning on selling his house, but he failed to establish that he had a workable plan to 
pay his debts. 
 
There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I find that financial 
considerations security concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
