       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of:       )
 )
----------------------------------          )  ISCR Case No. 17-03191
     )
     )
     )
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: David Hayes,  Esq., Department Counsel
      For Applicant: Pro se     
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated drug involvement or criminal conduct concerns.  Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On November 6, 2017, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
under the drug involvement, criminal conduct, and personal conduct guidelines why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance shouild be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended. DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive); by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4).
12/17/2018
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 27, 2017, and requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to another judge on March 20, 2018, reassigned to me
on May 30, 2018, and scheduled for hearing on June 5, 2018. A hearing was held on the
scheduled date for the purpose of considering whether it would be clearly consistent with
the national interest to grant, continue, deny, or revoke Applicant’s security clearance. At
the hearing, the Government’s case consisted of three exhibits (GEs 1-3). Applicant
relied on one witness (himself) and 11 exhibits (AEs A-K). The Government’s exhibits
and Applicant’s exhibits were admitted without objection. The transcript was received on
June 13, 2018.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documentation of expunged
charges regarding two state drug charges and proof of probation compliance in
connection with a September 2016 marijuana possession conviction satisfaction. Within
the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with a cover sheet and order of
dismissal of unidentified charges in another state and proof of probation compliance in
connection with his 2016 drug-related conviction.  Applicant’s submissions were admitted
without objection as AEs L-N.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly used marijuana with varying frequency 
from approximately 1974 until September 2016; (b) sold and purchased marijuana from
approximately 1981 until 1985; (c) used marijuana at least three times in 2016 while
holding a security clearance; (d) and was diagnosed with a condition described as
marijuana use in February 2017 by a licensed clinical psychologist.
Under Guideline J, Applicant allegedly was charged with the following: (a)
possession of marijuana and possession of drug paraphernalia in September 2016; (b)
engaging in construction trade without a license and proof of insurance in July 1999; (c)
felony forgery and engaging in construction trade without a license in February 1998; (d)
possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia in November 1997; (e) violation of a
protective order in March 1996; (f) fighting in a public place in August 1987; (g) felony
possession and distribution of marijuana in October 1985 for which he served nine
months in jail; (h) burglary, possession of marijuana, and receiving stolen property in
March 1980; (i) threatening a witness, battery on a person, and misdemeanor vandalism
in May 1979; (j) burglary in March 1979; and (k) information set forth in ¶ 1.a-1.c of
Guideline H.    
Under Guideline E, (a) each of the allegations covered in Guidelines H and J are
incorporated and (b) the allegations covered by ¶¶ 3.b-3.c covering allegations of receipt
of unsatisfactory evaluation in 2016 for violating company policy for using marijuana and
placement on his company’s performance action plan due to his arrest for marijuana
possession.  
2
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations covering his
drug activities, arrests and charges with explanations. He claimed his drug-related
activities happened so long ago and under such conditions that they will not likely recur.
Addressing his non-drug-related charges, he denied the allegations with explanations.
He claimed they were either dropped, duplicated, did not involve charges or felonies, or
happened many years ago and under such conditions that recurrences are unlikely.
Responding to the allegations covered by Guideline E, Applicant denied receiving an
unsatisfactory evaluation from his employer in September 2016 for violating company
policy for using marijuana. He admitted being placed on a performance action plan by his
employer.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 59-year-old software engineer who seeks a security clearance for a 
defense contractor. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant has never married and has no children. (GEs 1-2) He earned a high
school diploma in June 1977 and a music teaching certification in June 1985. In August
2000, Applicant earned a programming certification from a local state community college
in his state of residence. Between May 2005 an May 2006, he attended a state university
in his state of residence and earned a bachelor’s degree in computer science. (GE 1)
Applicant reported no military service.
Since November 2012, Applicant has been employed by his current employer. 
(GEs 1-2) He worked for another defense contractor between October 2009 and
November 2012. (GE 1) Between December 2000 and November 2012, he worked for
numerous non-defense contractors in various jobs. He reported intermittent periods of
unemployment between September 2006 and October 2009. (GEs 1-2) Records
document that he has held a security clearance since 2010. (GE 1)
Applicant's drug history
Applicant was introduced to marijuana at the age of 14. (GE 2). Typically, he
would smoke marijuana a few times a month when he or his friends could get the
substance. (GE 2) Between 1974 and 1985, he continued using marijuana with varying
frequency of use until he reached the age of 21. (GE 2) Beginning in 1981, he began to
buy and sell marijuana for his personal use as well as smoke the substance weekly on a
regular basis to relieve anxiety. (GE 2) He continued this practice until 1985 when he
was arrested for selling marijuana. (GE 2) 
In November 1997, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of
marijuana and possession of drug paraphernalia. (GEs 2-3) In court, he pled guilty to
possession of drug paraphernalia, and the marijuana possession charge was dropped.
(GE 2 and AE N)
3
In March 1980, Applicant was arrested on felony charges for burglary, possession
of marijuana, and receiving stolen property, Applicant entered a guilty plea. Applicant
later filed a motion with the court to vacate his guilty plea. (AE K) This motion was
granted, and Applicant’s felony guilty plea was dismissed and expunged. (AE K; Tr. 59) 
In October 1985, Applicant was arrested for felony possession and distribution of
marijuana. (GEs 1-3) At the time, Applicant was buying and selling marijuana at the rate
of two to three pounds a week and selling it to other unidentified individuals in
approximately one-half or one pound quantities. (GE 2) In that month, police raided his
home and found approximately one pound of marijuana. (GE 2) Applicant was then
arrested and taken to jail. In court, he pleaded guilty to the possession charges and was
sentenced to nine months in jail. (GEs 1-3; Tr. 60-61) Applicant is credited with
completing his court sentence. (GE 2) Upon Applicant’s subsequent motion in 2009 to
set aside his guilty plea, the charges were dismissed, and his felony guilty plea was
expunged. (AE K) 
Between 1981 and 1985, Applicant continued to use marijuana and purchased
and sold marijuana to support his personal needs for the substance. (GEs 1-3) Following
his arrest for selling marijuana in 1985, Applicant ceased using the substance until early
2016. (GE 2; Tr. 62) 
Records document that he was arrested and charged with possession of
marijuana and possession of drug paraphernalia in December 1997. (GEs 1-3) In court,
he pled guilty to possession of marijuana paraphernalia, and the marijuana possession
charge was dropped. (AE N) The record contains no probative evidence of Applicant’s
using or possessing marijuana prior to his arrest.
Sometime in early 2016, Applicant began dating a woman who typically smoked
marijuana in a homemade bong made from a soda can. (GE 2) Feeling peer pressure
from his girlfriend to use the marijuana she offered him, he used marijuana on
approximately three occasions in 2016, with the last occurring in September 2016. All of
his marijuana use and possession in 2016 occurred while he held a security clearance.
(GEs 1-22 and AE F; Tr. 70) While he likes the feeling he gets from marijuana use, he
knows his use violated DoD policy, as well as Federal and state law. (GE 2 and AE F)
In September 2016, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of
marijuana and possession of drug paraphernalia. Applicant had been home at the time
when police arrived in response to a complaint by his tenant. After disclosing to police
that he had a small amount of marijuana in his unit, and rented the other unit, police
arrested him and charged him with marijuana possession. (GE 1-3) Applicant disclosed
his arrest the following day to his employer. (GEs 2-3; Tr. 65-66) 
Once in court to answer to the 2016 marijuana possession and marijuana
paraphernalia charges against him, Applicant pled guilty to marijuana and marijuana
paraphernalia charges, was directed to see a substance abuse evaluator, and was
placed on probation. Probation conditions set by the court for his September 2016
offense included counseling and six months of supervised probation. (GEs 1-3 and AE L;
4
Tr. 69-70) Applicant, in turn, self-referred himself to a substance abuse clinic in fulfillment
of the conditions set by both the sentencing court and his employer.
Due to his September 2016 arrest for possession of illegal drugs and drug
paraphernalia, In February 2017, Applicant was placed on a performance action plan
and required to complete an improvement plan. (GE 2 and AE A) To complete his action
plan, Applicant was required to seek counseling on substance abuse through an
employee assistance program and complete counseling sessions recommended by the
provider; maintain a lifestyle consistent and compliant for someone that holds a security
clearance; and receive negative test results from any directed random drug tests. (GE 2)
In his follow-up counseling sessions (three in all) with a licensed clinical
psychiatrist, who diagnosed him with a condition described as marijuana use under the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-5 (Am. Psych. Assoc. 2013) (DSM-5). (GEs 1-2)
Before entering a diagnosis, his mental health evaluator administered an SASSI-3 test
and cleared him of any substance abuse or dependence problems. (AE F; Tr. 63-64)  
Applicant submitted to two randomly administered urinalyses directed by his
employer in 2016 and 2017, respectively. (AEs D-E) Both tests produced negative
results. (AEs D-E) Applicant was credited with satisfying his probation conditions in May
2017, and he has not used marijuana since September 2016. (AEs C and L; Tr. 64) And
to reinforce his assurances that he has disassociated from persons who use illegal drugs
(including his former tenant), Applicant sued his tenant to vacate the premises leased
from the former. (AE B; Tr. 55-58)  Disposition of the lawsuit remains pending.
Non-drug-related arrest history
Other criminal charges waged against Applicant include engaging in construction
trade without a license or proof of insurance in July 1999 and felony forgery and
engaging in construction trade without a license in February 1998. While the 1999
charges were dismissed in July 1999, Applicant pled guilty to the 1998 charges and was
convicted of a misdemeanor offense.  (AE N) 
Besides the forgery and construction trade charges, Applicant was charged with
other non-marijuana offenses between 1979 and 1996. In March 1996, he was charged
with violating a protective order. Applicant denies the charges, and the case summary
does not indicate any disposition. (AEs J, N) Records confirm that Applicant was
charged in March 1979 with burglary and in May 1979 with threatening a witness, battery
on person, and misdemeanor vandalism. Dispositions of these charges are not available.
 
Work-related adverse performance evaluations
As the result of his September 2016 drug-related arrest, Applicant received an
unsatisfactory evaluation for violating company policy for using marijuana. (GEs 1-2) He
was placed on an action plan by his employer due to his arrest for possession of
marijuana. His performance review of November 2016 included no evaluations on a
5
number of performance elements and an overall unsatisfactory rating. (AEs A and I) Still,
Applicant has kept his employment with his employer. (Tr. 67-68).
Endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by his supervisors and co-workers. His supervisor 
characterized him as a strong worker who can be trusted to perform his work thoroughly
and efficiently. (AE H) He credited him with strong professional commitments in all areas
he is responsible for as a member of his intelligence team. (AE H) A former general
manager familiar with Applicant’s work described Applicant as a thoughtful, trustworthy
employee on the company’s development team who is always considerate of his
colleagues and never gave reason to doubt his job performance. (GE I) A project lead of
Applicant’s software team credited Applicant with helping to modernize a military project
to keep pace with the newest technologies and protocols. (AE G) And a good friend who
worked with Applicant for four years, and is aware of his 2016 drug-related charges,
credited Applicant with good software work skills, dependability, and a strong work ethic.
(Tr. 82-83) In his opinion, Applicant gained valuable lessons from his 2016 drug-related
incident. (Tr. 85)
                                                       Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise as security concern and
may be disqualifying (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the conditions that
could mitigate security concerns. 
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is
to be evaluated in the context of the whole-person in accordance with AG, ¶ 2(c)
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial into
account the pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the  context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant's life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. When evaluating an applicant's
conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be considered together with the following AG ¶
2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual's age and maturity at the time of
6
the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or
absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation. Based on the requirement of Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. [s]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials." See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy concerns are pertinent herein:                                    
                                                    Drug Involvement
The Concern: The illegal use of controlled substances, to
include the misuse of prescription and non-prescription drugs,
and the use of other substances that causes physical or
mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with
their intended purpose can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because such
behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment
and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations . . . AG
¶ 24.
                                        Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubts about a
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very
nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to
comply with laws, rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 30
     Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack
of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during
7
national security investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .
AG ¶ 15  
                                            Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or 
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for
asecurity clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995). As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have are
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of 
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation Based on the requirement of Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. "[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials." See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). And, because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with th Applicant.
                                                         Analysis
Applicant is a well-regarded software engineer who presents with a considerable
history of drug involvement that includes drug-related arrests and an unsatisfactory 
personnel evaluation of Applicant as the result of his violating company policy in 2016 for
using marijuana. Principal security issues in this case center on Applicant's lengthy
history of drug involvement that includes a still very recent 2016 marijuana arrest and
conviction.
Drug concerns
Over a considerable period of drug activity stretching from 1974 to 1985, and
more recently in 2016, Applicant used, possessed, sold, and purchased marijuana. His
most recent involvement with marijuana (both use and possession) occurred while
8
holding a security clearance. Applicant’s admissions to using and possessing illegal
drugs while holding a security clearance raises concerns about risks of recurrence as
well as judgment issues. On the strength of the evidence presented, three disqualifying
conditions of the  AGs for drug abuse are applicable: DC ¶¶ 25(a), "any substance
misuse," 25(c), "illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation,
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug
paraphernalia; and 25(f), “any illegal drug use while granted access to classified
information or holding a sensitive position.” 
In Applicant's case, his significant involvement with marijuana over a number of
years, capped by his recurrent use and possession of marijuana in 2016 while holding a
security clearance following over 20 years of self-imposed abstinence, raises serious
questions over the strength of his most recent abstinence commitments. To his credit, he
sought substance abuse counseling in compliance with the directions he received from
the sentencing court and his employer and has since satisfied the court’s probation
conditions. For these initiatives, he warrants some application of MC ¶ 26(d),
“satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, including, but not
limited to, rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, without recurrence or abuse, and a
favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional,” and received a favorable
prognosis from his substance abuse evaluator. 
But while Applicant's material use and possession of illegal drugs in 2016 has
never been repeated since his acknowledged last use in September 2016 in any proven
way, his recurrent use and possession of marijuana products after a lengthy period of
sustained abstinence is still too recent to enable safe predictions of continued avoidance
of illegal drugs. It is too soon to fully apply any of the potentially mitigating conditions to
Applicant's situation. While Applicant's assurances that his drug involvement is a thing of
the past are encouraging, more time is needed to draw safe inferences that he is not a
recurrence risk.
Considering the record as a whole, there is insufficient probative evidence of
sustainable mitigation to make predictable judgments about his ability to avoid drugs and
drug purchases in the foreseeable future. Taking into account all of the facts and
circumstances surrounding Applicant's past marijuana use in 2016 while holding a
security clearance, he does not mitigate security concerns with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraphs ¶¶ 1.a-1.c of the SOR. Based on the favorable prognosis he
received from his substance abuse evaluator, subparagraph 1.d is resolved favorable to
Applicant.
Criminal conduct concerns
Additional security concerns are raised over Applicant’s considerable history of
arrests, both drug-related and non-drug related. Most of his pre-2016 drug-related
arrests (i.e., those of 1997, 1980, and 1985) are aged, but still relevant and material to a
pattern assessment of Applicant’s recurrent involvement with illegal drugs and drug
paraphernalia. Applicable to Applicant’s situation is DC ¶¶ 31(a), “a pattern of minor
offenses, any one of which on its own would be unlikely to affect a national security
9
eligibility decision, but which in combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment,
reliability, or trustworthiness,” and 31(b), “evidence (including, but not limited to, a
credible allegation, an  admission, and matters of official record ) of criminal conduct,
regardless of wether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted,” of
the criminal conduct guideline.  
Due to the age of most of Applicant’s drug-related and non-drug-related criminal
offenses, partial mitigation is available to him.  MCs ¶¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed
since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and 31(d) “there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation: including, but not limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training
or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement,”
apply. 
Overall, Applicant’s recurrent drug-related offenses covering his 1980, 1985, 1997
and 2016 charges and convictions form a part of a continuing pattern of illegal drug
involvement that are inner-related with his drug-related activities over an extended period
time spanning 1980-2016. Because his older drug-related arrests cannot be reasonably
separated from his drug-related activities covered by Guideline H, they cannot be
independently mitigated. So, while Applicant’s non-drug-related arrests are mitigated by
the passage of time and subsequent dismissal and expungement in some cases, his
drug-related offenses cannot be separated from the Government’s continuing drug-
related concerns covered by Guideline H.  
Personal conduct concerns
The Government’s drug-related  concerns are also raised under the personal
conduct guideline. Most of the allegations are adequately covered by the drug and
criminal conduct guidelines and need not be addressed anew under the personal
conduct guideline. Separately covered are Applicant’s unsatisfactory evaluation for 2016
that is keyed to his self-reported violation of his company’s policy for avoiding marijuana
use. As the result of his drug-related arrest of September 2016, his company placed him
on a performance action plan. With the support of his supervisors and managers,
Applicant is widely credit with being in compliance with his plan. 
By all reported accounts from his supervisors and managers, Applicant continues
to function and prosper with his employer and has successfully gained the confidence of
his company that he is not at risk to relapse to recurrent drug usage. Personal conduct
concerns of his employer resulting from his 2016 arrest are resolved and mitigated in
Applicant’s favor.  
Whole-person assessment
In making a whole-person assessment of Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability,
and good judgment, consideration is given to not only the drug, criminal conduct, and
personal conduct issues raised in the SOR, but the contributions he has and continues to
10
make to his employer and the defense industry in general. Overall, though, Applicant has
established insufficient probative evidence of his overall trustworthiness and
understanding of DoD policy constraints on the use of illegal substances to facilitate safe
predictions that he is at no risk of recurrence of illegal drug usage. Criteria for meeting
security clearance requirements under the drug and criminal conduct guidelines have not
been met by Applicant. Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the
allegations covered by the personal conduct guideline.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE H (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):                 AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a-1.c                  Against Applicant
Subparas. 1.d:        For Applicant
   
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT)                    AGAINST APPLICANT
   
         Subparas.  2a, 2.d. 2.g, and 2.h,                     Against Applicant
::                   and 2.k
         Subparas.  2.b-2.c, 2.e-2.f, and 2.1-2.j:           For Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT)                 FOR APPLICANT
Subparas 3.a-3.c:                                          For Applicant 
 Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility
to hold a security clearance. Clearance is denied.
                                               
        Roger C. Wesley
         Administrative Judge 
11
12
