 
1 
 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02668 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Aileen Xenakis, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was involved in alcohol-related criminal incidents in 2010, 2011, and 
was convicted of driving under the influence (DUI) in 2016. His last alcohol-related 
misconduct occurred two years ago. He has demonstrated a sufficient pattern of 
modified behavior for me to conclude that the questionable judgment associated with 
his alcohol-related incidents is behind him. I believe he will continue to consume alcohol 
responsibly to maintain his eligibility for a clearance. The alcohol consumption and 
criminal conduct security concerns are mitigated. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 3, 2016. (GE 
1) He provided a statement during an interview with a government background 
investigator on March 20, 2017, and answered interrogatories on September 28, 2017. 
(GE 2) After reviewing the information gathered during the background investigation, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 4, 
2017, alleging security concerns under Guidelines G (alcohol consumption) and J 
(criminal conduct). Applicant answered the SOR on November 8, 2017, and requested a 
 
2 
 
 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA).  
 
DOHA assigned the case to me on April 13, 2018, and issued a notice of hearing 
on June 8, 2018, setting the hearing for June 26, 2018. Applicant requested a delay to 
retain an attorney, and the hearing was rescheduled for July 10, 2018. At the hearing, 
the Government offered twelve exhibits (GE 1 through 12). Applicant testified, 
presented the testimony of an expert witness, and submitted eight exhibits (AE 1 
through 8). All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on August 7, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant denied SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and admitted SOR ¶ 
1.c. He submitted comments in mitigation and explanation. Because SOR ¶ 2.a cross 
alleges the same facts alleged in SOR ¶ 1, he submitted the same answers for both 
SOR paragraphs. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 53 years old. He graduated from high school in 1983, and shortly 
thereafter, he enlisted in the U.S. Navy. He honorably served on active duty until his 
discharge in 1989. (AE 5) He possessed a clearance while in the service. He married in 
1991 and divorced in 1998. He has an adult son of this marriage.  
 
Applicant has been working for federal contractors since 2001. He has received 
good evaluations and is well-regarded by his employers. (AE 4) He noted that of the 
160 employees working for his employer in 2006-2007, only he and 12 other employees 
have been continued to present. Applicant has been promoted twice, and has 
possessed a clearance since 1993. His clearance was upgraded to top-secret in 1996, 
which has been continued to present. He seeks the continuation of his clearance which 
is required for his work with his current employer.  
 
In response to Section 22 (Police Record) of his 2016 SCA, Applicant disclosed 
he was involved in an alcohol-related conviction for malicious bodily injuring (a felony) in 
April 2010. He arrived at a bar at about 7:30 p.m. to watch a couple of hockey games, 
and left the bar at about 1:45 a.m. He testified that he only drank four beers during the 
six-hour period. Applicant claimed that on his way home he was threatened by a man 
who was also at the bar watching the games. He assaulted the man. Applicant was 
found guilty at a jury trial of malicious bodily injuring, and required to make restitution of 
$1,250. Applicant claimed he was not intoxicated, and that he was the victim to a bad 
investigation. 
 
In April 2011, Applicant arrived at a bar for dinner and to watch some games. He 
claimed that he only consumed four beers over a six to seven-hour period. At about 2 
a.m., when the bar closed, Applicant went to a restaurant to eat. After a couple of hours 
at the restaurant, he was involved in an altercation with three police officers. Alcohol 
 
3 
 
 
use was noted in the police report. He was charged with resisting arrest, obstructing a 
police officer, and disorderly conduct. The charges were later dismissed due to the 
police officers’ failure to appear. Applicant repeatedly claimed he was not drunk and that 
he was the victim of police misconduct. 
 
During his March 2017 interview with a government investigator, Applicant 
disclosed that he was convicted of driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol in 2016. 
Applicant and coworkers went to a bar to eat and celebrate the completion of a job. 
They arrived at the bar at about 8:00 p.m., and stayed until the bar closed at 2 a.m. 
Applicant claimed he consumed four beers and two shots of scotch. He was arrested 
while weaving on the road. He pleaded guilty to DUI and was sentenced to one-year 
probation; fined $2,000; driver’s license was suspended for one year, with driving 
privileges for work; breathalyzer in the car, and to attend VA ASAP classes. He has 
complied with all the terms of his sentence. (AE 7) 
 
Applicant reported all the above incidents to his facility security officer and in his 
SCA. He has continued to consume alcoholic beverages, but averred he drinks once a 
week, three to four beers per occasion. Applicant denied having a drinking problem. 
There is no evidence to show that he has been diagnosed with any alcohol use 
disorder. He credibly testified that he has learned a valuable lesson as a result of his 
DUI conviction. He no longer drives after consuming alcohol. He now uses the services 
of taxis, a designated driver, or ride-sharing companies to avoid drinking and driving. 
 
Applicant submitted five favorable reference statements. (AE 8) He is considered 
to be responsible, dependable, hardworking, diligent, honest, and trustworthy. His 
references lauded his work ethic, performance, knowledge, and specialized skills. They 
recommended his eligibility for a clearance. His supervisor noted that Applicant follows 
security rules and procedures.  
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
4 
 
 
The AGs list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 21: Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness. 
 
 Applicant’s alcohol-related incidents in 2010, 2011, and his 2016 DUI, where he 
excessively consumed alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, establish the following 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 22(a): alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the 
individual's alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder; and 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 22(c): habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with 
alcohol use disorder. 
 
 The security concerns raised under this guideline have been mitigated by the 
following applicable factors under AG ¶ 23: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations. 
 
 Applicant acknowledged that he exercised extremely poor judgment by driving a 
vehicle after having consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication in 2016. There is no 
evidence of any further alcohol-related misconduct after his 2016 DUI. Although 
Appellant continues to consume alcohol, he has demonstrated a pattern of responsible 
consumption of alcohol. He has also taken the necessary precautions, by designating a 
sober driver or using a ride-sharing service, to avoid driving a vehicle on any occasion 
that he has consumed any amount of alcohol. In nearly two years since his DUI, he has 
demonstrated a sufficient pattern of modified behavior for me to conclude that the 
questionable judgment associated with his alcohol consumption is behind him.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 30: Criminal activity creates 
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it 
calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s 2010 and 2011 alcohol-related incidents, and his 2016 DUI conviction 
establish the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 31: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
 
6 
 
 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
 The security concerns raised under this guideline have been mitigated by the 
following applicable factors under AG ¶ 32: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 Incorporating my comments under Guideline G, AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) are 
established to mitigate the DUI conviction given the evidence of Applicant’s modified 
behavior and responsible consumption of alcohol. Applicant has demonstrated a 
sufficient pattern of modified behavior for me to conclude that the questionable 
judgment associated with his alcohol-related incidents, and 2016 DUI conviction are 
behind him. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
appellant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an appellant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
 
7 
 
 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines G and J in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Applicant, 53, served six years in the Navy, and has been working for federal 
contractors since 2001. He has possessed a clearance during most of his service and 
period working for federal contractors. There is no evidence of any other security 
concerns aside from those alleged in the SOR. 
 
Applicant’s criminal conduct concerns are primarily the result of his alcohol use. 
His last alcohol-related misconduct occurred two years ago. Applicant has 
demonstrated a sufficient pattern of modified behavior for me to conclude that the 
questionable judgment associated with his 2010 and 2011 alcohol-related incidents, and 
his 2016 DUI conviction are behind him. Applicant promised to continue to consume 
alcohol responsibly to maintain his eligibility for a clearance. The alcohol consumption 
and criminal conduct security concerns are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:     For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national security interests of the United States to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
