1 
         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
) ISCR Case No. 17-04166 
) 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On April 23, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The DOD CAF acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017 (AG). 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 25, 2018. She elected to have her case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 28, 2018. The evidence 
12/20/2018
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-9 (Items 1 and 2 include pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on July 24, 
2018. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. On September 5, 2018, Applicant’s counsel 
entered his appearance, filed a written response to the FORM (FE I), and submitted 
exhibits (AE) A-D. Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and Items 3-9 
are admitted.1 Applicant exhibits are also admitted without objection. The case was 
assigned to me on December 12, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all the allegations in the SOR. After a careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. She has worked for a federal contractor since February 
2016 as a translator at an overseas location. Her previous employment was in the 
private sector. She experienced periods of unemployment from 2009 to 2013, and from 
2006 to 2008. She was married for the second time in 2007, although she claims she is 
currently separated from her husband. Her first marriage was from 1991 to 2004. She 
has three adult children from this marriage. She has two children from her current 
marriage. She is a high school graduate.2 
  
 The SOR alleged Applicant has 12 charged-off and collection accounts in the 
total amount owed of approximately $14,466. The allegations are supported by credit 
reports from April 2018, November 2017, March 2017, and February 2016.3 
 
 Applicant explained in her SOR answer and FORM response that the nine 
medical collection debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f-1.i, and 1.k-1.m) were disputed because 
she had insurance during that time that should have paid these debts. She pointed out 
that all but two of these debts no longer appeared on her latest credit report. The 
remaining two that still remain (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b) are of minimal security 
significance. I find for Applicant concerning all the medical accounts.4  
  
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s counsel made two objections to the FORM. First, he states that the FORM erroneously 
refers to Guideline E when it should refer to Guideline F (FORM p. 2, para. 2). That objection is sustained 
and the correct reference should be Guideline F. I will consider the language as referring to Guideline F. 
Second, Applicant’s counsel objects, based on relevance, to Department Counsel arguing about past 
debts not alleged in the SOR (FORM p. 3, para. 3). I will not consider any unalleged debts for 
disqualification purposes, but I will consider such information as it may relate to the application of any 
mitigating conditions and the whole-person factors. To that extent, the objection is sustained.   
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Items 2, 4-6. 
 
4 Items 2, 6-9; FE I. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The three remaining delinquent accounts are from credit cards (SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.e). 
Applicant denied these debts because she claimed that they all were opened by her 
husband using her credit information, social security number, and other personal 
identifying information without her permission. She stated that because of her religion 
and culture, she had no right to question her husband’s handling of their finances or use 
of the credit cards. She acknowledged during her background interview that she was a 
cosigner on the accounts. Credit reports also show that the two largest credit card 
delinquencies were opened before her marriage to her current husband. She claims that 
she is separated from her husband and has made efforts to contact the creditors to 
remove the accounts from her name. She failed to provide documentation supporting 
these assertions. Her bank account statements from August 2018 indicated that her 
husband remains named on their checking account. All these accounts remain unpaid 
and are unresolved.5  
 
 Applicant submitted several character letters in support of her receiving a 
clearance. Four were from personnel related to her current position. Applicant is 
described as loyal, professional, honest, and patriotic by those who worked with her as 
a translator. Two letters were also provided by supervisors in her private sector 
employment where she was described as professional and loyal.6   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
5 Items 2, 6-9; FE I; AE D. 
 
6 AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid. I find all the above 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 None of these mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s debts are recent and 
remain unresolved. She did not provide sufficient evidence to show that her financial 
problems are unlikely to recur. She did not substantiate that she is separated from her 
husband and that he no longer has any influence over her finances. AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply. Applicant’s husband’s unauthorized use of her credit and resulting debt may 
be considered a condition beyond her control, however, she failed to take responsible 
actions to address her resulting debts by substantiating that she has separated herself 
from his control. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. She addressed her medical debts, 
but the delinquent credit card debt remains. There is no evidence of financial 
counseling. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) partially apply toward the medical debts. She failed 
to document her dispute of the credit card debt. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s translator 
duties in service to our military, and the circumstances that led to her financial 
difficulties. Applicant has not established a track record of financial stability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations.7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.f – 1.i:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.k – 1.m:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
                                                          
7 I considered the exceptions under Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, Appendix C, 
dated June 8, 2017, and determined they are not applicable in this case.  
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
