1 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
)
[Redacted] ) ISCR Case No. 17-03575 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 27, 2016. On 
November 9, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline 
F. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines
(December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017.
Applicant answered the SOR on December 6, 2017, and requested a decision on 
the written record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case on July 11, 2018. On September 5, 2018, a complete copy of the file of 
12/26/2018
 
2 
 
relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s 
evidence. He received the FORM on September 17, 2018, and submitted a timely 
response. The case was assigned to me on December 14, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant disclosed in his SCA that he was in a payment plan with the IRS for 
federal income taxes. (FORM Item 2.) The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $11,564 in 
delinquent federal income taxes (SOR ¶ 1.a) and that he failed to timely file his federal 
income tax return for tax year 2016 (SOR ¶ 1.b). In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he 
admitted both allegations with explanations. His admissions are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old security-systems engineer employed by defense 
contractors since October 2012. He received a bachelor’s degree in information 
technology security in January 2009 and a master’s degree in information security 
assurance in January 2010. He has been employed as an adjunct professor at several 
universities since February 2010. He married in September 1993 and has four children, 
ages 23, 22, 17, and 16. He has held a security clearance since November 2012. 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that his tax debt was due to “errors in 
my tax filing.” He did not provide any further details. He stated that he was making 
payments as required on a payment plan for the tax debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He did 
not provide any documentary evidence of a payment plan or payments. Department 
Counsel requested that he provide a tax transcript for 2014 showing payments, but he 
did not comply with the request. In Department Counsel’s submission, she pointed out 
the absence of documentation to support Applicant’s statements. 
 
In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he submitted a document reflecting that he 
had made one $350 payment in May 2018 and five $200 payments from May through 
September 2018 on a debt for tax year 2014. However, the document does not contain 
any indicia that it was issued by the IRS. He did not submit any documentary evidence of 
a payment agreement. He asserted that he also made $200 payments in June through 
October 2018, but he submitted no documentation of these payments. He stated that he 
had reduced his indebtedness to the IRS from $11,564 to $7,005, but he provided no 
documentation to support his statement. 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated that he believed that he electronically 
filed his federal income tax return for tax year 2016, and that he had mailed a hard copy 
of the 2016 tax return to the IRS, but he provided no documentation to support his 
statement. In his response to the FORM, he repeated his statement that he had filed his 
2016 return, elaborating that his tax return was received by the IRS and was processed 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (FORM Item 2) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
on June 18, 2018. However, he did not submit any documentary evidence in his SOR 
answer or response to the FORM showing that the 2016 return had been filed. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 
4 
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s responses to the SOR and the FORM and the documentary evidence 
in the FORM establish the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required. 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
5 
 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(g): the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
None of these mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s tax delinquencies 
are recent. He submitted no evidence of unusual circumstances or conditions beyond his 
control that caused him to incur the tax debt and fail to timely file his 2016 tax return. He 
submitted no evidence of counseling. Although he asserted that he was making 
payments, he submitted no documentary evidence of payments or a payment agreement, 
despite being reminded by Department Counsel at least twice of the need for 
documentation. When applicants assert that debts are being resolved, they are expected 
to present documentary evidence to support their assertions. ISCR Case No. 15-03363 
at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2016). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2  
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
6 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis 
and applied the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant submitted no evidence related 
to his job performance, professional reputation, or community involvement. Because he 
requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I had no opportunity to 
evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 
at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions 
under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his tax 
delinquencies. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
