 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04386 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the drug involvement and substance abuse and 
personal conduct, and criminal conduct security concerns. National security eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 30, 2016. On 
March 20, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance 
Abuse, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. Applicant 
answered the SOR on April 26, 2018 (Answer), and requested a decision on the record 
without a hearing.  
 
On June 25, 2018, a complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing seven Items, was mailed to Applicant. The FORM notified Applicant that he 
had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not respond to the 
FORM. Items 1 through 7 are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on 
October 29, 2018.  
 
 
 2
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 27 years old, single, and has no children. He received a high school 
diploma in June 2010, and he has attended some college courses. He has worked for a 
defense contractor since June 2016, and this is his first security clearance application. 
 
 Applicant started using and purchasing marijuana in 2010, when he was 
approximately 18 years old. He has admitted to using and purchasing marijuana until at 
least May 2016. 
 
In September 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of an 
illegal substance with the intent to distribute. He disclosed this arrest in his June 2016 
SCA. The charges were ultimately dismissed. (Item 4 at 15-16) 
 
The arresting officers noted that they saw a passenger in Applicant’s car pass him 
a joint of marijuana, and Applicant admitted that he used marijuana while operating his 
vehicle. They detected a strong odor of marijuana when they approached Applicant’s car. 
The officers found several discarded marijuana roaches, a burning marijuana joint, 
multiple baggies of marijuana, and other drug-related paraphernalia in Applicant’s car. 
The two other individuals in the car were also arrested, and one admitted to the arresting 
officers that he had recently been arrested for selling marijuana. (Item 6)  
 
In his PSI, Applicant claimed two individuals paid him to give them a ride in his car. 
When the police searched his car they found a bag of marijuana, it did not belong to him, 
but he was aware it was in his vehicle. The charges against Applicant were dropped after 
the presiding judge determined that the search and seizure during the arrest was illegal. 
(Item 4 at 15-16) 
 
Applicant did not disclose his history of using and purchasing marijuana in his June 
2016 SCA. (Item 3 at 35) During his September 2017 PSI, Applicant told the government 
investigator that he purchased and smoked three to five joints of marijuana a week from 
September 2010 until May 2016. He did not list this information on his SCA, because he 
was concerned he would lose his job. Additionally, he told the investigator that he does 
not intend to use marijuana in the future. (Item 4 at 16-17) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”1 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.”2 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
                                                          
1 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
2 Egan at 527. 
 
 
 3
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”3 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Adverse clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”4 Thus, 
a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Security Executive Agent have established for 
issuing national security eligibility. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.5 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”6 The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.7 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.8 An applicant has the burden of proving a potential mitigating condition, and the 
burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.9 
                                                          
3 Executive Order (EO) 10865 § 2. 
 
4 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
5 Directive ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
6 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
7  See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2016). 
 
8 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 4
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”10 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”11 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, but because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted 
in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia. 
 
Applicant admitted he purchased and used marijuana two to three times a week 
for almost six years. The record evidence raised both disqualifying conditions. 
 
The burden shifted to Appellant to rebut or prove mitigation of the resulting security 
concerns. AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
                                                          
 
10 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002); Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
11 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 5
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs used; and 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
Given Applicant’s frequency of marijuana use, his period of abstinence is 
insufficient to mitigate his lengthy history of use. He told the government investigator that 
he no longer associates with the people with whom he used marijuana, but there is limited 
corroborating evidence that Applicant has changed his lifestyle and behavior. Mitigation 
was not established under AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b). 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
 6
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
In this case, Appellant admitted that he intentionally falsified his SCA. The 
evidence established the above disqualifying condition. 
AG ¶ 17 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose derogatory information regarding use of marijuana in 
his SCA. Over a year later, he admitted during his PSI that he did not disclose his drug 
use because he was afraid his history would affect his ability to hold his job. The 
government relies upon applicants to be honest and forthright during the security 
application process. Applicant was not honest regarding his extensive period of marijuana 
use. There is no evidence that he made proactive efforts to disclose this derogatory 
information to his employer in the fifteen months between his completion of the SCA and 
his PSI. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(c).    
 
Guideline J: Criminal Conduct  
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual's judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
 Appellant’s drug-related 2012 arrest establishes the above disqualifying condition.  
 
 7
 AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised in this 
case. The following two are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including, but not limited 
to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
 It has been over six years since Applicant’s 2012 arrest. However, he continued to 
use and purchase marijuana until May 2016. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) was 
not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under the guidelines at issue in my whole-
person analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under this guideline, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, Applicant has not mitigated the drug 
involvement and personal conduct security concerns, but he did mitigate the criminal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 8
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a – 3.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security of 
the United States to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
