1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01088 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On April 9, 2015, Applicant completed an electronic Questionnaire for Investigation 
Processing (e-QIP). On April 30, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 29, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on June 25, 
12/21/2018
 
2 
 
 
2018. The Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, 
or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. He did not provide a response, 
objections, or submit documents. Items 1 through 6 are admitted without objection. The 
case was assigned to me on November 19, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the sole SOR allegation. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He is a high school graduate. He served in the military 
from 2003 to 2012 and was honorably discharged in the paygrade E-5. He was married 
from 2006 to 2007. He has no children. He has been employed since December 2014.1  
 
 Applicant disclosed on his April 2015 e-QIP that he failed to file and pay his 2012 
federal income tax return. He stated: “Recently discharge[d] from the military at the time 
[and] was unemployed and unable to pay the amount owed.”2 He estimated he owed 
$6,000. He further stated: “Requested reissuance of 2012 W-2 from DFAS3 as I am 
unable to access, once W-2 is received taxes will be filed and amount paid.”4 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in October 2017. He 
discussed his failure to file his 2012 federal tax return. He said that he had entered his 
information to an online tax program, but did not file and panicked when he found out he 
might owe $6,000 in taxes. He did not have the money to pay the total amount to the IRS. 
He said he subsequently lost his W-2. He attempted to obtain a new W-2. He contacted 
DFAS for a copy, but had not received a response. He said he failed to contact the IRS 
and make payment arrangements. He intended to contact DFAS again and request a 
copy of the W-2 and file his 2012 federal tax return. He anticipated this would be 
completed by April 2018.5 
 
 Applicant answered government interrogatories in March 2018. In them he stated: 
“I have requested a 2012 W-2 from DFAS to ensure that any taxes owed are paid[,] but 
have not received it yet. When I do[,] I will file and set a payment plan.”6 
 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS).  
 
4 Item 4.  
 
5 Item 5.  
 
6 Item 6. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant did not provide a response to the FORM or any evidence to show he has 
filed his 2012 federal income tax return or paid any amount owed.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
  
(g) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his 2012 federal income tax return. There is sufficient 
evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying condition. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant admitted he failed to timely file his federal income return for tax year 
2012. He has been aware since completing his April 2015 e-QIP that his failure to file his 
tax return was an issue. He provided insufficient evidence to show he is responsibly 
addressing his tax issue. His tax issues are not resolved. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant did not file his 2012 federal income tax return because he did not have 
the money to pay the amount he believed he owed. This does not constitute a condition 
beyond his control. He then lost his W-2. He has repeatedly said he was requesting a 
copy from DFAS, but had not received it. This may have initially been beyond his control, 
but Applicant has not presented sufficient evidence to show when he made the request, 
how many requests he made, his follow-up actions, and if he contacted the IRS to arrange 
a payment plan. Applicant has not acted responsibly. I find AG ¶ 20(b) and AG ¶ 20(g) 
do not apply.  
 
 It is unknown if Applicant sought financial counseling, and there are not clear 
indications at this time to conclude the problem is being resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) does not 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
6 
 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 34 years old. He failed to file his 2012 federal income tax return 
because he did not have the money at the time to pay what he thought he owed. In 2015, 
after completing his e-QIP he was on notice that this was a security concern. The DOHA 
Appeal Board has held that:  
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established government rules and systems. Voluntary 
compliance with these things is essential for protecting classified 
information. ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). 
Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. August 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant 
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), 
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 7 
 
Applicant has not provided evidence that the delinquent tax return is filed, and he 
has paid what is owed or has a payment plan with the IRS. Applicant has not met his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
7 ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 3 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016). 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
