1 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case: 18-00413 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement and substance misuse security 
concerns. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility 
is granted.  
Statement of Case 
On March 16, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement and substance misuse. The action was 
taken under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017.  
Applicant answered the SOR on April 9, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. However, on August 15, 2018, he withdrew that request and 
asked for a decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on August 30, 2018. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
12/21/2018
 
 
2 
 
 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, including documents identified as Items 1 
through 5. He was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on 
September 17, 2018. He responded to the FORM in a letter dated September 17, 2018, 
marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. Applicant expressed no objections in AE A to Items 1 
through 5, which are admitted into evidence as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. 
Department Counsel had no objections to AE A and it is admitted. The case was 
assigned to me on December 17, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a government contractor. He graduated 
college in spring 2016. He listed no spouse or children. (GE 4.) 
 
 In July and August 2014, Applicant was employed through a “co-op work 
assignment” with a government contractor. During that internship-like experience, he 
completed a security clearance application and a security clearance was eventually 
granted. Applicant separated from the employer in August 2014 before any alleged drug 
use, but through an administrative failure, the Joint Personnel Adjudications System 
(JPAS) was not updated to reflect the separation. Applicant was administratively 
removed from JPAS in January 2017, after the company did an internal audit. The 
facility security officer (FSO) certified that these administrative errors occurred. 
(Answer.) 
 
 Applicant was stressed and sleep deprived due to the demands of his rigorous 
college schedule. He was also young and immature. Between September 2014 and 
April 2016, he used marijuana approximately three times monthly in social settings with 
friends. He tried mushrooms twice with friends between May 2015 and August 2015. He 
was arrested in September 2014 and charged with possession of marijuana and defiant 
trespass. He pled guilty to the lesser charge of disorderly conduct. He was fined $300 
for this offense. (Answer; GE 3; GE 4.) 
 
 Applicant was hired by the government contractor for whom he previously 
worked in May 2017. He completed a new security clearance application on June 28, 
2017. He voluntarily disclosed all of his drug use on that security clearance application. 
(GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant now avoids all environments where drugs are used and promised to 
continue to do so. He signed a statement of intent to abstain from illegal drug use. 
(Answer.) 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG 
¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations of the September 2014 arrest for marijuana 
use, marijuana use from September 2014 to April 2016, and mushroom use from May 
2015 to August 2015. Applicant’s admissions raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 25(a) 
and 25(b). AG ¶ 25(f) is not established as Applicant was not “granted access to 
classified information or holding a sensitive position” within the plain meaning of those 
terms at the time he used marijuana or mushrooms. 
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not 
limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and 
contacts;  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. 
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use spanned over a two-year period, while in college. 
During the past two years, he demonstrated his serious commitment to abstinence from 
illegal substances. He ceased using all drugs prior to accepting employment with a 
government contractor, his first professional job. He disassociated himself from drug-
using friends and associates. Applicant’s drug use occurred largely while he was 
attending educational institutions. He is now in the work-force and no longer attends 
school. Thus, he has changed his environment. While the Directive does not define 
what constitutes “an appropriate period of abstinence” under AG ¶ 26(b)(3), his candor 
about his illegal drug abuse leads me to accept as credible his assertions of no future 
intent to use marijuana or other illegal substances under any circumstances. Applicant 
has demonstrated sufficient intent not to use any illegal drugs in the future. He signed a 
statement of intent. He has matured and understands that any illegal drug involvement 
is incompatible with his defense contractor employment. Applicant has presented 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the Government’s concerns under AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
    
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was irresponsible 
 
 
6 
 
 
and did not recognize the seriousness of his actions when he used marijuana and 
mushrooms in college. He has now matured. He has not used illegal substances for 
more than two years after coming to the revelation that there was no room for illegal 
substances in his future professional life. His changes are permanent and the likelihood 
of recurrence is extremely low. The potential for pressure, coercion, or duress is 
eliminated by Applicant’s abstinence. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He 
met his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for drug 
involvement and substance misuse. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
and a security clearance. National security eligibility is granted. 
 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
