1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-00984 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
On May 15, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 29, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), and Applicant received it on July 10, 2018. 
He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
12/20/2018
 
2 
 
 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. The Government’s 
evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant submitted a timely response and 
his exhibits are marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D. There were no 
objections by Applicant or Department Counsel and all Items and exhibits and are 
admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on October 11, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except ¶ 1.e. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of 
fact. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He served in the military from 2001 to 2005 and was 
honorably discharged in the paygrade E-3. He attended college at different times and 
earned an associate’s degree in 2015. He married in 2002 and divorced in 2009. He 
remarried in 2010. He has four children, ages 16, 13, 10 and 9 years old, who live with 
him. He has another child from a relationship. He pays child support for this child.1  
 
 Applicant was employed from approximately September 2015 until May 2017, 
when he was laid off. He was unemployed until August 2017, when he began work at a 
car dealership on commission. He disclosed he was also self-employed as a financial 
services advisor from May 2017. He attributes his most recent unemployment for his 
financial issues.2 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and a consolidated credit report from January 2018 
corroborated the SOR allegations. In his answer to the SOR, he stated that after being 
released from his management position, he was unable to make minimum payments on 
his debts due to insufficient income. He also stated that when he initially opened certain 
accounts, he had no intention of defaulting on them.3  
 
In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he explained he had previously paid his bills, 
showing he was financially responsible. He explained that he currently has $73 a month 
to repay his delinquent debts. He intends to increase this amount to $200 in April 2019. 
After January 2020 he intends to increase it to $330 and in November 2021 to $500. He 
expects all of his debts to be paid by February 2025. He provided a one-page document 
stating three steps on how to reduce debt. He provided another document listing his debts 
with proposed minimum payments and proposed payoff dates. He did not provide 
evidence that he has made any payment or a budget showing his other expenses, 
income, or ability to make the payments. He explained that his plan did not provide for 
potential settlement offers that would reduce the amount he would pay and expedite the 
                                                          
1 Items 3, 4, 5. 
 
2 Items 3, 4, 5. 
 
3 Items 3, 4, 5, 6; AE A. 
 
3 
 
 
process. He did not mention whether his proposed plan included providing for the amount 
of debt increasing due to interest.4  
 
Applicant acknowledged the debt owed in SOR ¶ 1.a and explained it was for a 
repossessed vehicle, which he purchased in 2015. His car payments were $709 a month. 
When he lost his job, he could not afford the payments. He attempted to trade the vehicle 
in for a less costly one, but due to the negative equity, he could not. He voluntarily 
returned the vehicle and then purchased a less expensive vehicle.5  
 
Applicant provided a document from the IRS showing that he was entitled to 
$5,410 income tax refund. The IRS involuntarily withheld $1,855 from the refund and 
applied it to his delinquent child support debt in February 2018. It is unknown what 
Applicant did with the remainder of the refund.6  
 
 Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e stating that neither he nor his wife 
recognized it. It is listed on his credit report. He did not provide evidence of any action he 
may have taken to dispute it with the creditor or on his credit report.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
                                                          
4 AE A, C, D.  
 
5 Items 3, 6; AE A. 
 
6 AE B. 
 
7 Items 3, 6.  
 
4 
 
 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following is 
potentially applicable:  
 
5 
 
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has 10 delinquent debts totaling approximately $32,487. He was unable 
to pay his debts. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that are recent and ongoing. At this time, 
only one debt has been paid. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to losing his job in May 2017. This was 
beyond his control. Applicant has a plan to resolve his debts, but has not implimented it. 
He did not provide evidence that he has voluntarily made payments towards any of his 
delinquent debts. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted 
responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) has some application.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling. Applicant 
provided a one-page document showing three steps on how to reduce debt. No other 
evidence was provided. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply.  
 
 The delinquent child support debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f was satisfied through an 
involuntary withholding of a tax refund and application to the debt. This does not constitute 
a good-faith effort to repay a debt. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. The debt is resolved.  
 
 Applicant denies the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e, but did not provide evidence of his action 
to dispute the debt. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. His financial problems began when he lost his job in May 
2017. He is unable to resolve his debts at this time. Although Applicant proposed a plan 
for how he was going to resolve his delinquent debts, he has not implemented it and has 
not made any payments. He did not provide evidence that he contacted his creditors and 
made payment arrangements. He did not provide evidence that he has made any 
payments towards any of his debts, except as previously noted about his child support 
payment. At this juncture, Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion. The record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
