 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 18-00944  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns, but not the sexual 
behavior and personal conduct security concerns. Based upon a review of the pleadings 
and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On May 18, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual behavior) E 
(personal conduct) and B (foreign influence). Applicant answered the SOR on June 14, 
2018, and requested that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written 
record without a hearing.   
 
On July 30, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing four Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on August 10, 2018, and received by him on August 13, 2018. The 
FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material 
in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. The 
Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 4. Applicant timely submitted four 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits in response to the FORM that I marked as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D.1 
In that response, he did not object to the Government’s documents. The Government did 
not object to Applicant’s exhibits. Items 1 through 4 and AE A through D are admitted into 
evidence. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned this case to me 
on October 29, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 54 years old and has been married for 29 years. Applicant and his wife 
have three boys, ages 26, 24 and 20.  All three of his sons serve in the Air Force.  
Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in 1986 and a master’s degree in 1991. He served 
in the Air Force from 1986 to 1995, and then transferred to the Air Force Reserve in 1996. 
He retired in 2007 as a major and was honorably discharged. He has worked for federal 
contractors since 1999 and his current employer since 2009. He has held a security 
clearance from approximately 1988 until July 2016. (Item 2; AE B)   
 
 As part of the security clearance eligibility investigation, Applicant participated in a 
polygraph on May 5, 2016. During that examination, he disclosed that while on a business 
trip to Australia in 2004, he engaged in sexual intercourse with a prostitute on two 
separate occasions. Those encounters took place in brothels. In 2014 and 2016, while 
visiting his father in Austria, Applicant hired prostitutes for sexual intercourse. Both of 
those incidents took place at the same brothel. Prostitution is legal in Australia and 
Austria. (Item 3)  
 
 Applicant paid the prostitutes in cash on each occasion. He never disclosed his 
name or information about himself to the women. He did not attempt to establish 
communication with the women after the encounters. (Item 4)  
 
 During the May 2016 polygraph, Applicant acknowledged that longstanding marital 
issues and his wife’s previous two affairs contributed to his decision to hire a prostitute 
on those four occasions. As of the date of the polygraph, he had not disclosed the 
incidents to his wife. He had not informed his employer of his actions because prostitution 
is legal in both countries, and he did not believe he broke a law which required disclosure. 
(Item 4) 
 
 Applicant was unaware that engaging in prostitution, which is legal in another 
country but illegal in the United States, is a violation of the Federal government’s policy 
regarding Combating Trafficking of Persons. He takes full responsibility for his actions, 
and did not realize the potential negative effect his behavior could have on his security 
clearance and employment. He knew that it could have a negative effect on his personal 
                                                 
1 The exhibits are as follows: AE A is a transmittal letter; AE B is an additional Response to the FORM; AE 
C is a letter of recommendation; and AE C consists of three ISCR cases pertinent to similar cases. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
life. (Item 4)  After receiving the SOR in 2018, he disclosed his behavior to his employer’s 
lawyer, his security officer, and some good friends in his field.2 (Item 1) 
 
 On June 12, 2018 (after the SOR issued on May 18, 2018), Applicant told his wife 
that he had hired prostitutes in the past.3 He said that he and his wife are resolving this 
issue and remain committed to their marriage. (Item 1) 
 
 Applicant repeatedly stated that he is not a security risk as a consequence of his 
behavior. He has never betrayed this country that he has successfully served for 32 years. 
He continues to play a critical role in his work for a U.S. agency. (Item 1; AE A) 
 
 Applicant submitted six letters of recommendation from former military and 
professional colleagues and supervisors. All of the authors have held or hold security 
clearances and have known Applicant for many years and highly recommend his security 
clearance be reinstated. They attest to Applicant’s impressive record of trustworthiness 
and honesty; work ethic; loyalty and ties to the United States; reliability; and professional 
competency. It is not clear whether all of them are aware of the underlying facts in this 
investigation. (Item 3: a through g; AE C)  
 
 In his answer to the SOR and response to the FORM, Applicant expressed 
remorse and embarrassment over his misconduct and sadness regarding the pain he has 
caused his wife. He has no intention to repeat his behavior. (Item 1; AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 6220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
June 8, 2017.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                 
2 Applicant’s disclosure to his employers appears to have occurred after he received the May 18, 2018 
SOR. (Item 1) 
 
3 Applicant’s disclosure to his wife occurred on June 12, 2018, two days before he signed his answer to the 
SOR. (Item 1) 
 
 
4 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D: Sexual Behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 sets out the security concerns relating to sexual behavior: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of judgment 
or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, may raise 
questions about an individual's judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Sexual behavior 
 
 
5 
 
 
includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, electronic, or 
written transmission. No adverse inference concerning the standards in this 
Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual orientation of the 
individual. 
 
AG ¶ 13 sets out a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. 
Applicant solicited and engaged the sexual services of prostitutes in 2004, 2014, 
and 2016, while he was visiting Australia and Austria. His actions violated DOD standards 
and the DOD policy articulated in the Combating Trafficking of Persons program. 
Engaging in prostitution is a criminal offense in most U.S. states. However, there is no 
evidence that this conduct is subject to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the United States. 
Thus, his conduct in Australia and Austria is not a crime. Nevertheless, his sexual 
misbehavior causes him to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress, and 
demonstrated a lack of good judgment. The evidence established the above disqualifying 
condition.   
 
AG ¶ 14 describes two conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised 
under this guideline: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment; and 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress. 
 
Although Applicant’s initial two encounters with prostitutes occurred in 2004, he 
again hired prostitutes in 2014 and 2016, with his most recent misconduct occurring about 
two years ago. Those more recent incidents cast sufficient doubt on his good judgment 
such that he failed to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 14(b).  Applicant revealed his 
misbehavior to his wife, employer, and possibly one colleague after he received the SOR, 
thereby reducing some potential for exploitation. AG ¶ 14(c) partially applies in his favor. 
This conduct cannot be fully mitigated because release or disclosure of information about 
his involvement with prostitutes can further damage his professional and community 
reputation.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing; and 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, while legal 
there, is illegal in the United States. 
 
The evidence establishes the above disqualifying condition. Applicant engaged in 
prostitution, which is a type of activity, if known, could adversely affect his personal, 
professional, and community standing. Although prostitution is legal in Australia and 
Austria, where he hired prostitutes, that behavior is illegal in almost all jurisdictions in the 
United States.  His conduct is also contrary to the Combating Trafficking of Persons 
program. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides three conditions that could mitigate security concerns under this 
guideline. They are as follows: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s most recent contacts with prostitutes occurred in 2014 and 2016, which 
indicate insufficient time has passed from which to conclude his past misbehavior does 
not cast doubt on his current judgment. Applicant acknowledged his past misconduct, but 
did not present evidence of counseling to address or resolve the underlying factors, which 
he said contributed to his conduct, which initially took place in 2004, and then in 2014, 
about 14 years later, and again two years later. The evidence does not establish 
mitigation under AG ¶¶ 17(c) or (d). There is some evidence that he has taken steps to 
reduce his vulnerability to exploitation based on his recent disclosure to his wife and 
employer in 2018, albeit after he received the SOR. AG ¶ 17(e) applies minimally.  
Personal conduct security concerns are not mitigated for the reasons discussed in the 
previous section on Sexual Behavior. 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 describes the security concerns regarding foreign influence: 
 
 Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling or residing outside the U.S., that may 
make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a 
foreign person, group, government, or country. 
 
Applicant engaged the sexual services of prostitutes while traveling to Australia 
and Austria in 2004, 2014, and 2016. That conduct could create a vulnerability to 
exploitation by the foreign women and their employers. AG ¶ 7(i) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this 
guideline. One may apply: 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 Applicant has not had contact with the four foreign women with whom he engaged 
in sex after his one-time encounter with them. He did not disclose his name when he hired 
them or discuss himself during the time spent with them. He paid cash for their services 
and did not use a credit card. The likelihood that his one-time contact with each of the 
four women could create a risk of foreign influence is minimal. The evidence establishes 
mitigation under AG ¶ 8(c). 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all pertinent facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines D, E, and B, and in my whole-person analysis. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of honorable service to DOD on active duty and as a 
contractor. He has established a successful career, as demonstrated by impressive 
letters of recommendation from supervisors and peers, attesting to his loyalty and good 
character. While those factors weigh in his favor, his involvement with prostitutes and 
failure to timely disclose that information to his wife and employer create serious security 
concerns, given his status as a federal contractor and former Air Force major. In 2004, 
he hired prostitutes on two occasions. Ten years later, in 2014, he hired another 
prostitute. In early 2016, he again hired a prostitute. On May 5, 2016, he disclosed his 
behaviors during a polygraph test. On May 18, 2018, two years later, DOHA issued an 
SOR alleging security concerns based on his past sexual indiscretions. After receiving 
the SOR, he spoke to his employer about the matter. About a month later, he told his wife 
about his conduct. Additional disclosure would damage his professional and community 
reputation and he continues to be vulnerable to exploitation and coercion. Applicant’s 
 
 
9 
 
 
failure to responsibly and timely address his personal behaviors raises unresolved 
security concerns.  
 
  Overall, the evidence leaves me with questions about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. He mitigated the foreign influence security concerns, 
but he did not mitigate the sexual behavior and personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:          AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline B:         FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:               For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                  
  
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
