 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 18-01216  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns. He did not mitigate the 
financial considerations security concerns related to unresolved delinquent debts. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On May 1, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant answered the SOR on 
May 16 and July 3, 2018, and requested that his case be decided by an administrative 
judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 2.)  
 
On June 26, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. 
A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, was 
mailed to Applicant on July 10, 2018, and received by him on July 18, 2018. The FORM 
notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. The 
Government’s evidence is identified as Items 1 through 6. Applicant did not submit a 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
response to the FORM or object to the Government’s documents. Items 1 through 6 are 
admitted into evidence. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned 
this case to me on October 29, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 46 years old and divorced since 2015. He and his former wife have 
two adult children. He remarried in 2017.He served on active duty in the Navy from 1995 
to 2016. He received an honorable discharge when he retired as an E-6. He then started 
a position with a defense contractor. He has held a security clearance since joining the 
Navy. (Item 3) He earned an associate’s degree in 2010. (Item 4) 
 
 Applicant stated that his divorce contributed to his financial problems. He was 
unable to pay all of his obligations and care for his son on one income. He said it was an 
emotionally and financially difficult time for him. Prior to the divorce, he stated he had a 
high credit score. He said his financial situation has improved. (Items 2, 4)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from September 2016 and March 2018, the 
SOR alleged 10 debts totaling $42,043, which became delinquent between 2015 and 
2018. They include unpaid credit cards and retail bills. Applicant admitted owing all of the 
debts. (Items 2, 5, 6)  
 
 Applicant did not provide proof that he has paid, is paying, or has a legitimate 
reason not to pay any of the alleged debts. He did not submit evidence of financial or 
credit counseling, or that he sought other assistance to resolve his delinquent debts. He 
did not provide budget information from which to predict future solvency or a plan to 
address the delinquent debts.   
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
September 2016. He did not report any issues under the section inquiring into financial 
problems. In his answer to the SOR, he strongly denied that he intentionally falsified the 
SF 86. He stated that he “rushed” through the application due to employment time 
constraints. He stated that through his long service in the Navy and continued support to 
the Federal Government, he has exhibited loyalty and dedication to the United States. 
(Item 2)  
 
 After considering the evidence, I find it insufficient for a determination that 
Applicant intentionally falsified the SF 86. His omissions were negligent, but not 
intentional.  
 
Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 6220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992, as 
 
 
3 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on 
June 8, 2017.  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny determination 
under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has a history of being unable to meet financial obligations, which began 
in 2015 and continues to date. The evidence raises security concerns under the above 
disqualifying conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate 
those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could potentially mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
 
 
5 
 
 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
All ten SOR-alleged debts are ongoing, unresolved, and total over $42,000. 
Applicant offered insufficient evidence from which to conclude that similar problems will 
not recur. Mitigation was not established under AG ¶ 20(a). He provided some evidence 
that the delinquencies were caused by a divorce and a period of unemployment. Those 
were circumstances beyond his control; however, he did not submit evidence that he 
acted responsibly under those circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. He presented 
no evidence of financial counseling or a budget. There are not clear indications that the 
ten delinquent debts are under control. Nor is there sufficient evidence that he made a 
good-faith effort to resolve any of them. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) do not apply. He did not 
submit evidence that he has a reasonable basis to dispute any of the alleged debts. The 
evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
    I considered the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all pertinent facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline F and in my whole-person analysis. I also considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service. However, he has unresolved financial problems, which he has not begun 
to address. Overall, the evidence leaves me with questions about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. He refuted the personal conduct security concerns, 
but he did not mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.j:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:          FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
                                                  
  
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
