1 
       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
)    ISCR Case No. 18-01351 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline J (criminal 
conduct). Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
     Statement of the Case 
On May 23, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline J. Applicant timely 
answered the SOR and elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of 
a hearing.  
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) 
on August 2, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on August 13, 2018, and had 30 days 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, and mitigation. Applicant 
provided no response to the FORM. The Government’s evidence, identified as Items 1 
through 7, is admitted without objection. The case was assigned to me on December 6, 
2018.  
12/17/2018
2 
 
  Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant is 37 years old. She obtained her associate’s degree in 2011 and her 
bachelor’s degree in 2013. She has been employed as a human resources manager for 
a federal contractor since July 2016.  Applicant was unemployed briefly from May 2016 
to June 2016 when she was terminated for alleged theft from her employer by uttering a 
forged instrument. Applicant reports no military service. She married in June 2001 and 
divorced in June 2009. Applicant is a single mother of three children. Applicant has not 
previously held a security clearance.   
 
On May 25, 2017, Applicant completed a Security Clearance Application (SCA), 
and in section 22 (Police Record) she disclosed her arrest in May 2016 when her previous 
employer accused her of forgery and grand larceny alleging that she forged and cashed 
phony payroll checks. She also disclosed that she was fired from this job. She stated that 
the case was dismissed by the court in December 2016.2 Applicant responded to the SOR 
on June 21, 2018 (Answer) and denied creating the duplicate payroll checks, then cashing 
them. An arrest warrant was issued on June 18, 2018, and she turned herself in to police. 
Since she could not afford an attorney, a public defender was assigned to her case. The 
public defender advised her to pay restitution for the duplicate payroll checks that were 
fraudulently cashed, and she did. In return, the prosecutor dropped the charges. (Answer) 
 
Applicant’s FBI criminal history record reflects the arrest for larceny by check on 
September 12, 2016, and the case dismissal on December 12, 2016. (Item 6) However, 
the offense report from the sheriff’s department involved, reflects that on May 4, 2016, 
Applicant came in to report that persons unknown cashed two false payroll checks in her 
name at local retail stores after Applicant cashed the original check at a bank. (Item 5) 
Interestingly, when sheriff’s deputies checked the loss detection video tapes in these local 
stores, they clearly show Applicant cashing the two checks. In her personal subject 
interview (PSI), Applicant stated she left this employer by mutual agreement. (Item 4) This 
contradicts her assertion in section 13A of her SCA (Employment Activities) that she was 
fired. She also stated “I have absolutely no idea how these checks were printed or 
cashed.” (Answer) She also stated it “was a poor decision on my part.”  
 
                                            Policies 
 
 DOD took action in this case under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AGs) implemented by 
DOD on June 8, 2017. 
                                                          
1 Unless stated otherwise, the source of the information in this section is Applicant’s May 25, 2017 Security 
Clearance Application (SCA) (Item 2) and her summary of clearance interviews by background investigators 
dated January 22, 2017 and March 7, 2018 (item 3).  
 
2 Item 2, p. 34. 
 
3 
 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudicative process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weighing 
of a number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that 
the individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
4 
 
       Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30 as follows:  
 
 Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶ 31. 
The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
  (b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an admission, 
and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.  
 
 In her Answer, Appellant denied the allegation in the SOR  and persists that she 
has no idea how this could happen. Yet, she admitted to the warrant for her arrest and a 
plea deal by which she paid restitution for the two false payroll checks. There is ample 
evidence that she committed grand larceny by check according to the offense report from 
the sheriff’s office. It reflects that she was clearly visible on video tape committing these 
two crimes. The above disqualifying condition is applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
Appellant provided no evidence of counseling, acceptance of responsibility, or 
rehabilitation. She was fired for lying to her boss when confronted with the video evidence 
showing she had uttered the false instruments in question. She presented no evidence of 
community involvement or character references. There is no evidence of unusual 
circumstances when she committed the offenses. Instead, they were crimes of 
opportunity since she received a hard copy of her payroll check because the direct deposit 
system was down. She continues to deny knowledge or culpability in the matter of the 
false payroll checks. She has not been forthcoming and completely cooperative in the 
5 
 
security clearance application process. Her arrest was two years ago. Insufficient time 
has elapsed without recidivism to conclude that her criminal behavior will not recur. AG 
¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) do not apply. 
 
          Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines. Most importantly, Applicant did not resolve the specific 
violation alleged in the SOR, and she has not accepted responsibility for her crimes.  
 
Applicant’s criminal conduct remains a security concern. These offenses were not 
minor, and they were not committed under such unusual circumstances that they are 
unlikely to recur. Applicant minimized her termination for theft from her employer by 
stating that it was by mutual agreement for her to leave the job. She benefitted by a plea 
deal arranged by her public defender to pay restitution, but she has yet to accept 
responsibility or express remorse about the fraudulent check offenses. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant has acknowledged the egregiousness of 
her behavior and she has not met her burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves 
me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising 
under Guideline J. 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
6 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a:                            Against Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                           
    ________________________ 
                                                    Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                                  Administrative Judge 
 
 
