 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 18-00853 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2016, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On April 6, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), 
(December 10, 2016), National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, effective June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
                                      
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear as to when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the 
case file. In a sworn statement, dated April 23, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR 
and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on July 16, 2018, and he was afforded 
an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, 
Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the Adjudicative Guidelines 
applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on July 30, 2018. Applicant’s 
response was due on August 29, 2018. Applicant timely submitted two documents in 
response to the FORM, and they was admitted as Applicant exhibits, without objection. 
The case was assigned to me on November 19, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with comments three of the factual 
allegations in the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.). He denied the remaining allegations. 
Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration 
of same, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 65-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving 
in a construction sales, management, and design position with his current employer since 
March 2000. Applicant’s educational background was not reported. He never served with 
the U.S. military. He has never held a security clearance. Applicant was married in 
September 1976. He has five adult children, born in 1980, 1991, and 1993, as well as 
twins born in 1982. 
 
Financial Considerations1 
 
When Applicant completed his e-QIP in October 2016, he referred to a simple “loss 
of income” with respect to several of his delinquent accounts, without offering any further 
explanations.2 During his personal subject interview conducted by an investigator from 
the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in December 2017, he again attributed 
                                                          
1 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in 
the following exhibits: Item 2 (Applicant’s Response to the FORM, April 23, 2018); Item 3 (e-QIP, dated 
October 5, 2016); Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated November 4, 
2016); Item 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated February 20, 2018); Item 6 (Personal Subject Interview, dated 
December 21, 2017).  
 
2 Item 3, supra note 1, at 30-31. 
 
3 
                                      
 
his financial issues to an inability to make payments due to a loss of income.3 He also 
stated that he has made payment agreements in order to satisfy all of his debts,4 but 
although he was requested to furnish documentation to support his contentions regarding 
payment plans and payments, he failed to do so. In his April 2018 Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant stated that his financial problems were caused by a “substantial decrease in 
[his] income,” again without offering any additional explanations.5  
The SOR identified seven purportedly delinquent accounts that had been placed 
for collection or charged off as generally reflected by Applicant’s 2016 or 2018 credit 
reports. Those debts, totaling approximately $164,457, are described below: 
 (SOR ¶ 1.a.) This is a credit-card account with an unpaid balance of $30,364 that 
was placed for collection.6 Although Applicant claimed that he was in communication with 
the creditor to resolve the account, he submitted no documentation to support his claim, 
and he did not indicate that he has made any continuing efforts to make payments.7 The 
account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.c.) These are two credit-card accounts with the same bank 
with unpaid balances of $21,742 and $16,933 that were placed for collection and charged 
off.8 Applicant’s position with respect to both accounts is that it was the creditor’s choice 
to write off the accounts, and he has made no efforts to resolve them.9 The accounts have 
not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.d. and 1.f.) These are two medical accounts with unpaid balances of 
$835 and $771 that were placed for collection.10 Applicant initially claimed that the smaller 
account was his wife’s medical bill and that it had been paid off, but when he was 
requested to furnish documentation to support his contention, he failed to do so.11 In his 
Answer to the SOR he claimed to have no knowledge of the accounts, and stated that he 
had requested supporting documentation.12 In his Response to the FORM, he claimed 
                                                          
3 Item 6, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
4 Item 6, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
5 Item 2, supra note 1, at 3. 
 
6 Item 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
7 Item 2, supra note 1, at 3. 
 
8 Item 5, supra note 1, at 5, 14; Item 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
9 Item 2, supra note 1, at 3; Applicant’s Response to the FORM, dated August 13, 2018, at 1. 
 
10 Item 4, supra note 1, at 2; Item 5, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
11 Item 6, supra note 1, at 5. 
 
12 Item 2, supra note 1, at 3 
 
4 
                                      
 
that his wife was working with the creditors in an effort to resolve them,13 but he submitted 
no documentation to support his claim, and he did not indicate that he has made any 
continuing efforts to make payments. The accounts have not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.g.) These are purportedly two student loans co-signed for his 
daughter with unpaid balances of $53,269 and $40,543 that were placed for collection.14 
The larger loan was originally issued by a bank and eventually transferred to a company 
that services and collects on student loans. Applicant contends that the two loans are 
actually two different snapshots of the same loan, and that the loan had changed hands 
over time.15 It appears that he is correct, for his 2016 credit report lists the larger loan two 
times (once by Experian and once by Equifax) with the exact account numbers, exact 
balances, and different creditors and some inconsistencies regarding timeframes, and the 
smaller loan is listed once (by TransUnion).16 Applicant’s 2018 credit report lists two 
separate student loans, each with a different servicer, with exact balances, but indicating 
that one of the creditors had sold or transferred the account to the other creditor.17 
Applicant submitted three receipts indicating that he had made payments of $596 in 
February 2018; $430 in March 2018; and $430 in April 2018.18 The loan is in the process 
of being resolved. 
Applicant failed to indicate his monthly net pay, monthly expenses, debt payments, 
or if he has any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary spending or 
savings. There is no evidence of a budget. There is no evidence of financial counseling. 
Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that his “loss of income” has been reversed, that 
his financial situation has improved, or that it is now under control. Furthermore, he has 
failed to indicate any intention to resolve the two credit-card accounts that had been 
charged off. 
Policies 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”19 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
                                                          
 
13 Applicant’s Response to the FORM, supra note 9, at 1. 
 
14 Item 5, supra note 1, at 6, 14. 
 
15 Item 6, supra note 1, at 5-6; Item 2, supra note 1, at 3. 
 
16 Item 5, supra note 1, at 6, 14. 
 
17 Item 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
18 Item 2 (Receipts, various dates), attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
19 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”20   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”21 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.22  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
                                                          
20 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
21 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
22 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”23  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”24 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG 19:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
                                                          
23 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
24 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Applicant had six (when discarding the duplicate listings)25 delinquent accounts 
that had been placed for collection or charged off. As to the two accounts that had been 
charged off, he has simply stood by and ignored those accounts because the creditor had 
chosen to write them off. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) have been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;26 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;27 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
                                                          
25 As noted above, SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.g. refer to one account. 
 
26 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
27 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or 
statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
AG ¶ 20(b) minimally applies, but none of the remaining mitigating conditions 
apply. The nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties 
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent,” or that it 
is “unlikely to recur.” Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to an otherwise 
unspecified “loss of income,” without documentary support. He also claimed to have 
insufficient funds to maintain his financial responsibilities. As noted above, with one 
exception associated with the student loans, there is no documented proof that Applicant 
has actually contacted his creditors or collection agents to pay or settle any of his 
delinquent debts.  
There is no documentation to reflect that Applicant made any efforts, before or 
after he was interviewed by OPM, or before or after the SOR was issued in April 2018, 
to: obtain financial counseling from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service; dispute his delinquent accounts with the credit reporting 
agencies or the creditors themselves; contact his creditors to set up repayment plans; or 
indicate that payments had been made to his creditors.28 An applicant who begins to 
resolve his financial problems only after being placed on notice that his or her security 
clearance is in jeopardy may be lacking in the judgment and self-discipline to follow rules 
and regulations over time or when there is no immediate threat to his or her own 
interests.29 In this instance, to date, with the exception of the student loans, there is no 
meaningful evidence that any corrective actions have been taken by Applicant. There is 
little evidence to conclude that Applicant’s finances are under control. 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
resolution of such issues, one at a time. Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without 
further confirmed action, are insufficient.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
                                                          
28 See ISCR Case No. 12-01335 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 29, 2017). 
 
29 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 17-01213 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 29, 2018); ISCR Case No. 17-00569 at 
3-4 (App. Bd. Sept. 18, 2018). 
 
9 
                                      
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.30  
  
There is very little evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant is a 65-year-
old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving in a construction sales, 
management, and design position with his current employer since March 2000. Applicant 
has been making payments on the student loans for only three months. 
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has six delinquent accounts that had been placed for collection or charged off. 
Among those debts are two credit cards, totaling $38,675, that were charged off, and 
Applicant has shown no intention to resolve them, claiming instead that the creditor chose 
to write them off. Also, there are two medical accounts that he has known about for some 
time, but other than undocumented indications that Applicant’s wife was working on them, 
no resolution has taken place. Another delinquent credit-card account remains with an 
unpaid balance of over $30,000. Applicant has not obtained financial counseling. There 
is no evidence of a budget. Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that his “loss of 
income” has been reversed, that his financial situation has improved, or that it is now 
under control. 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:31 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
                                                          
30 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
31 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an extremely poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, seemingly avoiding the debts in his name. Overall, the evidence leaves 
me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 
2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e. and 1.f.:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g.:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
