 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01207 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Guideline B, foreign influence concerns. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 30, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017 (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on June 24, 2018, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on August 7, 2018. The evidence 
 
2 
 
 
included in the FORM is identified as Items 3-5 (Items 1 and 2 include pleadings and 
transmittal information). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, who received it on 
September 15, 2018. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not file objections, but 
submitted exhibit (AE) A, which is admitted without objection. Items 3-5 are also 
admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on November 2, 
2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the SOR allegations with 
explanations. The admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
The SOR alleged Applicant’s mother and three brothers are citizens and 
residents of Iraq. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d).  
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He was born in Iraq in 1970. He served in mandatory 
conscripted military and Ba’ath party service from 1988-1993. He moved to Dubai, 
United Arab Emirates, in 2005 and resided there until 2007, when he moved back to 
Iraq. He worked as a translator with U.S. forces in Iraq from 2007-2009. Because of his 
work with U.S. forces, he qualified for a special immigrant visa. He used that visa to 
immigrate to the United States in 2009. He was awarded an associate’s degree from a 
U.S. community college in 2014. He became a U.S. citizen in March 2015. He is 
seeking a clearance for a translator position with a federal contractor. He is currently 
working for the contractor and deployed to Iraq. He is single with no children.1   
 
Foreign Influence. 
  
 Applicant has the following relatives who are residents and citizens of Iraq:  
 
 1. His mother. His mother is 70 years and is a housewife. She is not affiliated 
with the government or the military. Applicant has weekly telephone contact with her. 
She is unaware of his work position and he has not visited her since moving to the 
United States in 2009.2  
 
 2. Applicant’s three brothers. His three brothers are younger. None of his 
brothers know what he does for a living or where he works. None of his brothers have 
any Iraqi government connections. Applicant’s telephone contact with his brothers 
ranges from quarterly to annually.3 
                                                          
1 Items 3-5. 
 
2 Item 4; AE A. 
 
3 Item 4; AE A. 
 
3 
 
 
Iraq. 
 
 The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens against travel to Iraq as travel 
within the country remains dangerous. The U.S. Embassy warns that U.S. citizens are at 
high risk for kidnapping and violence and to avoid all but essential travel to Iraq. The 
U.S. government considers the potential threat to U.S. government personnel in Iraq to 
be serious enough to require them to live and work under strict security guidelines. The 
Islamic State of Iraq and Levant (ISIL) remained the greatest terrorist threat globally, 
maintaining a formidable force in Iraq and Syria.4 
 
Character Evidence. 
 
 Applicant supplied character references from his last two commanders for whom 
he conducted translator duties at various times during 2018. His commanders found 
Applicant to be professional and completely devoted to the U.S. Army and his country. 
He was described as creating “enhanced situational awareness on the battlefield, 
contributing significantly to the defeat of the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS).” 
Additionally, they describe him as an outstanding asset whom they trust. They 
recommend granting his clearance.5   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
                                                          
4 The Government failed to provide information concerning the country of Iraq for the purpose of taking 
administrative notice. I take administrative notice of the stated information from the U.S. Department of 
State website (https://iq.usembassy.gov/iraq-travel-warning-january-31-2017/). See FRE 201 and ISCR 
Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 
2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and 
Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). 
 
5 Item 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for foreign influence is set out in AG 
¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member or friend is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against 
the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The 
relationship between Iraq and the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his relatives living in Iraq does not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist his relatives living in Iraq who might be coerced by 
governmental entities, or pressured to assist Iraq.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”6 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Iraq seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his relatives 
living in Iraq, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 
7(b) apply based upon Applicant’s family members who are residents and citizens of 
Iraq.  
 
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. Applicant’s current translator position could cause him 
to be placed in a position to choose between the interests of his relatives and those of 
the United States. Applicant credibly testified that he has limited contact with his 
relatives in Iraq. AG ¶ 8(c) partially applies. 
 
Applicant has met his burden to establish his “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He worked as a translator from 2007 to 2009 for 
U.S. forces in Iraq. Additionally, as recently as this year, Applicant also worked as a 
translator for U.S. forces in Iraq where he earned praise for his loyalty, bravery, and 
trustworthiness while serving in harm’s way. He moved to the United States in 2009, 
earned an associates degree here, and became a U.S. citizen in 2015. The evidence 
supports the conclusion that Applicant has longstanding ties to the United States and 
would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support granting Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards denying his clearance. I considered the recommendations of his two 
commanders, who resoundingly recommend that Applicant be granted his security 
clearance. I also considered his strong ties to this country, as a translator serving in 
harm’s way while assisting U.S. forces on two separate occasions. He has 
demonstrated his longstanding loyalty to the United States. Therefore, he provided 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign influence 
concerns were mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
