 
 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 18-00757 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:  
 
 Applicant paid for sex with prostitutes at least six times between 1987 and 2015, 
at times while holding a security clearance, and once while assigned overseas. The 
information he presented to support his claims of rehabilitation was not sufficient to 
mitigate the security concerns his conduct raised about his judgment. His request for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On March 31, 2017, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for a security clearance required for 
his employment with a federal contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is 
 
 
2 
 
 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security for Applicant to have a security 
clearance.1 
 
 On April 20, 2018, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that 
raise security concerns under the adjudicative guidelines for sexual behavior (Guideline 
D) and personal conduct (Guideline E). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) 
and requested a hearing.  
 
 I received the case on August 9, 2018, and convened the requested hearing on 
October 31, 2018. The parties appeared as scheduled. Department Counsel proffered 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2. Applicant testified and proffered Applicant Exhibits 
(AX) A - D. All exhibits were admitted without objection. I received a transcript (Tr.) of the 
hearing on November 9, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline D, the Government alleged that between 1987 and 1989 (SOR 
1.a), Applicant paid a woman for oral sex and sexual intercourse; that in 1993 or 1994 
(SOR 1.b), he paid a woman for oral sex; that in 2008 or 2009 (SOR 1.c), while holding a 
security clearance, Applicant visited a massage parlor and paid for oral sex and sexual 
intercourse; and that in 2013 and 2015 (SOR 1.d), while still holding a clearance, he paid 
for oral sex from a woman who he had solicited through a website subscription obtained 
for soliciting prostitution. Under Guideline E, the Government cross-alleged (SOR 2.a) the 
sexual conduct addressed under Guideline D as adverse personal conduct. 
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations. He also provided 
explanatory remarks and documents in support of claims made in his response. (Answer; 
Tr. 9 - 11) Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR establish those allegations as 
facts. Additionally, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old and has worked for a defense contractor in a position that 
requires a security clearance since December 2015. In December 1985, he earned a 
bachelor’s degree. In May 2002 and May 2006, Applicant earned master’s degrees. He 
was commissioned as an officer in the U.S. Army in March 1986, serving on active duty 
until February 1999. He then affiliated in the Army Reserve, where he served until retiring 
as a lieutenant colonel in February 2015. (Answer; GX 1; Tr. 66) 
 
 Applicant first received a security clearance in 1991 in connection with his military 
duties. After leaving active duty, he worked for federal contractors and in Army Reserve 
assignments for which he received top secret clearance. In 2008, he was granted 
eligibility for access to sensitive compartmented information (TS/SCI). In April 2015, 
Applicant began work as a contractor at a federal agency that required eligibility for 
access to sensitive compartmented information (TS/SCI). In July 2015, Applicant was 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
administered a polygraph examination to renew his TS/SCI eligibility for that job. During 
the pre-test interview, Applicant disclosed his use of prostitutes as alleged in the SOR. In 
October 2015, his SCI eligibility was revoked. Applicant appealed that decision, but his 
appeal was denied in June 2016. Applicant re-applied for a security clearance when he 
submitted his March 2017 e-QIP. He had previously not disclosed his use of prostitutes 
because he had not undergone a full lifestyle polygraph and because the questions in his 
security clearance applications had asked only if he had been arrested or charged with 
any criminal conduct, not whether he had engaged in criminal conduct that had not 
otherwise been known by the government. (Answer; GX 1; GX 2; Tr. 35 – 38) 
 
  As to the specific allegations in this case, available information shows that on one 
occasion sometime between 1987 and 1989, while Applicant was stationed overseas as 
an Army officer, he went to a strip club and solicited sex from one of the dancers there. A 
few years later, sometime in 1993 or 1994, Applicant solicited a prostitute for oral sex on 
a street near the Army base in the United States where he was stationed. At that time, 
Applicant held a security clearance as part of his military duties. On another occasion, in 
either 2008 or 2009, Applicant was at a major unified command in the United States in 
connection with his civilian employment with a federal contractor. One evening during that 
assignment, he went to a massage parlor in town and solicited sex from one of the 
employees there. Applicant held a TS/SCI clearance at the time. (Answer; GX 2; Tr. 38 – 
44) 
 
 The record also shows that in December 2013, Applicant received sex for money 
from a prostitute he contacted through a website to which he had subscribed that 
specialized in effecting such transactions. In April 2015, he contacted the same prostitute 
and arranged to have sex with her for money, this time at a different location and without 
the assistance of the aforementioned website. In both 2013 and 2015, Applicant took 
several precautions, including using a disposable cell phone, providing false employment 
and other personal information for the website’s screening process, and leaving his 
military identification card at home. He took those steps because he knew his conduct 
was illegal and that it might subject him to coercion to leverage his access to classified 
information. (Answer; GX 2; Tr. 44 – 48) 
 
 Applicant has told his immediate family and one close friend about his use of 
prostitutes. He has not yet told his employer about the issues in this case because he is 
embarrassed about his conduct. (Tr. 52 – 55) 
 
 In response to the Governments information, Applicant has acknowledged that his 
use of prostitutes when he was an Army officer in his mid-20s and early 30s was the 
product of him being young and stupid. As for his later transgressions, Applicant cited a 
series of personal and professional challenges as underlying stressors that contributed 
to his lack of good judgment and discretion. His father, to whom he was very close, died 
in March 2008. Additionally, Applicant was due to be married to an Air Force officer in 
June 2008; however, factors related to his father’s death and their respective military 
obligations caused the cancellation of the wedding. For the next seven years, Applicant 
 
 
4 
 
 
and his fiancée tried to continue their relationship in the face of her military transfer 
overseas, but to no avail. Their relationship ended in 2015. Added to those stressors was 
Applicant’s involuntary termination from a civilian job in 2014 for failing to meet his 
company’s marketing and revenue goals. (Answer; AX A; AX D; Tr. 25 – 30) 
 
 In August 2015, Applicant self-referred to his company’s employee assistance 
program (EAP) for counseling or other professional assistance with his behavior. After 
one meeting, he was referred to a licensed clinical social worker (LCSW) who specialized 
in sexual behavior issues. Applicant and the LCSW met about four times between 
September 2015 and April 2016. In October 2015, at the behest of the LCSW, Applicant 
began attending Sex Addicts Anonymous (SA) meetings. SA is a 12-step program 
modeled on Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and based on the premise that one can be 
addicted to acting on sexual impulses and that group therapy and adherence to a 12-step 
plan is an effective road to recovery from such an addition. Applicant initially attended SA 
meetings about three times a month, but had to reduce his attendance in the last year or 
so because of a long commute after work. He now attends by phone twice a month. 
Applicant has a sponsor on whom he can rely, along with a lifelong friend in whom he has 
often confided. Applicant has himself acted as a sponsor for others. He claims to have 
had no desire to use prostitutes and that he now has insight into his behavior as a mental 
health issue. The record does not contain any information or diagnosis from the LCSW; 
nor did Applicant present any references from his sponsor or anyone else with knowledge 
of Applicant’s efforts in recovery. (Answer; AX B; Tr. 55 – 64, 67 – 78) 
 
 Applicant also presented information about his participation in a support group for 
soldiers dealing with the effects of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Applicant has 
not been diagnosed with PTSD and it was unclear from his testimony how his involvement 
in that group related to his own recovery through SA. (AX C; Tr. 61 – 62, 69 – 70) 
 
Policies 
  
 This case is governed by the adjudicative guidelines (AG) issued by the Director 
of National Intelligence on December 10, 2016, and made effective for all adjudications 
on or after June 8, 2017. Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and material 
information,2 and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the 
adjudicative guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 
2(d) of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors 
are:  
 
  (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                 
2 See Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest3 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information.  
 
 The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on 
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an 
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, 
extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security 
clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.4 A person who has access 
to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based 
on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each 
applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will 
protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national 
interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s 
suitability for access in favor of the Government.5 
 
Analysis 
 
Sexual Behavior 
 
 The Government’s information about Applicant’s solicitation of prostitutes, while 
serving as an Army officer and, at times, while holding a security clearance, reasonably 
raised a security concern about his sexual behavior that is articulated at AG ¶ 12: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense; reflects a lack of judgment 
or discretion; or may subject the individual to undue influence of coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. These issues, together or individually, may raise 
questions about an individual's judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified or sensitive information. Sexual behavior 
includes conduct occurring in person or via audio, visual, electronic, or 
                                                 
3 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
4 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
5 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
 
written transmission. No adverse inference concerning the standards in this 
Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of the sexual orientation of the 
individual. 
 
 More specifically, Applicant’s conduct was, at least in the locations here in the 
United States where it occurred, criminal in nature, and he knew at the time he engaged 
in that conduct that he was breaking the law. His conduct was impulsive and reflected a 
gross lack of judgment and discretion. The precautions he took when he solicited a 
prostitute in 2013 and 2015 show that he was aware of the potential for coercion and 
manipulation that could result from his actions; nonetheless, he succumbed to his 
impulses. Finally, his conduct in this regard involved a high degree of risk, in that he did 
not know the women he hired for sex, and he did not take into account the potential link 
between prostitution and human trafficking. All of the foregoing requires application of the 
following AG ¶ 13 disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high-risk sexual behavior 
that the individual is unable to stop;  
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress;  and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature or that reflects lack of discretion or 
judgment. 
 
In response to the Government’s prima facie case against granting access to 
classified information in this case, Applicant produced information regarding his 
participation in SA, his LCSW counseling on about four occasions, and his changed 
circumstances. Based on that information, and the fact that he has not engaged in any 
misconduct since 2015, Applicant argues he is unlikely to repeat his misconduct and that 
the Government’s concerns should be resolved in his favor. The foregoing requires 
consideration of the following AG ¶ 14 mitigating conditions: 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment; and 
 
(e) the individual has successfully completed an appropriate program of 
treatment, or is currently enrolled in one, has demonstrated ongoing and 
consistent compliance with the treatment plan, and/or has received a 
favorable prognosis from a qualified mental health professional indicating 
the behavior is readily controllable with treatment. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s information is not sufficient to support these mitigating conditions. As 
to passage of time or infrequency, only three years has passed since Applicant’s last use 
of prostitutes. Between four and six years passed between the events of SOR 1.a and 
1.b; another 15 years passed between the events of SOR 1.b and 1.c; and the events of 
SOR 1.d occurred between five and seven years thereafter. Additionally, although 
Applicant cites personal events as triggers for his conduct, those events, while significant 
and stressful, were not so unusual as to explain or justify his misconduct. AG ¶ 14(b) does 
not apply. 
 
 As to Applicant’s counseling and SA participation, there is no information in this 
record about the LCSW’s observations or evaluation of Applicant. Nor did Applicant 
present information from any corroborating source about his participation in SA, including, 
but not limited to, his progress in the 12-step process or record of attendance. He did not 
establish how or if his interest in a PTSD support group was contributing to his own 
rehabilitation, and there is no clinical finding or prognosis that would support a finding of 
mitigation here. AG ¶ 14(e) does not apply. Applicant did not meet his burden of 
overcoming the security concerns raised under this guideline. 
  
Personal Conduct 
 
 The Government’s information also reasonably raised a security concern about 
Applicant’s judgment that is addressed, in relevant part, as follows at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. 
 
More specifically, Applicant’s use of prostitutes evokes the disqualifying condition 
at AG ¶ 16(c):  
 
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but 
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment 
of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics 
indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct was sufficient to disqualify him under Guideline D. Accordingly, 
AG ¶ 16(c) cannot apply here. Nonetheless, Applicant’s conduct still requires application 
of the general security concern at AG ¶ 15. As to application of the AG ¶ 17 mitigating 
conditions, the following are pertinent to these facts and circumstances: 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 I conclude that, for the same reasons AG ¶¶ 14(b) and 14(e) are not supported by 
this record so, too, the record does not support AG ¶¶17(c), 17(d), or 17(e). Applicant’s 
offenses were not minor; they occurred on multiple occasions under a variety of 
circumstances; and they occurred several years apart over the past 30 years. Although 
he has acknowledged his misconduct and received counseling, there is not sufficient 
information about that counseling or about his ongoing recovery through SA to show that 
his conduct will not recur. Finally, Applicant remains embarrassed about his conduct 
(which he knew at the time to be illegal and a potential source of coercion) and has not 
disclosed these issues to his current employer. On balance, the general security concerns 
about his judgment persist and Applicant carry his burden of persuasion to show they are 
mitigated. 
 
I also have evaluated this record in the context of the whole-person factors listed 
in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant is a decorated career Army officer who has a strong record of 
service in both his military and civilian careers. However, without more detailed 
information about his counseling and his efforts in recovery, those factors and the 
passage of time since his last transgression are not enough to resolve the doubts about 
his suitability for clearance that were raised by the Government’s information. Because 
protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, any 
remaining doubts must be resolved against the granting of access to classified 
information. 
  
 
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 
of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline D: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d: Against Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 2.a:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
