 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01227 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINTZELMAN, Caroline E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct 
security concerns. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 1, 2015. 
On May 12, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant answered the SOR on June 7, 2018 (Answer), 
and requested a decision on the record without a hearing.  
 
On June 28, 2018, a complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
containing eight Items, was mailed to Applicant. In the FORM, Department Counsel (DC) 
made a motion to amend the SOR.1 The FORM notified Applicant that he had an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation 
within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. Applicant responded to the FORM on August 
                                                          
1 The Directive’s provisions for amending the SOR are permissive. See ISCR Case NO. 08-02404 at 5 
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2009) and Additional Procedural Guidance E.3.1.17.  
   
 
 2
11, 2018 (Response). Items 1 through 8 are admitted into evidence and the SOR is 
amended without objection. The case was assigned to me on October 16, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 45 years old and has been married since 1997. He and his wife have 
twelve-year-old twins. Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in 2000 and a juris doctor 
degree in 2003. He has held a security clearance since approximately 2010, and has 
worked for his employer as a supply chain advisor since October 2011. 
 
Applicant claimed his financial issues started after his 2008 cancer diagnosis. In 
approximately 2015, his wife took time off from work to care for her father, which also 
contributed to his family’s inability to pay their financial obligations. (Item 3; Item 4; Item 
5) 
 
 The SOR, as amended, alleged five delinquent debts, totaling over $180,000. 
Additionally, the SOR alleged Applicant failed to disclose delinquent debts in his January 
2015 SCA. In Applicant’s Answer, he claimed his home mortgage and student loans were 
in the process of being rehabilitated. He also denied the two Guideline E allegations. (Item 
1) In his January 2015 SCA, Applicant disclosed one unalleged delinquent debt, a credit 
card account. This account became delinquent in 2008 due to Applicant’s health-related 
issues. He disclosed no other debts. (Item 4) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant opened this home mortgage account in 2010 and it became 
delinquent in approximately 2013. (Item 6 at 1; Item 7 at 6; Item 8 at 4-5) During his 
September 2015 personal subject interview (PSI), Applicant told the government 
investigator that in approximately 2010, he defaulted on his home mortgage. To qualify 
for a loan modification program, Applicant did not make three monthly mortgage 
payments. Applicant claimed he was able to make the mortgage payments; however, he 
discontinued payments per the lender’s recommendation.  
 
During his September 2015 PSI, Applicant also admitted that the mortgage 
became delinquent again in approximately 2015, after he completed the SCA, due to his 
father-in-law’s health issues. Applicant claimed he did not disclose this debt in his SCA 
because the account was in good standing after 2010, and his financial issues did not 
recur until after he completed the SCA. (Item 3; Item 5) 
 
Applicant provided documentation in his Answer and Response, demonstrating 
that the mortgage account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. is currently in good standing. He did not 
provide documentation to show that the mortgage was current when he completed his 
2015 SCA. (Item 3; Response) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b. The credit bureau reports (CBRs) in the record show that Applicant 
was not making payments toward this student loan in 2012, and again in 2014. (Item 6 at 
2; Item 7 at 6) During his September 2015 PSI, he claimed this loan was being 
rehabilitated and was current; therefore, he did not disclose the delinquency in his 
 
 3
January 2015 SCA. Applicant did not provide documentation to support this claim. In his 
Answer, he provided documentation that he entered into a rehabilitation agreement in 
March 2018. He did not provide proof of payments in his Answer or Response; however, 
the most recent CBR in the record shows that he made a $50 payment in May 2018. (Item 
8 at 3)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.c. This federal student loan became delinquent in approximately October 
2013. (Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 10; Item 8 at 3) During his September 2015 PSI, Applicant 
claimed he was unable to make payments toward this student loan in 2008, after he was 
diagnosed with cancer. He also claimed that this student loan was in a loan rehabilitation 
program, and he was making $1,100 monthly payments toward it, which is why he did not 
disclose it in his SCA. In his June 2018 Answer, Applicant claimed he was unaware of 
this student loan when he completed his SCA, and he thought it was a duplicate of SOR 
¶ 1.b. He also admitted that he was not making payments toward this student loan.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d. This credit card debt became delinquent in August 2014. (Item 6 at 2; 
Item 7 at 6; Item 8 at 2) During his interview, Applicant claimed he did not recognize this 
debt, which is why he did not disclose it in his SCA. In his Answer, he claimed he was 
disputing the amount alleged and believed he owed $90 rather than $240. He did not 
provide proof of resolution. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e. This federal student loan became delinquent October 2013. (Item 8 at 
2) Applicant did not address this allegation in his Response.  
 
Applicant did not disclose any of his delinquent student loans in his SCA, nor did 
he disclose them to the investigator in September 2015 before being confronted. During 
his September 2015 PSI, he claimed he did not disclose these debts because they were 
all in a rehabilitation program and in good standing at the time that he completed his 
January 2015 SCA. (Item 4 at 4) In his Answer, Applicant claimed he was unaware that 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was delinquent.  
 
Applicant also claimed during his PSI that he was making monthly payments of 
$1,100 toward at least one of his student loans. In his Response, he claimed he had been 
making monthly payments of $600 for several years. Additionally, in his Response, 
Applicant claimed he failed to disclose all of these debts in his SCA because he used his 
2010 SCA as the basis for completing his 2015 SCA. Applicant did not provide proof of a 
2015 loan rehabilitation program, nor did he provide proof of the various student loan 
payments he claimed he made over the years.    
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”2 As Commander in Chief, the 
President has the authority to “control access to information bearing on national security 
and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
                                                          
2 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
 4
information.”3 The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”4 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Adverse clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”5 Thus, 
a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant has not met 
the strict guidelines the President and the Security Executive Agent have established for 
issuing national security eligibility. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR.6 “Substantial evidence” is “more than 
a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”7 The guidelines presume a nexus or rational 
connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an 
applicant’s security suitability.8 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
                                                          
3 Egan at 527. 
 
4 Executive Order (EO) 10865 § 2. 
 
5 EO 10865 § 7. 
 
6 Directive ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
7 See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
8  See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2016). 
 
 
 5
facts.9 An applicant has the burden of proving a potential mitigating condition, and the 
burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government.10 
 
  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.”11 “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”12 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern under Guideline F is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .   
 
 The record evidence establishes two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (inability to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). 
 
 AG ¶ 20 describes conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
                                                          
9 Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
11 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002); Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
12 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see also AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 6
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant experienced personal issues that contributed to his financial 
delinquencies; however, he did not meet his burden to establish that he acted responsibly 
to address the alleged unpaid debts. Although it appears that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a is currently in good standing, Applicant’s remaining debts remain unresolved and they 
are significant.  
 
 The loan rehabilitation paperwork Applicant provided is insufficient to mitigate the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant owes over $170,000 in delinquent student loans. 
The CBRs in the record demonstrate that his payment history has been spotty at best, 
and for significant periods, nonexistent. The documentation reflects a single $50 payment 
in May 2018 toward the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, which does not reflect a good-faith 
effort to repay or resolve his debts.  
 
 Applicant did not provide proof of any payments in his Answer and Response, 
despite various claims that he has paid significant amounts of money toward his student 
loans in the past. Nor did he provide documentation to reflect that the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e have been resolved or are in the process of being resolved. 
Applicant’s debts remain a recent and ongoing issue, nor did they become and remain 
delinquent under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur, and they continue to 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(d) was not established.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern under Guideline E is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable under the established facts in this 
case: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
 
 7
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose adverse financial information in his SCA. At the 
time that he completed the SCA, all of the debts alleged in the SOR were 
outstanding. AG ¶ 16 (a) is established. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 describes conditions that could mitigate the security concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstance that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant denied the Guideline E allegations and stated that he did not intentionally 
falsify his January 2015 SCA. During his September 2015 PSI, he failed to disclose his 
delinquent debts until he was confronted by the Government investigator. At that time, he 
claimed he failed to disclose his delinquent debts because they were rehabilitated and in 
good standing. He also claimed that his mortgage became delinquent after he completed 
his January 2015 SCA, but he provided no documentation to support these claims. 
 
In his Answer, Applicant claimed he was unaware of at least one of his student 
loans, which is why he did not report its delinquency in his 2015 SCA. In his Response, 
for the first time, Applicant claimed he used his 2010 SCA to fill out his 2015 SCA, which 
is why he failed to include various delinquent debts. Applicant admitted that in 2008, he 
had difficulty paying his student loans due to his illness; therefore, this information should 
have been included in his 2010 SCA. 
 
Applicant is an educated and experienced individual. This was not his first security 
clearance application. The evidence as a whole reflects that he was aware of his various 
delinquent debts before he completed his most recent SCA. Applicant’s inconsistent 
explanations for failing to disclose his delinquent debts lack credibility and do not alleviate 
concerns as to his trustworthiness, questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, 
and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 
17 (c) was not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
following guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
 
 8
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under the guidelines at issue in my whole-
person analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under this guideline, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, Applicant has not mitigated the financial and 
personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the interests of national security of 
the United States to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. National security eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
CAROLINE E. HEINTZELMAN 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
