 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01244 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case invokes security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Applicant presented insufficient evidence to mitigate the financial 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 25, 2018, in accordance with the Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline F. The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the Government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR, and requested a review based on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on November 30, 
2018. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated July 12, 
2018. The Government submitted seven Items for the record. Applicant timely responded 
to the FORM with a packet of documentation, which was marked as AX A, and entered 
into the record without objection. 
 
 
 
2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, age 32, separated from his wife in 2015, and has three minor children 
and two stepchildren. He obtained hi general education degree (GED) in April 2005. He 
attended college courses from 2011 to 2015, but he has not received a degree. Applicant 
served on active duty in the U.S. Army from 2006 to 2016, receiving an honorable 
discharge. Applicant completed a security clearance application on August 24, 2016. 
(Item 3) He has held a security clearance since 2006. (Item 4)  Applicant has been with 
his current employer since December 2016. (Item 4) 
 
The SOR alleges in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.o that Applicant has 15 delinquent debts 
totaling approximately $36,400. (Item 1). Applicant admits that he owes each of these 
debts. (Item 2) He provided an explanation for the delinquent debts in his Response to 
the FORM. (AX A) 
 
Applicant separated from his spouse in 2015. He notes the delinquent debts stem 
from the marital separation. Applicant’s wife and children left him, but his wife could not 
find a job. He takes full responsibility for the debts. In his response to DOHA 
interrogatories, Applicant explained that each delinquent debt was not paid, but was in a 
payment arrangement plan. (Item 5) 
 
During Applicant’s 2017 OPM investigative interview he explained that he fell 
behind in his bill payments during 2015 and 2016, due to the marital separation and being 
left with one income. He supported his wife and children, but did not have sufficient 
income for living expenses or other bills. He was not allowed to stay in military quarters 
and had to find a room with a friend. He used credit cards to pay for food and other daily 
expenses. He also took out some loans.  Applicant told the investigator that he did not 
recognize some of the accounts. He also reported that he would pay the delinquent 
accounts with his tax refund and salary. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant provided documentation that in September 2014, he obtained a budget, 
an action plan and a payment plan agreement from a company that would provide 
financial counseling and help Applicant in resolving his debts. (AX A) The agreement 
requires that Applicant pay $462 a month beginning in November 2018. An automatic 
withdrawal of $378 would continue monthly until August 2021. Applicant wanted to start 
the program earlier, but he stated that he lost a job on May 2018 because his employer 
lost the government contract that he was working on. (AX A) 
 
Applicant also arranged another plan with another company with a payment plan 
to begin in March 2019. He agreed to pay $550 each month, withdrawn from his account, 
for a period of 60 months. The estimated termination date is September 2023. He 
arranged this plan for a later date as he wants to enroll in college again and would have 
additional funds from the GI bill housing stipend in the amount of $1,000 that he would 
set aside for other payments. (AX A) 
 
Applicant provided one receipt for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m for $125. This 
account is paid in full. (AX A) Applicant stated that with both payment plans and an 
 
3 
 
established budget he will pay his debts. Applicant’s budget shows a negative monthly 
net remainder at this time. He noted that one of his children has diabetes and requires 
insulin to live. His job and security clearance mean everything to him. He believes that 
his military service has shown that he can overcome obstacles and adversities. He has 
taken steps to mitigate his financial issues. Applicant has not yet produced any receipts 
for payments on his repayment plans. 
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
 
4 
 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), AG 
¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
 
5 
 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are the result of some unemployment after he left the 
military in 2016 and his marital separation in 2015. He had one income at that time to pay 
bills and support his family. He lived on loans and use of credit cards to support himself. 
He admitted that in 2015 and 2016, he began having a problem with paying all his bills.  
 
Applicant presented recent information that he obtained the services of two 
companies to resolve his delinquent debts. He received financial counseling, obtained a 
plan of action and established a budget. He paid one small debt. His two payment plans 
start in November 2018 and March 2019. He did not provide any proof that he has made 
any payments yet on either plan. His budget shows a minus net monthly remainder. AG 
¶ 20(a) is not fully applicable due to the lack of clarifying information.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. His debts are due to circumstances beyond his 
control, but he obtained services in 2018 when he knew he was having financial difficulty 
in 2016. It is not clear from the record what his annual salary was in 2015, or anything he 
did to establish that he undertook responsible action under the circumstances.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) is partially established. He is working with two financial companies and 
arranged repayment plans. His plans will last until 2023 and he has not made one 
payment yet on the first plan. There is no track record.  AG ¶ 20(d) is not fully established 
because his payments have not started. He did not produce sufficient documentation to 
fully support this mitigating condition. Applicant has not met his burden to mitigate the 
financial concerns set out in the SOR.  
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
6 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis, 
and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of 
the whole person, including his many years of military service, and the circumstances 
beyond his control,  which led  to his debts. I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated 
the security concerns raised by his financial indebtedness. Accordingly, Applicant has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-n:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.o:   For Applicant 
 
      Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
