1 
        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
   DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: )
)
) ISCR Case No. 18-01565 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kris Poppe, Esq.  
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant failed to mitigate the criminal conduct and personal conduct security 
concerns, but he did mitigate the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
Statement of the Case 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 28, 
2017. On July 20, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, foreign influence, Guideline J, criminal conduct, and Guideline E, 
personal conduct. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AGs) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
12/18/2018
 
2 
 
Applicant obtained counsel and answered the SOR on August 15, 2018, 
admitting all of the SOR allegations under Guideline B, foreign influence, and Guideline 
J, criminal conduct. He denied the two SOR allegations of falsification under Guideline 
E at SOR ¶ 3.b and ¶ 3.c. Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on October 15, 2018. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
November 6, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled.  
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 - 12 were admitted into evidence without objection. 
At the hearing, Applicant testified, and he submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A – N, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on November 
15, 2018.  
 
    Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel submitted formal requests that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iraq and Turkey. Applicant did not object and the requests 
were approved. The requests concerning Iraq and Turkey and attached supporting 
documents were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing 
Exhibits (HE) 1 and 2. Some of the facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact below.   
 
Request for Administrative Notice - Iraq 
 
The request listed supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts. AG ¶ 6, Foreign Influence, provides, “Adjudication under this Guideline can and 
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.” A risk assessment in this case 
necessitates administrative notice of facts concerning Iraq.  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the HE 1 source documents, and incorporated them by reference. The 
facts are summarized in the written request and will not be repeated in this decision. 
However, of particular note, are the following salient facts from HE 1: 
 
 
3 
 
Iraq is a constitutional parliamentary republic. The U.S. State Department warns 
that U.S. citizens traveling in Iraq remain at high risk for kidnapping and terrorist 
violence and to avoid all but essential travel to Iraq. The Islamic State of Iraq and the 
Levant (ISIL) controls a significant portion of Iraq’s territory. Within areas under ISIL 
control, the Iraq government has little or no ability to exercise control and ensure public 
safety. Kidnappings and attacks by improvised explosive devices (IED’s) occur 
frequently in many areas of the country, including Baghdad. Such attacks often take 
place in public venues such as cafes and markets.  
 
Anti-U.S. sectarian militias threaten U.S. citizens and Western companies 
throughout Iraq. Iraq witnessed a continuing surge of terrorist activity in 2016, primarily 
as a result of the actions of ISIL. Although the government of Iraq has made significant 
progress in its campaign to retake occupied territory from ISIL, there remains a security 
vacuum in parts of Iraq. The U.S. State Department has also reported that ISIL 
committed the overwhelming number of significant human rights abuses, including 
attacks against civilians, especially Shia but also Sunnis who opposed ISIL, and women 
and children. ISIL members committed acts of violence on a mass scale, including 
killings by suicide bombings, IED’s, execution-style shootings, public beheadings, and 
other forms of execution. Sectarian hostility, widespread corruption, and lack of 
transparency at all levels, weakened the Iraq government’s authority and worsened 
effective human rights protections. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice - Turkey 
 
The request listed supporting documents to show detail and context for those 
facts. A risk assessment in this case necessitates administrative notice of facts 
concerning Turkey.  
 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts 
contained in the HE 2 source documents, and incorporated them by reference. The 
facts are summarized in the written request and will not be repeated in this decision. 
However, of particular note, are the following salient facts from HE 2: 
 
Notwithstanding the long strategic U.S. – Turkey relationship, current country 
conditions are problematic.  The U.S. State Department urges citizens to avoid travel to 
Turkey due to terrorism and arbitrary detentions. Terrorist groups explicitly target 
Western tourists and expatriates for kidnapping and assassination. The potential for 
terrorist attacks in Turkey, including against U.S. citizens and interests, remains high. 
The U.S. Government does not allow family members to accompany personnel 
assigned to the U.S. Consulate in Adana, unless they are working in the Consulate. 
Turkey is a transit country for foreign terrorist fighters wishing to join the Islamic State of 
Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and other terrorist groups fighting in Syria and Iraq. Since a July 
2016 coup attempt, the Turkish Government has operated under a state of emergency, 
with far reaching effects on the country’s society and institutions, restricting the exercise 
of many fundamental freedoms. Profound and significant human rights abuses persist.    
 
 
4 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and single. He reports no children. He was born in 
Baghdad, Iraq and he served as a linguist for a federal contractor attached to armed 
forces of the United States from 2003 to 2009. (GE 1, Tr. 15, 35) He went on more than 
1,000 combat patrols. (Tr. 86) Applicant has one brother, age 30, who served as a 
linguist in support of U.S. Marines in Iraq for five years. (Tr. 36) He also has three 
sisters still living in different cities in Iraq with their husbands and families. Their ages 
are 31, 39, and 42. Applicant’s parents moved from Iraq to Syria in 2005 and remained 
for three years. (Tr. 38-39) Next, they moved to Turkey due to the instability in Syria. 
Applicant moved to the U.S. in 2009 on a special immigrant visa program and he was 
naturalized in 2014. (Tr. 15)  
 
 Applicant’s mother served in the Ministry of Education in Iraq for 22 years, and 
his father retired from the Iraqi Army as a major in 1989-’90, after more than 20 years of 
service.  (Tr. 30-31) Applicant provided financial support of $250, once a month from 
2010-2016, to his parents for such things as medical bills. (Tr. 39) They are refugees 
residing in Turkey. Applicant has telephonic contact with his parents once or twice a 
week. (Tr. 40-41) Applicant has filed an application with the Embassy in Turkey to try to 
move them to the U.S. on a visa. His brother tutors school children in Iraq. They last 
had contact more than three years ago. (Tr. 43) Applicant’s two oldest sisters are 
teachers in Iraq and his youngest sister never worked. (Tr. 44) In addition to providing 
financial support to his parents, as needed, Applicant gave his youngest sister $900 to 
help her buy a car. (Tr. 45) His telephonic contact with his sisters varies from once 
every two weeks to once a month. He has no property in Iraq, and held a bank account 
there briefly from 2008-2009. (Tr. 89)  
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 28, 
2017.2 In section 22 (Police Record) of his SCA, he answered “no” to all questions 
about being issued any summons, citations, tickets to appear in court in a criminal 
proceeding etc. Applicant failed to disclose the civil summons, 4 criminal summonses, 
25 citations and 18 traffic warnings that he received between November 2010 and 
September 2016. (GE 4-11) He admitted all of these traffic violations in his Answer. 
Applicant submitted AE A, an updated state division of motor vehicles driving record, to 
show that he has not had any vehicle violations since 2015. Applicant testified credibly 
that he may have misinterpreted the questions in this section of the SCA but since all of 
his citations involved fines of less than $300, he was not required to report them. (Tr. 
82) Since all of the charges against him alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a–2.e were dismissed and 
Applicant served no community service, paid no fines, and had no consequences, he 
misunderstood and believed he did not have to report these in his SCA. (Tr. 83) To 
corroborate his testimony on this point, he did disclose his arrest for domestic violence 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise stated, the basis for these findings of fact is Applicant’s Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SCA) dated February 28, 2017 (GE 1) and the summaries of personal subject 
interviews conducted on July 27, 2017, and December 8, 2017. (GE 2) 
 
2 GE 1. 
 
 
5 
 
in 2015 (SOR ¶ 2.a) and protective order against him, as well as the arrest for 
communicating threats in 2016, to the clearance investigator in his December 8, 2017 
clearance interview. (GE 2, Tr. 117) He disclosed this offense because it is the only one 
where he went to trial.  
 
 In September 2011, Applicant lived with his girlfriend. They had a disagreement 
and when he tried to move out, she gave him only half of his personal property. (Tr. 58) 
She tried to shove him out the door and he allegedly pushed her. The judge dismissed 
this complaint at SOR ¶ 2.a. (Tr. 58) In SOR ¶ 2.b, Applicant lent $250 to a female co-
worker who was in financial distress in January 2015. He asked her for a check to 
secure this loan, which he would only cash after she became solvent. (Tr. 60-63) When 
he later tried to cash the check, he found that there were insufficient funds in her 
account and confronted her. She tried to snatch the cold check out of his hand and 
called police. He was charged with trespassing and the judge summarily dismissed that 
complaint and had her arrested for uttering a false instrument. (Tr. 63) In August 2015, 
a mentally ill neighbor alleged that Applicant committed simple assault, but promptly 
dropped the charges. (GE 6, Tr. 63) Again, Applicant was arrested for communicating 
threats against a former business partner in March 2016, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, and 
that charge was dismissed by the judge on May 16, 2016. (GE 8)   
 
 Applicant obtained his commercial driver’s license (CDL) and operated a 
transportation company from 2013-2017. (Tr. 52) He received numerous citations for 
driving infractions during that period. (Tr. 55) Applicant testified that he started driving in 
Iraq when he was 14 years old, and he was accustomed to driving unimpeded by 
restrictions on speed, and rules and regulations. (Tr. 75) He had difficulty assimilating to 
the rules of the road and driving laws when he moved to the U.S. at age 28. Although 
he studied a safe driving booklet, passed a written exam, and took a state road test to 
obtain his state driver’s license in 2009, he had a habit of speeding. (GE 9, 10, 11, Tr. 
77)  
 
 Applicant testified credibly that despite his astonishing number of driving 
offenses, his state license was never suspended, and it is still valid. (Tr. 80, AE A) 
Instead, he would routinely hire an attorney who would go into state court and get the 
driving offense reduced to improper equipment (odometer), and pay a fine – 25 times. 
(Tr. 79) Despite this ruse, Applicant was aware that the problem was not a defective 
odometer. (Tr. 123) Applicant admitted that he took too long to change his driving 
habits, but he did so. (Tr. 79) He was recently issued a warning in 2018 because he 
was driving his girlfriend’s car, which had an improperly displayed license plate. (Tr. 96) 
 
 Applicant was involved in a civil dispute with one of his former employee-truck 
drivers, after that driver abandoned one of his trucks and left it unattended. (Tr. 12, GE 
7) He was charged with simple assault on the other CDL driver in August 2015 at SOR 
¶ 2.d. The state court judge dismissed this criminal complaint against Applicant on 
September 28, 2015. (GE 7) Then, a civil action ensued between Applicant and the 
same driver for $4,500 that Applicant loaned the driver. It was resolved for $4,500 in 
Applicant’s favor. (Tr. 72) Applicant reasonably stated that he had no reason to report 
this civil action in his favor, in his SCA, and he did not intend to falsify that form or 
 
6 
 
deceive the government as alleged in SOR ¶ 3.c because this is all a matter of public 
court records. (Tr. 114, 118, GE 7,12)   
 
 Applicant submitted AE B–K, which are character reference letters, and AE L-N, 
which are certificates of appreciation for his service as a linguist on behalf of U.S. 
Armed Forces. Notably, he served coalition forces with bravery and distinction since 
2006. An Army Brigadier General stated “service of local national translators who risk 
their safety, and that of their families, to support the mission and U.S. soldiers, is 
invaluable.” (AE B) Applicant was first employed by the U.S. military as a general 
laborer in 2004 in Iraq. Then, he served in direct support of combat units including the 
82nd Airborne Division, and 2nd and 3rd Brigade Combat Teams, 4th Infantry Division, as 
an Arabic translator. He performed so well that he was added to Army civil action teams 
in 2008. (AE C-N)   
  
         Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
 
7 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant’s parents are living in Turkey, but applied for visas to immigrate to the 
U.S. His brother and sisters are citizens and residents of Iraq. He provides occasional 
financial support to his parents as a dutiful son. Applicant’s foreign contacts create a 
potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both directly and through his family members. AG 
¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are implicated by the evidence. Accordingly, Applicant’s relationship 
 
8 
 
with his parents and siblings, who are citizens and residents of Turkey and Iraq, creates 
a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.  
  
Conditions that could potentially mitigate foreign influence security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.  
 
Applicant has demonstrated a long-standing preference for working and living in 
the U.S. He served in harm’s way as a linguist for over six years and endured over 
1,000 patrols with U.S. Armed Forces. He was hired as a linguist precisely because of 
his Arabic language skills that are indigenous to people who were born and raised 
and have family in Iraq. He has the background, upbringing, and understanding of Iraqi 
culture that is invaluable. Although he is presumed to have strong bonds of affection 
with his parents and siblings in Turkey and Iraq, these bonds are not sufficient to offset 
or overcome his demonstrated, long-term commitment to the U.S. and self-abnegation 
in its service under dangerous conditions.3  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. Guideline B 
is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.4  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the U.S. over 
                                                          
3 The Appeal Board has held that “an Applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the United States 
is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an Applicant in a Guideline B case.” ISCR Case 
04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. March 20, 2007). 
4 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
9 
 
matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, we 
know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, especially 
in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s government, its 
relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are relevant in assessing whether 
an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S., or 
the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant parents are Iraqi citizens residing in Turkey, and his siblings are 
citizens and residents of Iraq, which is an unstable regime. His contact with them is 
infrequent by telephone. There is no indication that they are affiliated with the Iraqi 
government or intelligence services. Applicant’s foreign family members do not pose an 
unacceptable security risk. There is sufficient evidence to conclude that Applicant would 
report contacts with his relatives by foreign intelligence agents, and that he has a long-
term commitment to the U.S. All of the mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 8 are applicable to 
the contacts with family members, which are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.b.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 lists conditions that could raise a security concern and may be dis- 
qualifying including: 
 
(a) a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own would 
be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which 
in combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability or 
trustworthiness; and 
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, 
an admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, 
prosecuted, or convicted. 
 
Applicant admitted to 25 traffic citations, and 18 warnings between 2010 and 
2016. However, traffic violations generally don’t rise to the level of criminality. Although 
he repeatedly violated state traffic regulations and admits that it took too long for him to 
alter his behavior, there is no evidence of criminality. This same aberrant behavior is 
properly cross-alleged in SOR ¶ 3.a. The criminal summonses issued against Applicant 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.e were all dismissed or resolved in his favor.  Thus, AG ¶¶ 
31(a) and (b) do not apply.  
 
 
 
10 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
           The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
The Concern. Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure 
to cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national 
security investigative or adjudicative processes. The following normally will 
result in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to meeting 
with a security investigator for subject interview, completing security 
forms or releases, cooperation with medical or psychological 
evaluation, or polygraph examination, if authorized and required; and 
  
b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions 
of investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
     
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
 (c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; and 
 
 (d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
 
11 
 
individual may not properly safeguard classified information. This 
includes but is not limited to, considerations of: 
    
   (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
Applicant did not disclose his extraordinary involvement and frequent interaction 
with authorities in law enforcement and the U.S. judicial system over the last decade in 
his SCA. He has a well-established pattern of speeding and failure to comply with traffic 
rules and regulations. AG ¶¶ 16(a) (c) and (d) are implicated and the focus shifts to a 
determination of which, if any of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
17. Conditions that could potent ia l l y  mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances or factors that contributed to 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
            Applicant’s traffic violations were frequent and numerous. His last offense 
occurred in  2018 when he was driving his girlfriend’s vehicle, and received a warning 
because  the vehicle lacked a proper license plate. It is premature to conclude that 
his aberrant driving behavior is unlikely to recur. Thus, the cross-alleged 25 citations 
and 18 warnings at SOR ¶ 3.a, while not rising to criminality, do support a whole-
person assessment of unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. This 
allegation, insofar as it cross-alleges driving offenses improperly alleged under 
Guideline J, at SOR ¶¶ 2.f – 2.h, is not mitigated here under Guideline E. The sheer 
number of repeated driving offenses, when combined with all available information, 
raises concerns about Applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability.  
 
Applicant misunderstood the questions in the SCA in section 28 about being 
a party to any civil court actions in the last 10 years. He testified credibly that he was 
the successful plaintiff in a civil dispute and multiple summonses were dismissed 
against him. His contention that he felt no reason to disclose these matters of public 
record, in his SCA, is not unreasonable. He naturally assumed that since his 
extensive list of infractions all involved fines of less than $300 he did not have to 
report these on his SCA. I find that he did not have the specific intent to deliberately 
deceive the government or falsify his SCA. His failures to disclose these infractions 
and civil disputes as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 3.c and 3.d, have no national security 
significance or concern. 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B, E, and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline. Applicant is 37 years old. He submitted 
character references from his supervisors attesting to his allegiance to the U.S. Virtually 
all of his adult work life was spent in Iraq supporting U.S. interests. However, he is still 
in the process of assimilating successfully into his new country, and learning to comply 
with driving laws.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has  
mitigated foreign influence security concerns, and criminal conduct security concerns, 
but not personal conduct security concerns.  
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                      Paragraph 1, Guideline B:                         FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:                             For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
13 
 
                      Subparagraphs 2.a-2.h:                             For Applicant 
 
                      Paragraph 3, Guideline E:                         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
                      Subparagraph 3.a                                      Against Applicant  
 
                      Subparagraphs 3.b-3.c:                             For Applicant 
 
 
                   Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
          ________________________ 
          Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                               Administrative Judge 
