1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
 ) ISCR Case No. 18-00541 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
Applicant was counseled approximately 40 times between January 2012 and March 
2017 in the U.S. military for failure to comply with a lawful order and tardiness. He used 
marijuana with a state-issued medical marijuana card approximately five times in June 
2017 and tested positive for marijuana in a drug screen in July 2017. Applicant improved 
his military conduct over time to conform his duty performance to expectations, and he has 
not had misconduct issues in his present job. He destroyed his medical marijuana card and 
intends to refrain from any involvement with marijuana in the future. Clearance is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On April 26, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security 
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct, and 
explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue security clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National 
12/26/2018
2 
 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG) effective within the DOD on June 
8, 2017. 
 
On May 9, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). 
On September 7, 2018, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine 
whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. On October 5, 2018, I scheduled a hearing for November 15, 
2018. 
 
 I convened the hearing as scheduled. Three Government exhibits (GEs 1-3) were 
admitted in evidence. An August 1, 2018 letter forwarding the proposed GEs to Applicant 
and a list of the GEs were marked as hearing exhibits (HEs I and II) for the record but not 
admitted in evidence. Three Applicant exhibits (AEs A-C) were admitted in evidence. 
Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on November 27, 2018. I held 
the record open for three weeks after the hearing for additional evidence from Applicant. 
On December 5, 2018, Applicant submitted a copy of his medical marijuana card, which 
was admitted into evidence as AE D without objection. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline H, and cross-alleges under Guideline E (SOR ¶ 
2.b) that Applicant used and purchased marijuana in approximately June 2017 while he 
was granted access to classified information (SOR ¶ 1.a) and that Applicant tested positive 
for marijuana in July 2017 (SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant is also alleged under Guideline E to have 
received approximately 40 corrective action memos or written reprimands between July 
2011 and March 2017 for misconduct issues while he was serving on active duty in the 
U.S. military (SOR ¶ 2.a). 
 
 In a detailed response of May 9, 2018, Applicant admitted the use of marijuana with 
a legally obtained medical marijuana card and that he had failed a pre-employment drug 
screen administered by his current employer. Having learned that even medical marijuana 
use was illegal under federal law, he destroyed his marijuana card and had himself 
removed from the medical marijuana program. Applicant also admitted the disciplinary 
actions taken against him during his active duty service, with over half of them received 
during his first two years, for conduct that he attributes to being “a loud-mouthed know it all 
that didn’t want to listen to anybody of authority and challenged everybody.” Applicant 
explained that after he attained the rank of petty officer third class (E-4), his command had 
a serious talk with him about his performance and professionalism, and that written 
reprimands were few and far between thereafter. He added that such conduct had not 
continued in his current employment; that he had received a raise; and that he has been 
approached about a career development plan at work. (Answer.) 
3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old high school graduate with some community college 
credits. He was married from January 2013 to March 2016, and has a five-year-old son for 
whom he pays $650 per month in child support. His ex-wife has primary physical custody of 
their son. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 24-26.) He has worked for his current defense contractor employer 
as a test mechanic since July 2017 and needs to retain his security clearance to maintain 
his employment. (Tr. 25.) 
 
Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. military with a Secret security clearance 
from July 2011 to March 2017. (GE 1.) After completing boot camp and military schooling, 
Applicant reported to a command in January 2012. He initially showed little appreciation for 
military decorum or rank and challenged his superiors about military practices and 
regulations. He was also late to watch on occasion. He was issued well over 20 corrective 
action memoranda or written reprimands during his first two years in the service. In 2014, 
he achieved the rank of petty officer third class. After being counseled about his lack of 
military professionalism and insubordinate attitude, he began to conform his behavior to 
that expected of his rank and military service. (GE 2; Tr. 54-55, 62-67.) His Evaluation 
Report and Counseling Record for his duty performance from June 2015 to June 2016 
indicates that he exceeded standards in areas of military bearing/character, personal job 
accomplishments, and teamwork. Applicant’s rating superior noted that Applicant had 
shown improvement over the reporting period and was now operating at the level expected 
in his division. He was described as knowledgeable, a team player, and driven and 
recommended for advancement with a rating of must promote. (AE A.) 
 
Counseling incidents declined significantly, although by the time of his discharge, 
Applicant estimated that he had received approximately 40 written chits or reprimands at 
the command. (GE 2.) Applicant was administered non-judicial punishment once, in 
December 2016, when he and three others violated liberty restrictions by staying out past 
curfew. Applicant was punished with a reduction in rank from E-4 to E-3 (suspended), 60 
days restriction (suspended), and loss of half pay for two months (enforced) for failure to 
obey an order and conduct that could bring discredit on the armed forces. Applicant was 
warned that the reduction in rank and restriction punishments would be enforced if he 
should receive any additional written counseling chits or reprimands. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 57, 67.) 
 
Within a month of his non-judicial proceeding, Applicant had an argument with an 
information technology systems technician in his division. A week later, the technician 
blamed Applicant for cutting an Internet cable.1 Applicant was issued a written counseling 
                                                 
1 Applicant indicated during a December 2017 subject interview that he argued with the information technology 
systems technician because the technician was not permitted to be present during weapons handling, and he 
refused to leave until a superior intervened. (GE 2.) Applicant now asserts that he argued with the technician 
because his son had just been diagnosed with autism, and the technician had blocked his emails so he could 
not receive updates about his son. (Tr. 63-63.) 
4 
 
chit, even though he denied cutting the cable and never signed the chit. As a result of the 
reprimand, the suspended terms of his non-judicial punishment were imposed. Applicant 
contested the reprimand to no avail. According to Applicant, when he asked a military 
superior for assistance, this superior told him that he had to worry about his own career. 
(Tr. 62.) Because of his length of service, Applicant could not continue in the military at the 
rank of E-3 per regulation. In March 2017, he was honorably discharged against his desire 
to stay in the military. (GE 2; Tr. 24, 58-64.) 
 
Applicant’s direct superior at the time of Applicant’s non-judicial punishment and 
discharge had served with Applicant from January 2013. He attests that early on, Applicant 
frequently disappeared and was delinquent in his qualifications. However, once Applicant 
decided to commit to his duty, his performance improved markedly, and he took immense 
pride in his work.  Applicant proved to be a great asset to him with training junior personnel 
and could be counted on to give his very best until the job was done. (AE B.) 
 
Two or three weeks after his discharge from the military, Applicant applied to work 
for his current employer. (Tr. 28.) As of May 2017, he had received no response to his job 
application. (Tr. 21, 29.) He had trouble sleeping, and expressed his concerns to a 
counselor who was seeing a friend. The counselor suggested that he see a local physician 
for medical marijuana. Applicant had used marijuana twice that he can recall and perhaps 
three to four times while in high school “to party,” but he did not engage in any illegal drug 
use while in the military. (Tr. 26-27, 50-51.)The physician prescribed medical marijuana for 
Applicant for post-traumatic stress related to his military service.2 (GE 2; Tr. 35, 40-41, 47.) 
On May 25, 2017, Applicant was certified for medical marijuana by the state for one year. 
He was authorized to purchase 2.5 ounces from a medical marijuana dispensary. He 
received his card (AE D) in the mail a few weeks later, and he purchased 3.5 grams of 
marijuana from a dispensary at a cost of $35. (GE 2; Tr. 41-42.) Applicant used marijuana 
approximately five times over the course of two or three days in his home in June 2017. 
(GEs 1-2; Tr. 42-43.) He did not share any of the marijuana because it would be a criminal 
offense. (Tr. 42.) Applicant did not then consider the implications of his medical marijuana 
use because it was legal under state law. (Tr. 23, 45.) 
 
 Shortly after he used marijuana, Applicant was offered a position with his employer. 
He realized that his use of marijuana could have negative implications. He discarded his 
medical marijuana card and removed himself from the medical marijuana program.3 (Tr. 
32-33.) He was called in to the worksite by his employer in July 2017 and administered a 
                                                                                                                                                             
  
2 Under pertinent state law, a patient may only register for a medical marijuana certificate if he or she is a state 
resident being treated for a debilitating medical condition by a state-licensed physician. Post-traumatic stress 
disorder is one of the specific debilitating conditions that qualifies for medical marijuana under state law. 
 
3 Applicant told the OPM investigator that he stopped using marijuana immediately when he received his job 
offer. (GE 2.) Applicant was asked on cross-examination about when he stopped using marijuana. He testified 
that he was “already done and out,” when he was called by his employer. When asked when he first suspected 
that his marijuana use could be a problem, he responded that his mind set was that marijuana was legal in the 
state and he “didn’t make the correlation between state and federal.” He acknowledged that he realized it 
could be problematic. (Tr.  44-45.) Applicant testified that he destroyed his medical marijuana card to “take 
away all temptation,” and so there would be no doubt that he could use marijuana again. (Tr. 32.) 
5 
 
pre-employment drug screen by hair sample. (GE 3; Tr. 29-30.) Suspecting that he would 
test positive for tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), Applicant notified the person taking his 
sample that he had a medical marijuana card, and he provided proof to the yard hospital by 
email link that he had been issued a state medical marijuana certificate. (GEs 2-3; Tr. 31-
33.) On July 19, 2017, Applicant’s employer filed an incident report with the DOD indicating 
that Applicant had tested positive for THC in his pre-employment hair drug screen, and that 
he had provided proof of a state medical marijuana certificate to the yard hospital. (GE 3.) 
 
 Despite failing the pre-employment drug screen, Applicant was hired by the defense 
contractor because his marijuana use was legal under state law. Applicant was told that he 
could no longer use any marijuana legally or illegally because it was a federal contractor 
job and marijuana is illegal under federal law. (Tr. 22, 35.) 
 
 On July 27, 2017, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86). In response to inquiries concerning 
the illegal use of drugs or controlled substances, Applicant indicated that he used medical 
marijuana with a medical marijuana card one day throughout the day in June 2017. He 
denied any intention to use marijuana in the future and explained: 
 
I had a [state] Medical Marijuana card. Legal by state ILLEGAL by federal 
law. Since working at [company] I have stopped use and have also destroyed 
the card and taken measures to remove myself from the program. (GE 1.) 
 
In early December 2017, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). He volunteered that, when he was in the 
military, he had been disciplined an estimated 40 times for misconduct related to 
disrespecting rank and military decorum (such as asking a superior not to walk on the deck 
that he had just cleaned; requesting gloves before he would clean latrines; and asking a 
superior not to stick his finger in his face). He often challenged his superiors, for which he 
received counseling chits for insubordination. He was also written up multiple times for 
being late to watch and once for breaking a window in a guard shack. He explained that he 
often spoke up when he felt something was not right or he felt a superior was being 
demeaning toward him. Applicant addressed his non-judicial punishment and the 
subsequent incident involving the Internet cable that led to his discharge. He denied that he 
cut the cable and indicated that the technician who issued the chit admitted to an officer 
that he wrote the chit out of anger following his argument with Applicant. Applicant 
acknowledged that he had created a bad reputation among his superiors at the command, 
but his performance evaluations were generally good, even with all the written counseling 
memoranda. About his marijuana use, Applicant explained that he purchased 3.5 grams of 
marijuana with a medical marijuana card in June 2017 and used it “no more than five 
times.” Later that month, he received a job offer from his defense-contractor employer, and 
he immediately resolved to abstain from any marijuana use in the future. He added that he 
failed his initial drug screen administered by the company and notified company personnel 
about his medical marijuana use. He indicated that, because he had a medical marijuana 
card, he could work for the company but would have to update his security clearance 
paperwork and abstain from marijuana going forward. Applicant denied any use of 
6 
 
marijuana since then and added that he had destroyed his medical marijuana card. 
Applicant explained that he would not compromise his employment eligibility by using 
marijuana in the future. He agreed to submit to random drug screening by his employer. 
(GE 2.) 
 
In September or October 2017, Applicant volunteered for a drug screen at work that 
was negative for all substances tested, including marijuana. (Tr. 35-36.) Applicant 
understands that his employer has a drug-free policy (Tr. 28, 36), and that marijuana 
remains illegal under federal law. (Tr. 52.) He signed an agreement with his employer to 
refrain from engaging in any prohibited drug use while employed by the company. He has 
been tasked by his employer with talking to new hires now and then about the fact that 
employees have to abide by the federal prohibition of any marijuana involvement. (Tr. 53-
54.) Applicant does not intend to use marijuana in the future. (Tr. 35.) He now takes 
melatonin to help with his sleep issues. (Tr. 39.) 
 
Applicant has not had any incidents of misconduct or insubordination in his current 
job. (Tr. 72.) He was promoted after six months on the job and has applied for a 
supervisory position. (Tr. 68.)  He only recently regained his driving privileges, which had 
been suspended when he was in the military because his ex-wife failed to pay a speeding 
ticket for him that he incurred just prior to a deployment. He had to take Uber to work at   
$36 a day that he paid for by working overtime. (Tr. 69-71.)  Applicant’s current supervisor 
asks that Applicant be given special consideration by the DOD with respect to keeping his 
clearance. Applicant has become a valuable asset to their department. He qualified to hold 
two positions centered on the safety and well-being of workers and needs no guidance. His 
supervisor considers Applicant to be an “extremely efficient, driven, competent and 
qualified individual.” (AE C.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
7 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concerns about drug involvement and substance misuse are set forth in 
AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of prescription 
and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances that cause 
physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because such behavior may lead to physical or 
psychological impairment and because it raises questions about a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Controlled 
substance means any “controlled substance” as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. 
Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in this guideline to describe 
any of the behaviors listed above. 
  
Applicant used medical marijuana approximately five times over two to three days in 
June 2017. He used and purchased the drug with a medical marijuana card obtained 
legally in his state.4 That marijuana use caused him to fail a pre-employment drug screen 
                                                 
4 Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I drug. Despite some states providing for medical marijuana use or the 
decriminalization or legalization of recreational use of minor amounts of the drug, marijuana remains a 
8 
 
administered by his employer in July 2017. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 25(a), “any 
substance misuse (see above definition);” 25(b), “testing positive for an illegal drug;” and 
25(c), “illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;” apply. 
The Government’s case for AG ¶ 25(f), “any illegal drug use while granted access to 
classified information or holding a sensitive position,” inferentially stems from the fact that 
Applicant held a Secret clearance for his military duties that had not been revoked or 
suspended after his discharge in March 2017.5 His break in service was only a few months, 
and so his clearance was still active. He had applied to work for a defense contractor for 
which he needed to retain his Secret clearance eligibility. To the extent that AG ¶ 25(f) 
applies, it must be noted that Applicant was not in a position when he used the marijuana 
where he could potentially have been exposed to classified or sensitive information.  
 
Applicant bears the burden of establishing that matters in mitigation apply. Two 
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 have some applicability. They provide: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on an individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all illegal drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
                                                                                                                                                             
Schedule I controlled substance under federal law. Such drugs have a high potential for abuse, no currently 
accepted medical use in treatment in the United States, and lack accepted safety for using the drug under 
medical supervision. 
  
5 DoD 5220.22, the National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual, provides for reciprocity under ¶ 2-
204: 
 
Federal agencies that grant access to classified information to their employees or their 
contractor employees are responsible for determining whether such employees have been 
previously cleared or investigated by the Federal Government. Any previously granted 
[Personnel Security Clearance] that is based upon a current investigation of a scope that 
meets or exceeds that necessary for the clearance required shall provide the basis for 
issuance of a new clearance without further investigation or adjudication unless significant 
derogatory information that was not previously adjudicated becomes known to the granting 
agency. 
 
Under ¶ 2-201 of the NISPOM, investigations are current if within five years and meet the standards for the 
level of personnel security clearance required. 
9 
 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use was infrequent and legal under state law. He apparently 
did not fully understand that his state laws permitting medical marijuana do not alter the 
federal prohibition or existing national security guidelines concerning marijuana use. Even 
so, the circumstances of his use are somewhat troubling because he had an application 
pending to work for his employer in a position needing security clearance eligibility, and he 
held eligibility for a Secret clearance that may well have been a consideration in the 
employer’s decision to hire him. There is no evidence that his clearance had been revoked, 
even though he was unemployed and not accessing classified information. Applicant knew 
when he was in the military that marijuana use was prohibited and illegal under federal law 
if not also contrary to his security clearance eligibility. His security clearance eligibility 
should have given him reason to question whether he should use medical marijuana 
irrespective of state law and of the fact that he had not received a response from the 
defense contractor to his job application. AG ¶ 25(a) does not fully apply. 
 
 Regarding AG ¶ 25(b), Applicant has persuasively established that he does not 
intend to use any marijuana in the future. Regarding when he decided he was done with 
marijuana, he told an OPM investigator that, when notified of a job offer from his employer 
later in June 2017, he immediately stopped using medical marijuana. He testified at his 
hearing that he was “already done and out” before he was contacted. Suspecting that his 
drug screen would be positive, Applicant destroyed his medical marijuana card to “take 
away all temptation,” and so there would be no doubt that he could use marijuana again. 
He indicated on his SF 86, during his subject interview, and again during his hearing that 
he does not intend to use marijuana again because it is illegal under federal law, and he 
does not want to jeopardize his job. His dedication to his work, which was confirmed by his 
current supervisor, reflects the importance of his job to him. He is not likely to risk his 
employment by using marijuana. As of his hearing, he had not used marijuana in 15 
months, and so has established a pattern of abstinence under AG ¶ 25(b). Although he has 
not executed a statement of intention to abstain containing an acknowledgement that any 
future involvement or misuse would be grounds for revocation of his security clearance, he 
signed a statement for his employer that he would not use any marijuana while employed 
by the company. His drug involvement and substance misuse is mitigated under AG ¶ 
25(b). 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct  
  
The concerns about personal conduct are set forth in AG ¶ 15:  
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide 
truthful and candid answers during national security investigative or 
adjudicative processes. 
 
10 
 
Applicant volunteered during his subject interview that he had a difficult time 
adjusting to the military after he reported to a command in January 2012. For 
insubordination, disrespect of rank and military decorum, and being late to watch several 
times, he was written up approximately 40 times by his superiors at the command, with 
most of the discipline imposed during his first two years. After being counseled about his 
lack of military professionalism and insubordinate attitude, he began to conform his 
behavior to that expected of his rank and military service. He showed notable improvement 
over the June 2015 to June 2016 rating period to the point where he exceeded standards 
in areas of military bearing/character, personal job accomplishments, and teamwork. Even 
so, he received his only non-judicial punishment during his military service in December 
2012 for violating curfew restrictions while out with other servicemen. He subsequently 
received another counseling chit from an information technology technician for allegedly 
cutting an Internet cable. Applicant denied that he cut the cable, but whether because of 
his poor reputation earned early at the command or because he had been warned to avoid 
any further infractions, it was enough for his commanding officer to impose the sanctions 
(restriction and reduction in rank) that had been suspended in December 2012. The record 
does not fully spell out with specificity the nature and dates of many of Applicant’s 
disciplinary infractions. Even so, his admitted misconduct is enough to satisfy disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 16(d), which provides: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself of an adverse determination, but 
which, when combined with all available information, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This includes, but is 
not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; and 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
Concerning the Government’s case for disqualification under the personal conduct 
guideline because of Applicant’s marijuana use while he held an active security clearance 
and Applicant’s drug screen positive for marijuana (SOR ¶ 2.b), the Appeal Board has held 
that security-related conduct can be considered under more than one guideline, and in an 
appropriate case, be given independent weight under each. See ISCR Case No. 11-06672 
(App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2012). Applicant exercised “questionable judgment” within the general 
security concerns set forth in AG ¶ 15 when he used and purchased marijuana in violation 
of the obligations of his security clearance eligibility. Separate from the risk of physiological 
impairment associated with the use of a mood-altering substance, which is a Guideline H 
concern, Applicant had an obligation as a clearance holder to comply with federal law. 
 
Two of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 merit some consideration. They are 
as follows: 
11 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factor that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
  
Despite the numerous disciplinary actions, steps were not taken to separate 
Applicant from the military until March 2017 when he was granted an honorable discharge. 
This suggests that his violations were largely minor in nature, but they cannot be 
reasonably characterized as infrequent. Although his medical marijuana use was limited, 
the fact that he held security clearance eligibility and had an application pending for 
defense-contractor employment when he used the marijuana is an aggravating factor. His 
marijuana use when combined with his record of misconduct in the military supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment that is not adequately mitigated by AG 
¶ 17(c). 
 
For the reasons discussed under Guideline H, Applicant’s marijuana use is not likely 
to recur. Regarding his disciplinary infractions in the military, Applicant should have 
understood by December 2016 what the command expected of him. He was an E-4 who 
had considerable responsibilities and had gone a long way toward rehabilitating his 
reputation in the command. He had everything to lose and nothing to gain by violating 
curfew. He was given yet another chance by the command with the suspension of the 
imposition of reduction in rank. He was on notice by his command that another counseling 
chit would result in the imposition of suspended punishments. Applicant thereafter argued 
with a technician, who filed a counseling chit alleging that Applicant cut an Internet cable. 
There is no evidence to rebut Applicant’s assertion that he did not cut the cable. Whether 
or not the technician filed a false reprimand, Applicant bears some responsibility for the 
end of his military career. Even so, to the extent that Applicant’s disciplinary infractions 
have some bearing on his current security worthiness, he has not displayed similar 
behavior in his defense-contractor employment. Applicant has demonstrated sufficient 
reform for mitigation under AG ¶ 17(d).   
 
Whole-Person Concept  
  
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(d).6 In that regard, Applicant’s youth likely played a role in his insubordination and other 
                                                 
6 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows:  
  
12 
 
misconduct in the military. He turned age 20 shortly before he reported to the command. 
With none of the written reprimands in evidence, the nature and seriousness of Applicant’s 
misconduct cannot be fully determined.  Even if some of the corrective actions were not 
merited, Applicant readily acknowledges that he was a hard-headed person who thought 
he knew it all.  Applicant’s medical marijuana use is exacerbated because it occurred while 
he held an active clearance, although the legality of that use under state law is 
circumstance that caused some confusion for him. 
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a security 
clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990). At the same time, 
the security clearance decision is not intended to punish applicants for past wrongdoing. 
Rather, it involves an evaluation of an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness 
in light of the security guidelines in the Directive. See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. 
June 21, 2010.) Applicant has exhibited reform and permanent behavioral change under 
AG ¶ 2(d)(7). He began by learning to comport his duty performance to that expected by 
his command. His military performance evaluation for June 2015 to June 2016 reflects the 
considerable progress he made in that regard. More recently, when he suspected that he 
would test positive because of medical marijuana, he removed himself from the state’s 
medical marijuana program and destroyed his card. He has displayed reliability and 
dedication in his current job with no incidents of misconduct. His supervisor considers him 
a valuable asset to their department. There is no evidence that Applicant ever violated 
security either in the military or in his defense-contractor employment. He understands that 
any future drug involvement could cost him his employment that he clearly enjoys and 
wants to retain. While his repeated misconduct in the military and his June 2017 drug 
involvement are not condoned, I am persuaded they are not likely to reoccur. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  For Applicant 
                                                                                                                                                             
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
13 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
