 
1 
 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 18-01182 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Dave F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
 RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to demonstrate financial responsibility, or that 
his financial problems are being resolved. The financial considerations security 
concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 9, 2017. 
He was interviewed by a government investigator on August 21, 2017. After reviewing 
the information gathered during the background investigation, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 26, 2018, alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant answered the 
SOR on July 2, 2018, and requested a decision based on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. 
 
A copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), containing the 
evidence supporting the security concerns, was provided to Applicant by letter dated 
August 2, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on August 10, 2018. He was granted a 
period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM to submit any objections to the FORM and 
 
2 
 
 
to provide material to refute, extenuate, and mitigate the concerns. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on November 28, 2018. Absent 
any objections, I admitted and considered the Government’s proposed evidence.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
In the FORM, Department Counsel advised Applicant that the FORM included an 
unauthenticated summary of interview with a government background investigator on 
August 31, 2017. (FORM, Item 3) Applicant was informed he could object to the 
summary of his interview, and it would not be admitted or considered, or that he could 
make corrections, additions, deletions, and update the document to make it accurate. 
Applicant was informed that his failure to respond to the FORM or to raise any 
objections could be construed as a waiver and the proposed FORM evidence would be 
considered. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I admitted the FORM’s proffered 
evidence and considered it. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant admitted the eight SOR financial allegations (¶¶ 
1.a through 1.h). He also submitted comments in mitigation and explanation. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 44 years old. He graduated from high school in 1992, and shortly 
thereafter enlisted in the U.S. Navy. He honorably served on active duty between 1992 
and 2012, and retired after 20 years of service. While in the Navy, Applicant possessed 
a clearance at the top-secret level with access to sensitive compartmented information 
(SCI). He married in 1996, and was widowed in 2009. He disclosed having no children.  
 
Following his retirement, Applicant took six months off to rest and travel. He was 
unemployed between June and December 2012. He has been consistently employed 
with different federal contractors since then. His current employer, a federal contractor, 
hired Applicant in August 2016, and is sponsoring his clearance. Apparently, Applicant’s 
clearance was continued after he retired. He is seeking the continuation of his 
clearance.  
 
In response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of his 2017 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed he had financial problems, which resulted from him providing financial help to 
his family. He provided no additional information or any documentary evidence to clarify 
or demonstrate the breadth and extent of his financial help. Applicant stated that he filed 
for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2016, because he was having difficulty making ends meet. 
He was financially overwhelmed helping his family and had to file for bankruptcy to 
resolve his financial problems. 
 
Although Applicant had numerous accounts charged-off, in collection, or 
delinquent, Applicant failed to disclose them in his 2017 SCA. He claimed he believed 
 
3 
 
 
that since the accounts were included in the bankruptcy filing, he did not have to list the 
individual delinquent accounts in his SCA.  
 
Applicant was confronted by a government investigator about his delinquent 
accounts during his August 2017 interview (FORM, Item 3), including a delinquent 
mortgage and the seven accounts alleged in the SOR. Applicant stated that all the 
accounts were included in the bankruptcy filing and they were being paid through the 
bankruptcy. He indicated he had been making payments to the bankruptcy trustee since 
September 2016. The bankruptcy was dismissed because of lack of payments to the 
trustee in about September 2017. Applicant presented no documentary evidence of his 
efforts to contact his creditors, to pay his delinquent debts, or to establish payment 
agreements, either before he filed for bankruptcy or after the bankruptcy was dismissed. 
 
In his SOR answer, Applicant claimed that he obtained a mortgage modification 
and had made two payments in accordance with the mortgage rehabilitation provisions. 
He presented no documentary evidence to support his claims. Moreover, he presented 
no evidence concerning his current financial situation (monthly income, living expenses, 
and debt payments). He presented no evidence to show he participated in financial 
counseling (other than that required to file bankruptcy), or that he is following a working 
budget. 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended; and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a 
Sensitive Position (AGs), applicable to all adjudicative decisions issued on or after June 
8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AGs list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in Security Executive Agent 
 
4 
 
 
Directive (SEAD) 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 2(f). All available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
Applicant’s financial problems are documented in the record. He has at least 
seven delinquent accounts and a delinquent mortgage that he was unable to address. 
He filed for bankruptcy protection in 2016, which was dismissed because of lack of 
payments in 2017. AG ¶ 19 provides disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” The record established these disqualifying 
 
5 
 
 
conditions, requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
The following mitigating condition under AG ¶ 20 is potentially applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained an applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 The AG ¶ 20(b) financial considerations mitigating condition is not fully raised by 
the facts and does not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant’s financial problems 
started before 2015, and are ongoing and unresolved. Applicant’s financial problems 
could be attributed to his providing financial help to his family. Notwithstanding, he failed 
to submit documentary evidence to corroborate his financial help, the extent of his help, 
and how that has affected his ability to be responsible with his own finances. Moreover, 
he did not present sufficient evidence of good-faith efforts to pay his debts or that he 
has been financially responsible under his circumstances.  
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to 
demonstrate financial responsibility, or that his financial problems are being resolved. 
The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have incorporated my comments under 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of these factors were addressed under 
that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant, 44, honorably served 20 years in the Navy. He has been consistently 
employed with federal contractors since 2012. He held a clearance in the service, which 
apparently has been continued to present without any issues or concerns. 
Notwithstanding, his evidence is insufficient to establish a track record of financial 
responsibility. He did not respond to the FORM. Thus, he offered no mitigating 
evidence, and no documents, to establish that he has resolved or is resolving his debts 
in a responsible manner.  
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against granting a security clearance. 
Unmitigated financial considerations security concerns lead me to conclude that 
granting a security clearance to Applicant is not warranted at this time.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of reform necessary for award of a security clearance in the 
future. With more effort towards documented resolution of his delinquent debts, a 
healthy financial picture, and a track record of behavior consistent with his obligations, 
he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance 
worthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
