       DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
    DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------         )    ISCR Case No. 18-00049
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant
mitigated security concerns regarding his alcohol consumption and criminal conduct.
Eligibility for access classified information is granted.
History of the Case
On March 16, 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of
eligibility for granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec.
Or.)10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Security Executive Agent,
by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (SEAD 4). 
12/31/2018
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 4, 2018, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on May 24, 2018. The Government’s case consisted of three
exhibits that were admitted without objection (GEs 1-3). Applicant relied on one witness
(himself) and three exhibits that were admitted without objection (AEs A-C). The
transcript of the proceedings (Tr.) was received on August 2, 2018.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documentation of early
termination of his non-supervised probation and expungement. For good cause shown,
Applicant was granted 60 days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was
afforded seven days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with the following
documentation: summary of charges and disposition of a March 2016 DUI charge,
character references, a DoD award recognizing Applicant’s meritorious service as part
of a DoD response to a 2015 cyber-security incident, and a minute order approving
early termination of Applicant’s probation. Applicant’s submission’s were  admitted
without objection as AEs D-G.
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guideline  G, Applicant allegedly committed four alcohol-related offenses
between March 1991 and March 2016. Specific allegations are as follows: (a) March
1991 DUI charges with conviction of alcohol-related reckless driving; (b) October 1996
DUI charges followed by conviction of the offense and sentencing of 30 days to home
confinement and placement on probation for three years; (c) April 1997 DUI charge
followed by conviction of the offense and due to a previous probation violation,
sentencing of 270 days of confinement and placement on probation for five years; and
(d) March 2016 DUI charge followed by conviction of alcohol-related reckless driving
and placement on probation until 2019. Alcohol-related allegations covered by
Guideline G were incorporated under Guideline J.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the alcohol-related
allegations with explanations. He claimed lapses in judgment that he deeply regrets. He
further claimed he enrolled in an alcohol management program to help reinforce what
he knows to be the correct decision-making when addressing alcohol issues completed
alcohol counseling, and provide him with additional tools for avoiding alcohol-related
incidents in the future. 
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 48-year-old chief technologist for a defense contractor who seeks
a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
2
Background
                               
Applicant married in October 2003 and has three children from this marriage.
(GEs 1-2; Tr. 43) He attended a local community college between June 2008 and June
2010, but did not earn a diploma. Between June 2010 and May 2012, he attended an
accredited four-year university and earned a bachelor’s degree. (GEs 1-2) Applicant
reported no military service. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 50) 
Since March 2016, Applicant has been employed by his current defense
contractor. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 21, 47) Between March 1993 and March 2016 he was
employed as a division director for a DoD agency. Applicant has held a security clearance
since approximately 1995. (GE 1; Tr. 49)
Alcohol-history
Applicant presents with a lengthy record of alcohol-related offenses dating to
1991. In March 1991, he was cited for DUI and later pled guilty to a reduced charge of
alcohol-related reckless driving. (GEs 1-3) He had attended a local party with 50 to 60
people in attendance and consumed three to four beers. (GEs 2-3) Not convinced he
was intoxicated he headed home. On his way home, he was pulled over by police for
speeding. After acknowledging he had been drinking, the investigating officer at the
scene administered a sobriety test to Applicant. Police thereafter escorted Applicant to
a county sheriff’s office where Applicant was booked and fingerprinted before being
released. In court, Applicant pled guilty to an alcohol-related reckless driving charge
and was fined. (GEs 2-3)
In October 1996, Applicant was cited for DUI after being stopped and
administered a field sobriety test. Appearing in court, Applicant pleaded guilty to DUI.
(GEs 2-3) He was fined $1,250 and sentenced to 31 days in jail. Records confirm that
he accepted an option from the court to serve 30 days of home confinement with an
ankle bracelet with three years of probation. Based on his probation violation, the
sentencing court placed Applicant on three years of probation. Applicant is credited with
successfully completing his court-ordered home confinement. (GE 2) 
Appellant was cited for a third DUI offense in May 1997. (GEs 2-3) Returning
home from a party where he consumed alcohol with friends and family members, he
stopped to rest.  When approached by an inquiring police officer, he acknowledged he
had been drinking and was escorted by the officer to a local police station where he
was booked,  fingerprinted, and released.  Applicant later pleaded guilty to DUI and was
given the option by the court of serving 270 days of home confinement, and was placed
on probation. 
Appellant accepted the home confinement option offered by the sentencing
judge in connection with Applicant’s 1997 alcohol-related incident and took concerted
steps to change his drinking habits during the confinement period. (Tr. 24, 32-41)
Additionally, Applicant was required to complete an alcohol education program to retain 
his drivers license, and was placed on probation by the sentencing court. (Tr. 23-24)
3
In March 2016, Applicant was cited for DUI after being stopped by police. (GEs
2-3) Applicant assured he did not exceed .08 BAC levels with his pre-arrest drinking.
His assurances are not challenged and are accepted. In court, Applicant pleaded no
contest to the DUI charges and was convicted of alcohol-related reckless driving. (GEs
2-3 and AE G) He was fined $1,683, required to complete an alcohol education
program, and placed on probation until 2019. (GEs 2-3; Tr. 23) 
Upon Applicant’s September 2018 motion for early termination of probation,
Applicant’s motion was granted, and Applicant’s probation was terminated, effective
September 18, 2018. (AE G) While his registered BAC level was only .07 percent, and
under the legal limit for driving with reported alcohol in his system, Applicant
acknowledged his registered .07 BAC level was enough to support an alcohol-related
reckless driving charge under his state’s driving restrictions. (Tr. 31-34, 45-46) 
Following his 2016 alcohol-related reckless driving conviction, Applicant self-
referred himself to an outpatient alcohol counseling program. (AEs A-C) His recovery
program consisted of 36 counseling sessions over a four-month period, along with
required participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). (AE C) Applicant was
credited with successfully completing the program in June 2018. (AE A)
Between March 2016 and January 2018, Applicant continued to consume
alcohol on an occasional basis (never to intoxication) without any further alcohol-related
incidents. (Tr. 45-46) Since January 2018, he has ceased drinking altogether. (Tr. 45-
46, 52) 
Endorsements and awards
Applicant is highly regarded by his chief executive officer (CEO) and former
colleagues. (AE E) His CEO, who has known him for many years, attested to
Applicant’s strength of character and compassion for others. He credited Applicant’s
efforts in training wounded warriors and people with disabilities to integrate into
common working environments. (AE E) He described Applicant as a cherished friend
and all around great person who is thoughtful, reliable, and open in his professional and
family relationships.
A senior operating executive with Applicant’s current defense contractor
employer who has known Applicant for a number of years credited Applicant with
developing a working pipeline of training and job placement of person’s with disabilities
on to information technology service contracts with the DoD. (AE E) He praised
Applicant for his enthusiasm in promoting his firm’s organizational mission and culture
of taking care of people. (AE E)   
Applicant has been hailed as a featured speaker for federal law enforcement
agencies. (AE E) A former colleague and current chief technology officer for Applicant’s
former DoD agency who has known Applicant for many years extolled Applicant’s
technical contributions to upgrading his agency’s security systems. (AE E) This current
DoD agency head credited Applicant with having a limitless talent for finding solutions 
4
and expressed his personal honor in having the opportunity to work with Applicant. (AE
E) 
Among Applicant’s many awards is a bestowed award for excellence in 2016
from a DoD under secretary of defense in recognition of Applicant’s exceptional support
of a DOD cyber-security project. (AE F) This award credited Applicant with exceptional
meritorious service in leading his DoD agency’s contract action to provide identity
protection and restoration services in connection with a noted adverse cyber-security
incident. (AE F)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require
administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is
to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(d)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made
about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(d) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
5
              Alcohol consumption 
The Concern: Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the
exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.
Criminal Conduct
The Concern: criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant comes to these proceedings with a considerable history of alcohol-
related incidents over a 25-year period dating to 1991. Between March 1991 and
March 2016, he pled guilty to four alcohol-related offenses. Principal security issues
6
raised in this case center on Applicant’s alcohol-related offenses covered by
Guideline G and incorporated under Guideline J.
Alcohol consumption concerns
Applicant’s problems with recurrent alcohol-related incidents over a 25-year
period raise concerns over his risk of future alcohol abuse. On the strength of the
evidence presented, two disqualifying conditions (DCs) of the AGs for alcohol
consumption (AG ¶ 21) may be applied: DC ¶¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away
from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse,
disturbing the peace or other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the
individual’s alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol
abuse disorder,” and 22(c), “habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol use
disorder.”
Applicant’s completion of a self-referred alcohol counseling program in June
2018 followed his last alcohol-related conviction in March 2016 based on a separate
provision in his state’s vehicle code for drivers who do not meet the legal requirements
for driving over the established .08 BAC limits, but otherwise qualify for driving while
intoxicated. Still, Applicant felt enough concern about his slip in March 2016 to self-refer
himself to a an outpatient counseling program. After reducing his drinking to occasional
drinking following his March 2016 incident, he ceased drinking altogether in January
2018 and has remained abstinent to date. 
Based on the findings of the court considering his March 2016 incident and his
proactive efforts since his March 2016 offense, he may take full advantage of the
following Guideline G mitigating conditions: MC ¶¶ 23(a), “so much time has passed, or
the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or judgment,” and 32(d) “the individual has successfully completed a
treatment program along with required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with
treatment recommendations.” Applicant’s circumstances and subsequent actions
following his last alcohol-related incident are sufficient to facilitate safe predictions that
he will avoid any abusive drinking in the foreseeable future.
Criminal conduct concerns
Security concerns are also raised with respect to Applicant’s alcohol-related
incidents under the overlapping coverage of Guideline J. Disqualifying conditions
applicable to Applicant’s alcohol-related offenses under Guideline J (criminal conduct)
are twofold: DC ¶¶ 31(a), “a pattern of minor offenses, any one of which on its own
would be unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness,” and
31(b), “evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an admission, and
matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the individual was
7
formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted.” Each of these cited offenses are cross-
referenced under Guideline G and are considered to be alcohol-related for purposes of
Guideline J analysis.  
Applicable mitigating conditions covering Applicant’s alcohol-related offenses
under Guideline J are as follows:  MC ¶¶ 32(a), “”so much time has elapsed since the
criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and 32(d), “there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation; including, but not limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement.”  Passage of time since Applicant’s last alcohol-related offense in March
2016 exceeds two years and provides enough time to mitigate these alcohol-related
offenses under Guideline J as well.
Whole-person assessment
Applicant’s lengthy civilian service with DoD (23 years) is respected and
appreciated. Endorsements from his current employer and previous DoD agency
document Applicant’s strong character, trust, and reliability. His credits include letters of
appreciation of his service as a speaker for a federal law enforcement agency and a
DoD undersecretary recognizing his contributions to the DoD’s cyber-security
restoration efforts. 
Applicant’s recognized service contributions and letters of appreciation when
considered in conjunction with the positive steps he has taken to mitigate security
concerns associated with his lengthy history of alcohol-related offenses are is enough
to dispel concerns about risks of recurrent abusive drinking. Considering the record as
a whole, safe predictions can be made at this time about Applicant’s ability to avoid
alcohol-related incidents in the foreseeable future. Alcohol concerns are fully mitigated 
and enable favorable conclusions to be made in connection with the allegations
covered by Guidelines G and J.
                                               Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE G (ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION):   FOR APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:           For Applicant
GUIDELINE J (CRIMINAL CONDUCT):            FOR APPLICANT
   Subparagraph 2.a :                                For Applicant
8
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
9
  
10
