1 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--- )          ISCR Case No. 18-01209  
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
Appearances 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________ 
Decision 
______________ 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations. 
Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
Statement of the Case 
On April 11, 2017, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On January 30, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued him a set of interrogatories. He 
responded to those interrogatories on April 2, 2018. On May 4, 2018, the DOD CAF 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and 
modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and Directive 
4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4) National Security Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) (December 10, 2016), for all covered individuals who require initial or continued 
12/20/2018
  
  
2  
                                        
eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive position, 
effective June 8, 2017. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on May 16, 2018. In two separate sworn statements, 
dated May 23, 2018, and June 27, 2018, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government 
was prepared to proceed on July 31, 2018. The case was assigned to me on August 24, 
2018.  A Notice of Hearing was issued on August 29, 2018. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on September 26, 2018. 
 
 During the hearing, Government exhibits (GE) 1 through GE 5, and Applicant 
exhibits (AE) A through AE I, were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on October 4, 2018. I kept the record open to 
enable Applicant to supplement it. He took advantage of that opportunity and timely 
submitted additional documents, which were marked and admitted as AE J through AE 
P, without objection. The record closed on November 8, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with comments two of the three 
factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations of the SOR (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 
1.b.). Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving 
as a director of field applications with his employer since September 2016. He was 
previously an owner of a construction corporation from August 2012 until December 2015. 
A 1997 high school graduate, Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in 2001 and a 
master’s degree in 2009. He has never served with the U.S. military. He never held a 
security clearance. He was married in 2004. He has two sons, born in 2007 and 2012. 
 
  
  
  
3  
                                        
Financial Considerations1 
  
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until 2014. Applicant’s 
company merged with another company in late 2012, and he became the co-owner and 
operator of a small real estate development firm organized as an S corporation. Together 
with two partners, they shared equally in the income, liabilities, and management of the 
corporation. The company was doing rather well financially, and in early 2014, it had eight 
residential and commercial properties in various stages of construction. There were 
approximately $1,000,000 in outstanding gross billings and approximately $175,000 in 
outstanding short-term liabilities associated primarily with labor and materials for those 
jobs.2 In January 2014, Applicant’s two partners unexpectedly decided to abandon the 
business, leaving him with the liabilities. They were removed from the corporation.3 He 
later determined that that they had improperly and secretly bid against the corporation 
under a company name they had created, and had charged personal expenses and 
expenses for their secret company to the corporate account, and had already delivered 
$25,000 to $35,000 in upgrades to customers without Applicant’s knowledge.  
Applicant focused on attempting to complete the construction jobs that were 
unfinished. Two of the families, with about 75 percent of the work on their respective 
houses completed, and final inspections performed, stopped making payments. The 
unpaid balances totaled approximately $150,000. Applicant filed liens. He sued one 
family in arbitration for $93,000, but only received $13,000 after arbitration in August 
2015.4 Those funds went back to the corporation to pay off debts. He sued another 
homeowner, and in December 2017, he received a judgment for $43,000, plus court 
costs.5 He did not actually receive the funds until nearly a year later. Applicant worked 
three jobs: building homes and as an information technology consultant, in order to 
generate the funds necessary to resolve the debts that resulted from his ex-partners’ 
actions and the refusal of his customers to timely pay their bills. However, it was the 
actions of his bank in 2015 that resulted in the most lasting damage to his financial 
situation. 
Applicant and one of his customers happened to use the same bank. His customer 
wrote him a check for approximately $54,500 one Friday afternoon in August 2015, and 
Applicant deposited it into his account. That evening, Applicant’s account details reflected 
                                                          
1 General source information pertaining to the financial issues discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits: GE 1 (e-QIP, dated April 11, 2017); GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated July 19, 
2017); GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated July 5, 2017); GE 4 
(Equifax Credit Report, dated January 25, 2018); GE 5 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated April 
2, 2018, along with associated papers, various dates); Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated May 23, 2018; 
Applicant’s Amended Answer to the SOR, dated June 27, 2018; AE I (Letter, dated September 17, 2018).   
  
2 AE B (Checking Account Transactions, dated May 23, 2014); AE I, supra note 1. 
 
3 AE A (Corporate Record, dated January 14, 2014). 
 
4 AE C (Arbitration Correspondence, various dates). 
 
5 AE C-1 (Final Judgment, dated December 27, 2017). 
  
  
4  
                                        
that the funds were available. The following Tuesday, the funds were removed from the 
account by the bank without Applicant’s knowledge or authorization, eventually causing 
several of his checks to bounce. Applicant’s efforts to have the funds restored were 
successful, and the funds were put back into his account on Friday. Applicant’s personal 
banker at the bank and the branch manager even acknowledged that the re-deposit was 
made with no holds on the deposit, and they explained that the issue developed because 
of internal bank processing difficulties. Unfortunately, during the week of the missing 
funds, Applicant’s laborers refused to show up for work because payments could not be 
guaranteed. For the third time, the bank again removed the funds from Applicant’s 
account without his knowledge or authorization, and once again Applicant had several 
more checks bounce. The experience and the delays cost Applicant roughly four weeks 
of production on a commercial project, and his cash-flow was negatively impacted. In 
October 2015, Applicant requested a $20,000 credit line from that same bank so he could 
have sufficient funds to complete two construction projects and have approximately 
$155,000 in receivables released to him, but the bank rejected his request.6 Although 
Applicant estimated that the bank measures cost him $200,000, and the bank denied any 
liability for its actions, the bank settled Applicant’s claims, and it agreed to pay him 
$55,000 in September 2016.7  
Applicant debated whether or not to sue his former partners for fraud, but based 
on estimated legal costs of up to $30,000, he decided not to do so.8 Because of the impact 
on his finances, Applicant was not in a position to make more timely payments to his two 
creditors, but he did contact them in an effort to establish repayment plans or settlements. 
On January 17, 2017, the first such repayment plan was agreed to, and Applicant started 
making monthly $500 payments. Payments were made as agreed, and in August 2018, 
the account was satisfied. In May 2018, based on settlement offers, Applicant presented 
repayment plans to his remaining creditor, the holder of two of his delinquent accounts.9  
The SOR identified three purportedly delinquent accounts that had been placed 
for collection or charged-off, as generally reflected by Applicant’s July 2017 or January 
2018 credit reports. Those debts total approximately $56,139. The current status of those 
accounts is as follows: 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): This is a bank loan with a high credit of $30,000 and an unpaid and 
past-due balance of $23,920, of which $22,638 was charged off in March 2016.10 
Applicant reached out to the creditor and agreed to a settlement in the amount of $9,560. 
He offered to start making monthly payments of $300 or more, but the bank wanted 
                                                          
6 AE E (Letter, undated). 
 
7 AE E (Bank Litigation File, various dates). 
 
8 Tr. at 41. 
 
9 Applicant’s Amended Answer to the SOR, supra note 1; AE F (Settlement Offer, undated); AE G 
(Settlement Offer, undated); AE I, supra note 1; AE H (Consent Judgment, dated January 17, 2017); AE H 
(Satisfaction of Judgment, dated August 21, 2018). 
 
10 GE 3, supra note 1, at 6; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
  
  
5  
                                        
something like $800.11 In October 2018, Applicant sold some real estate for $195,000, 
with an estimated net receipt of $177,975.12 He contacted the creditor the day before the 
sale, and expects to use funds from the sale to resolve the debt.13 There is no 
documentary evidence of any payments on the account since the sale. The account has 
not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): This is a bank-issued credit card with a high credit of $22,638 and 
an unpaid and past-due balance of $20,219 that was charged off in June 2016.14 
Applicant reached out to the creditor and agreed to a settlement in the amount of $8,088. 
He offered to start making monthly payments of $250 or more, but the bank wanted 
something like $800.15 In October 2018, Applicant sold some real estate for $195,000, 
with an estimated net receipt of $177,975.16 He contacted the creditor the day before the 
sale, and expects to use funds from the sale to resolve the debt.17 There is no 
documentary evidence of any payments on the account since the sale. The account has 
not been resolved. 
 (SOR ¶ 1.c.): This is an unspecified type of account with a past-due and unpaid 
balance of $12,000 that was placed for collection.18 Applicant set up a payment plan with 
the creditor calling for monthly $500 payments. Payments were made as agreed, and in 
August 2018, the account was satisfied.19 To date, there should be two completed 
preauthorized payments. The account has been resolved. 
In addition to the accounts alleged in the SOR, Applicant addressed various other 
accounts that were not alleged in the SOR. For example, he had to resolve all of the 
disputes, debts, and litigation caused by the actions of his two former partners and his 
bank’s unusual dysfunctional activities.20 Other than the accounts alleged in the SOR, 
Applicant is not aware of any other delinquent accounts, and his most recent credit report 
does not reflect any additional delinquencies. In March 2018, Applicant prepared a 
                                                          
11 AE F, supra note 9; Tr. at 43-44. 
 
12 AE L (Sales Contract, dated October 24, 2018). 
 
13 AE K (Letter, dated October 23, 2018); AE J (E-mail, dated October 31, 2018). 
 
14 GE 3, supra note 1, at 6; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
15 AE F, supra note 9; Tr. at 43-44. 
 
16 AE L, supra note 12. 
 
17 AE K, supra note 13; AE J, supra note 13. 
 
18 GE 3, supra note 1, at 6; GE 4, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
19 AE H, supra note 9. 
 
20 Tr. at 44. Applicant was sued for roughly $3,500 because of his former partners’ actions, and he 
had to resolve that debt. 
 
  
  
6  
                                        
Personal Financial Statement to reflect his assets ($11,756 in cash); real estate 
($470,000); retirement pensions and accounts ($20,678); and liabilities ($423,068), 
including the two debts described above.21 During the hearing, Applicant noted that his 
current annual income is $110,000.22 The unanticipated expenses associated with the 
earlier described problems have disappeared, and Applicant has made significant 
progress in stabilizing his finances and avoiding other financial delinquencies. 
Character References 
 
 A lieutenant in the county sheriff’s office has known Applicant over a number of 
years, and they have worked together professionally on several high value projects. 
Applicant has proven himself to be an invaluable asset to the team in leading every project 
to a successful conclusion. Applicant has a reputation among colleagues for being 
trustworthy and punctual. Their professional relationship morphed into a personal 
relationship, and Applicant is someone the lieutenant can confide in and trust with zero 
doubts as to his word and his follow through.23 
 
 The owner/operator of a landscape company has known Applicant since 
childhood, and they have worked together since 2009. Applicant renovated his first 
corporate office, and later engaged the landscaping company on numerous occasions to 
handle work for Applicant’s customers. When Applicant’s partners departed, Applicant 
took the high road and chose to bear the burden of paying off all of their vendors. Instead 
of filing for bankruptcy, Applicant made payoffs rather than leaving his vendors high and 
dry. He respects Applicant on how he has handled himself in becoming financially stable 
again, and he considers Applicant to be trustworthy, honest, and loyal.24 
 
A certified public accountant has known Applicant since 2004, as both a friend and 
a client. When Applicant’s two partners left the company, they left Applicant with the 
unfinished projects. Although several professionals recommended that Applicant file for 
bankruptcy as a result of the business losses, he refused to do so. Instead, although it 
meant placing a financial burden on himself and his family, he personally paid off the 
outstanding business debts. He considers Applicant to be a person of integrity with a 
strong desire to always do the right thing.25 
  
  
                                                          
21 AE M (Personal Financial Statement). 
 
22 Tr. at 58. 
 
23 AE P (Character Reference, dated October 25, 2018). 
 
24 AE O (Character Reference, dated October 10, 2018). 
 
25 AE N (Character Reference, dated November 6, 2018). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”26 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”27   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”28 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.29  
 
                                                          
26 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
27 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
28 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
29 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”30  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”31 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
At the outset, I note I had ample opportunity to evaluate the demeanor of Applicant, 
observe his manner and deportment, appraise the way in which he responded to 
questions, assess his candor or evasiveness, read his statements, and listen to his 
testimony. It is my impression that his explanations regarding his financial issues are 
consistent and have the solid resonance of truth. 
 
Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, including Applicant’s testimony, as 
well as an assessment of Applicant’s demeanor and credibility, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts and factors, I conclude the following with respect to the 
allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Analysis 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
  
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:        
  
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
                                                          
30 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
31 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19:   
  
(a) inability to satisfy debts;  
  
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
  
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
  
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators. 
  
Applicant had three delinquent accounts totaling approximately $56,139 that had 
been placed for collection or charged off. There is no evidence that he was unwilling to 
satisfy his debts or that he had the ability to do so, and there is no evidence of frivolous 
or irresponsible spending, or consistent spending beyond his means. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) have been established. AG ¶¶ 19(b) and 19(e) have not been established.  
     
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;32 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
                                                          
32 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an 
applicant’s ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed 
as recent for purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 16, 2017) (citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sep. 13, 2016)). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.33  
 
I have concluded that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) all partially or fully apply. 
Applicant was the owner/operator of a rather successful company. In early 2014, it had 
residential and commercial properties in various stages of construction, with 
approximately $1,000,000 in outstanding gross billings and approximately $175,000 in 
outstanding short-term liabilities associated primarily with labor and materials for those 
jobs. When Applicant’s two crooked partners unexpectedly abandoned the business, they 
left him with the liabilities, including some that they had improperly and secretly generated 
without Applicant’s knowledge. Applicant focused on attempting to complete the 
construction jobs that were unfinished, but two customers stopped making payments. He 
successfully sued them and eventually realized some of the funds owed his company. 
Applicant did not ignore his debts. Instead he worked three jobs in order to generate the 
funds necessary to resolve the debts that resulted from his ex-partners’ actions and the 
refusal of his customers to timely pay their bills.  
However, as noted above, it was the internal bank processing difficulties of his 
largely dysfunctional bank in 2015 that resulted in the most lasting damage to his financial 
situation. One of Applicant’s customers wrote him a check for approximately $54,500. 
There was nothing wrong with the check, but there was something wrong with the bank. 
On three occasions, the bank removed the funds from Applicant’s account without his 
knowledge or authorization, leading him to bounce checks to vendors and workmen. The 
experience and the delays cost Applicant roughly four weeks of production on a 
commercial project, and his cash-flow was negatively impacted. In October 2015, 
Applicant requested a $20,000 credit line from that same bank to complete two 
construction projects and have approximately $155,000 in receivables released to him, 
but the bank rejected his request. Although Applicant estimated that the bank measures 
                                                          
33 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or 
statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
cost him $200,000, and the bank denied any liability for its actions, the bank settled 
Applicant’s claims, and it agreed to pay him $55,000 in September 2016.  
Applicant did not ignore his creditors. He incurred expenses arising from his ex-
partners’ actions, and eventually resolved them. He has resolved one of the debts alleged 
in the SOR, and he is in the process of resolving the other two debts. His current annual 
income is $110,000. The unanticipated expenses associated with the earlier described 
problems have disappeared, and Applicant has made significant progress in stabilizing 
his finances and avoiding other financial delinquencies. Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances no longer cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment.34  
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
resolution of such issues, one at a time.   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
                                                          
34 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010).  
  
 
12 
                                      
 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.35  
  
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant’s S 
corporation encountered some financial difficulties and delays in completing various 
construction and renovation projects. Accounts became delinquent, and two were 
charged off. On its face, without further explanations, those factors would be viewed in a 
negative light. However, Applicant was a victim of fraud by two former partners; at least 
two of his customers refused or delayed payments to him for work completed; and he was 
the victim of highly unusual practices of his bank. 
  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving as a 
director of field applications with his employer since September 2016. He was previously 
the owner of a highly successful construction corporation from August 2012 until 
December 2015. Applicant’s friends and colleagues describe him as a person of integrity 
who is trustworthy, honest, and loyal. Faced with unanticipated business expenses 
caused by his two crooked partners, Applicant ignored bankruptcy and instead addressed 
his creditors. He generated funds by working on three jobs. He completed construction 
and renovation projects; paid off non-SOR creditors he was initially unaware of; satisfied 
one SOR account; negotiated settlements with the two accounts he has with the 
dysfunctional bank; and sold a property that should resolve those two remaining SOR 
accounts.  With a current annual income of $110,000, cash in the bank, and no other 
delinquencies, Applicant’s efforts to restore fiscal stability have been remarkable. His 
financial situation is now under control.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:36 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
                                                          
35 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
36 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
Applicant has demonstrated an outstanding track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, already resolving most of his debts, and he is in the process of 
resolving the two remaining debts. Overall, the evidence leaves me without substantial 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising 
from his financial considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.c.:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
