 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 18-00969 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 27, 2018, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 On June 27, 2018, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on the 
record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on July 12, 
2018. On August 1, 2018, Applicant received the FORM. Applicant had 30 days to 
submit a response to the FORM. She did not submit a response. On September 20, 
2018, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on December 
12, 2018. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
  
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a DOD contractor seeking a security 
clearance. She has worked for her current employer since 2013. Her highest level of 
education is an associate’s degree. She separated from her husband in 2010 and has 
an 18-year-old daughter from a previous relationship. (Item 3) 
 
On February 1, 2018, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing. (Item 3) A subsequent background investigation revealed 
Applicant had the following delinquent debts: a $29,169 deficiency account on a 
mortgage that was foreclosed in 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.a:  Item 5 at 2; Item 6 at 8); a $91 debt 
placed for collection in January 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 5 at 2; Item 6 at 8) and two 
medical accounts in the amounts of $345 and $181 placed for collection in December 
2012 and February 2013 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d). In her response to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, but denied the remaining three allegations. (Item 2)  
 
Applicant started having financial problems in 2010 when she separated from her 
husband. He was unfaithful and eventually went to jail.  The record is not clear on 
whether her husband remains incarcerated.  She could not make the mortgage 
payments without her husband’s income. Her home was foreclosed in July 2014, which 
resulted in the deficiency balance alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.   
 
She provided confirmation numbers next to each of the remaining SOR 
allegations. While it would have been better to have provided a statement from the 
creditor indicating the debt was paid in full, I find SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d for Applicant, 
because they are no longer on her most recent credit report. (see Item 5)   The $91 debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a minimal amount and does not raise significant security 
concerns. The debt of most concern is the $29,169 mortgage foreclosure deficiency 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.  Applicant intends to pay this debt off when she completes 
making payments towards her smaller debts. 
 
There are several debts that were not alleged in the SOR, which Appellant paid 
off.  At least five delinquent debts were paid off by Applicant before the SOR was 
issued. She appears to be systematically paying off her delinquent accounts when she 
is able to do so. (Item 4; see also Items 5 and 6) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access 
to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
3 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis   
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
 
4 
 
 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
  
All of the above disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant incurred several  
delinquent debts, to include a $29,000 deficiency balance as a result of a mortgage 
foreclosure.  
 
The security concern under Financial Considerations is broader than the 
possibility that a person might knowingly compromise classified information to obtain 
money or something else of value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-
control, judgment, and other important qualities.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raised 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
financial counseling service, and there are clear indications the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  AG ¶ 20(a) applies because Applicant was unable to pay the mortgage after she 
and her husband separated in 2010. Her ability to pay the mortgage was further 
aggravated by her husband’s incarceration. While Applicant still owes the mortgage 
deficiency debt, she has paid off several of her delinquent accounts that were not 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s financial situation occurred under unusual 
circumstances that are unlikely to occur. Her efforts to resolve her financial situation 
demonstrate reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) applies because circumstances beyond Applicant’s control adversely 
affected her financial situation. Her marital separation in 2010 and her husband’s 
subsequent incarceration affected her ability to pay her mortgage as well as other 
expenses.  Two of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR were medical expenses.  
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. She systematically resolved 
several debts that were not alleged in the SOR.  There is sufficient evidence to 
conclude that the two medical bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d were paid.  They no 
longer appear on her most recent credit report. Applicant acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. While there is no indication that Applicant attended 
formal financial counseling, her current financial situation is relatively stable and within 
her control.  Given the circumstances, her financial situation could have been worse, but 
it is clear that she managed her debts within reasonable parameters. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies.  There is strong circumstantial evidence that Applicant has 
resolved the two medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d.  I also considered the 
five unalleged delinquent debts that Applicant resolved before the SOR was issued. 
Applicant is making a good-faith effort to resolve her delinquent debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
6 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered Applicant’s employment history with a DOD contractor since 2013. I 
considered her marital separation and her estranged husband’s incarceration. I 
considered that she is raising her daughter alone. I considered that circumstances 
beyond Applicant’s control contributed to her financial problems. Applicant is 
methodically resolving her delinquent accounts within her ability to do so. The security 
concerns raised under financial considerations are mitigated. Applicant is warned that 
future delinquent debts may result in her security clearance being revoked.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
