                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 18-00415
                )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I
conclude that Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding foreign influence and 
financial considerations, and refuted allegations of falsification covered by personal
conduct.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
History of Case
On February 28, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under
Executive Order (Exec. Or) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,1992), as amended
(Directive); and by Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent, National Security
Adjudicative Guidelines (SEAD 4).
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 23, 2018, and requested a hearing. 
The case was scheduled for hearing on July 26, 2018. A hearing was held on the
scheduled date. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of four exhibits (GE).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and 14 exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was
received on August 3, 2018. 
Besides its four exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of facts
detailed in 13 official source documents that are official Government publications.
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative
proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007). Administrative
notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that are well known.  See
Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006). For good cause shown,
administrative notice was granted with respect to the above-named official background
reports addressing the geopolitical situation in Iraq. 
Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves, consistent  with
the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid.  This notice did not foreclose Applicant from
challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the reports
addressing Iraq’s current status. Nor did the notice foreclose consideration of information
about the country not covered in the Government’s request for administrative notice, so
as to ensure accurate and timely assessments of the country’s changing political
landscape.
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the proceedings, Applicant requested the record be kept open
to permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with his documented surrender
of his Iraqi passport. For good cause shown, Applicant was granted seven days to
supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded three days to respond. Within
the time permitted, Applicant documented his submission of blood-test information to his
sponsor and prospective employer. Applicant’s submission was admitted for general
background purposes without objection as AE M.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged in the SOR to have: (a) one brother who
is a citizen of Iraq; (b) two brothers who are citizens and residents of Iraq; (c) a sister-in-
law who is a citizen and resident of Iraq; and (d) numerous other relatives who are
citizens and residents of Iraq.  
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly began gambling after receiving $80,000 in
inheritance and lost all of his inheritance. Allegedly, he obtained loans from his siblings
to continue his gambling and disclosed his gambling activities in the electronic
questionnaires for Investigative Processing (e-QIP) he completed in March 2017. 
2
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified his answers to questions posed
by a counterintelligence investigator in a February 2017 personal subject interview by
telling the investigator he transferred his inheritance money to his siblings for safe-
keeping, omitting facts that he had already spent the money on gambling. Allegations of
incurring gambling losses under Guideline F were incorporated by subparagraph 3.b of
Guideline E.
 In his response to the SOR allegations covering Guideline B, Applicant partially
admitted and partially denied each of the allegations. He claimed his oldest brother is a
dual-U.S. citizen who currently resides in the United States and maintains no contact
with Applicant. He claimed his two other brothers are Iraqi citizens residing in Iraq who
are currently waiting for authorization to immigrate ot the United States. He also claimed
that his sister-in-law is married to his youngest brother residing in Iraq and does not
speak to Applicant. And he claimed that he does not speak with any of his extended 
family members in Iraq who are employed by the Iraqi government.
Addressing his alleged delinquent debts, Applicant partially admitted and partially
denied allegations pertaining to his gambling. He admitted to receiving an inheritance
but denies losing all of his inheritance on gambling and obtaining loans from his siblings
to finance his gambling. He denied being an abusive gambler and denies engaging in
any gambling since 2016.
Responding to Guideline E allegations of (a) falsifying material facts during a
counterintelligence-focused security screening by telling an authorized investigator he
transferred his inheritance money to his siblings and (b) incorporated allegations of
using inheritance money to gamble, Applicant admitted and denied the allegations,
claiming he did not lose all of his inheritance money on gambling and was not an
abusive gambler. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 57-year old linguist for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted
as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant was born and raised in Iraq in December 1960 and immigrated to the
United States in January 2011 as a refugee. (GEs 1-4 and AEs A and D; Tr. 57) As an
approved U.S. refugee, he was issued a green card entitling him to permanent
residency status. (GEs 1-4 and AEs A and D; Tr. 49, 57).  He qualified for U.S. refugee
status due to years of his working for the U.S. Army in Iraq (2004-2009) through his
employments by U.S. companies supporting the Iraqi government. (GE 2)  
3
In April 2016, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen and received a U.S.
passport in the same month and year. (GE 1 and AEs A and D) He acquired an Iraqi
passport after becoming a U.S. citizen due to fears that traveling on a U.S. passport in
Iraq would be dangerous. (GE 2) He has since surrendered his Iraqi passport. While
Applicant still holds Iraqi citizenship, he has expressed a willingness to renounce it. (GE
4)
Applicant has never married and has no children. (GEs 1-2; Tr. 80) He earned a
high school diploma in Iraq in June 1981 and a bachelor’s degree from Iraq in June
2003. He reported active duty service in the Iraq military between December 1982 and
October 1990. He maintains no contact with current or former military colleagues. (GE
1-4) 
Applicant never served in the U.S. military service due to his being well above
the age of qualification when he arrived in the United States. (GEs 1-2) Before
immigrating to the United States, he served on active duty with the Iraqi Army as a
clerk. (GE 4) His military service was mandated by the Iraqi Government. (GE 4) He
received an honorable discharge with the rank of corporal in October 1990 and
relinquished all ties with the Iraqi Army. Applicant was awarded no benefits or pension
for his Army service. (GE 4)
Since November 2016, Applicant has worked part time with a non-defense transit
company as a driver and makes about $5,000 a month, enough to support himself. (GE
2 and AE L; Tr. 39) His application for a linguist position with a global linguist firm in
February 2017 remains on hold pending confirmation of his security clearance. (GEs 1-
2) 
After immigrating to the Unites States, Applicant worked for DoD contractors.
Between July 2011 and November 2016, Applicant worked for various non-defense
retailers in the United States. (GEs 1 and 4 and AE L) He reported brief periods of
unemployment between May 2012 and November 2016 when his only financial support
came from unemployment disability benefits. (GEs 1-2)
Applicant’s family ties in Iraq
Both of Applicant’s parents passed away in 2005. (GE 4) While alive, his father
was a brigadier general (never in the Ba’ath party) in the Iraqi army before his
retirement in 1968. (Tr. 40) Applicant has two brothers who are citizens and residents of
Iraq and also served in the Iraqi army. (GEs 1-2 and 4; Tr. 40) He maintains bi-weekly 
contacts with his youngest  brother but never discusses his U.S. Government work out
of concern for his safety. (Tr. 64-67) Applicant’s younger brother is married, and his wife
(Applicant’s sister-in-law) is a citizen and resident of Iraq. (GEs 1-2 and 4; Tr. 70-71) 
Likewise, Applicant’s next-to-youngest brother (middle brother) is also a citizen
and resident of Iraq. (Tr. 69-70) But Applicant has not spoken to this brother since 2008.
4
(Tr. 62) To the best of his knowledge, neither of his brothers residing in Iraq ever
worked for the Iraqi government or have any connections with the Iraq government. (Tr.
65-66)
Applicant’s oldest brother is a dual citizen of Iraq and the United States, and
resides in the United States. (GEs 1-4; Tr. 66-67) His oldest brother was naturalized as
a U.S. citizen in March 2018. (AE I) Applicant does not have a close relationship with
this brother and maintains infrequent contact with him, despite their close proximity to
one another. (Tr. 56-58) Besides his siblings and sister-in-law, Applicant has numerous
relatives who are citizens and residents of Iraq. (GEs 1-4) Applicant has no contact with
any of these relatives.
Applicant has no financial interests in Iraq and neither provides nor receives
financial support from any family member residing in Iraq. (GE 2) Applicant assured that
both of his brothers who reside in Iraq live in generally safe and secure areas in the
Baghdad region; although they are not completely insulated from risk of harm from
corrupt Shiite officials who look to Iran for advice. (Tr. 73-74) But because he has never
disclosed what he does for the U.S. Government, Applicant cannot foresee either of his
family members in Iraq being exposed to risks of pressure or coercion. (Tr. 62) 
In a signed, sworn statement of intent he provided, Applicant pledged (1) to
never obtain a foreign passport or foreign citizenship with a country other than the
United States again and (2) to continue to have minimal or no contact with foreign
contacts outside of his official duties. (AE E) Applicant consented to an automatic
revocation of his security clearance should he violate any pledge in his statement of
intent. (AE E)
Iraq’s country status
Iraq is a country with a population of 27 million that is broken down along ethnic
and religious lines: Shiites, Sunni, Kurds and Turkoman comprise the predominant
ethnic and sectarian groups.   Once known as Mesopotamia (the fertile crescent), Iraq is
bordered by Kuwait, Iran, Turkey, Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia. See Background
Note, Iraq, at 2-3, U.S. Dept. of State (Feb. 2008)   At the end of World War I, Iraq
became a British-mandated territory, and founding member of the Arab League. (id.)
General Abdul Karim Qasim assumed power in a July 1958 coup and held power
for five years before succumbing to the Ba’ath Party’s takeover of the Iraqi government,
and Hasan al-Bakr’s selection as prime minister.  See Background Note, Iraq, supra, at
4.  When Bakr resigned in 1979, Saddam  Hussein assumed the reigns of power. Under
Saddam Hussein’s direction, Iraq launched a major invasion of its neighbor, Iran, in the
1980s. See the World Factbook: Iraq, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (Feb. 2018); 
Background Note Iraq, supra.  Iraq declared victory in 1988 and survived to claim the
largest military establishment in the region.  Iraq then turned its forces to mounted
5
attacks against the ongoing Kurdish rebellion by Kurdish elements in the northern
mountains of Iraq.   (id.)
Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, and was repelled by a U.S.-led coalition in
February 1991. See World Factbook: Iraq, supra; Background Note, Iraq, supra.  After
the war, the UN Security Council required the Hussein regime to surrender to the
coalition and submit to UN inspections. When the Ba’ath regime refused to fully comply,
the Security Council invoked sanctions to prevent further weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) development, and to enforce Iraq’s surrender terms.  Coalition forces employed
limited no-fly zones in southern and northern Iraq and a limited no-drive zone in
southern Iraq to prevent the regime from invading Kuwait again. (id.)
In 2003, A U.S.-led coalition invaded Iraq and succeeded in removing Saddam
Hussein and his Ba’athist regime from military and political power. See The World
Factbook: Iraq, supra;  Background Note Iraq, supra, at 3.  After two years of operations
under a provisional authority, Iraq’s new government assumed office in March 2006
(with the approval of the U.S. Government), following free elections. (id.)
Notwithstanding the election of a new national government with U.S. backing,
violence continued to envelop Iraq. This violence was fueled and perpetrated by Al
Qieda terrorists, Sunni insurgents, and, Shiite militias and death squads. See The World
Factbook: Iraq, supra; Background Note Iraq, supra. State Department reports
document human rights abuses that include a “pervasive climate of violence,
misappropriation of official authority by sectarian, criminal and insurgent groups;
arbitrary deprivation of life, disappearances, torture and other cruel, inhumane or
degrading treatment or punishment.” (id.)
Since March 2006, the Government of Iraq has been comprised of a broad
coalition of political alliances representing the Shiite, Sunni and Kurdish blocs. See The
World Factbook: Iraq, supra, at 2;  Background Note Iraq, supra. at 8. While elections
have been held, none of the key constituent groups have been able to form a
government, adopt an oil law, establish and maintain effective security throughout the
provinces, or neutralize sectarian divisions. In this still very fragile political environment
in Iraq, there are substantiated reports of human rights abuses that continue to
underscore a still pervasive climate of tension and violence.
Economic developments
Economically, Iraq’s economy continues to be dominated by the oil sector, as it
has for the past half century since the completion of new pipelines to Lebanon in 1949,
and to Syria in 1952  See The World Factbook: Iraq, supra;  Background Note Iraq,
supra. As a result of the  U.S.-led invasion in 2003, much of Iraq’s oil refining
capabilities were shuttered. The rebuilding of oil infrastructure and utilities infrastructure
has continued to expand since 2004 with U.S. aid and support, despite setbacks from
insurgent activity. 
6
Proposed oil revenue sharing legislation among the three war-hardened ethno-
sectarian divisions (Shia, Sunnis, and Kurds) still awaits passage after years of stalled
negotiations, however, and at the moment, there are no good estimates of when such
legislation will be approved and implemented. See Statement for the Record, Worldwide
Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community, U.S. Director of National
Intelligence (Feb. 2018) For the foreseeable future, the national government can be
expected to continue to seek the passage and implementation of a revenue sharing law
to strengthen and encourage the development of this important sector. See id.
Recent reports (although not official U.S. pronouncements) suggest that
Baghdad is close to agreement with the semi-autonomous Kurdish regional government
(KRG) to restart crude flowing from the Kirkuk oil fields as U.S. sanctions against Iran
hit Iran’s energy sales. See Iraq closing in on Deal to Resume Kirkuk Oil Exports,
Reuters/Bloomberg (Nov. 2018). If these estimates prove to be accurate, they would be
welcomed by both U.S. and allied Interests. For despite Iraq’s producing 4.3 million
barrels of oil per day, according to published reports, Iraq’s population remains poor.
See Putting Iraq-KRG Oil Relations on Solid Legal Ground, the Washington Institute for
Near East Policy (July 2018). Currently, the case brought by the federal government of
Iraq against the KRG in 2012 over the legality of the KRG’s oil contracts and
independent exports remains pending with no disposition projected in the near future.
See id. 
Past budget laws passed by Iraq’s national parliament requiring the KRG to
contribute certain export earnings in the country’s overall exports (a law that would
seem to legitimate the KRG’s ownership claims to Kirkuk oil) have never led federal
authorities to export Kirkuk-produced oil. In so doing, Iraq’s federal authorities have
severely limited Iraq’s northern export outlet via the Kurdish pipeline to Turkey. Breaking
the oil-stalemate that existed for years between the KRG and Iraq’s federal government
can have major positive ramifications for not only Iraq and its oil exports, but for the
United States and other Western interests as well. 
Terrorism and human rights issues
Despite recent improvements in its security enforcement efforts, Iraq remains a
very dangerous, volatile and unpredictable country. The U.S. State Department
continues to strongly warn U.S. citizens against traveling to Iraq. See Travel Advisory-
Iraq, U.S. Dept. of State (Jan. 2018); Request for Administrative Notice, supra, a 3-4. 
The State Department assessed Baghdad as being a critical-threat location for crime
directed at or affecting official U.S. interests. See Iraq 2017 Crime and Safety Report:
Baghdad at 2-3. U.S. Dept. of State (March 2017) While crime statistics and crime
reporting mechanisms are incomplete and inconsistent, the vast majority of
individualsunder contract with, or employed by, the U.S. Government in Iraq are
required to travel with a protective security detail, so as to limit potential criminal threats
against them. (id.)  
7
Attacks against military and civilian targets throughout Iraq continue and include
sites and facilities where foreign tourists frequently visit: hotels, restaurants, police
stations, check points, foreign diplomatic missions, international organizations, and
other locations with expatriate personnel. See Travel Advisory-Iraq, supra,  and 
Security Message: Expanded Temporary Movement Restriction, U.S. Department of
State (December 2017) The U.S. Embassy’s ability to provide consular services to U.S.
citizens outside Baghdad is extremely limited under the security environment that still
exists in Iraq. See Country Information: Iraq: Safety and Security, U.S. Dept. of State
(July 2017); Request for Administrative Notice, supra at 3-4.
The U.S. Government considers the potential security threats to U.S. government
personnel in Iraq to be sufficiently serious to require them to live and work under strict
security guidelines. See Country Information: Iraq: Safety and Security, supra; Request
for Administrative Notice, supra at 3-4. The U.S. Embassy’s ability to provide consular
services to U.S. citizens outside of Baghdad is extremely limited under the security
environment that exists in Iraq. See Country Information: Iraq: Safety and Security, U.S.
Dept. of State (July 2017); Request for Administrative Notice, supra at 3-4. Terrorist
groups continue to mount attacks throughout Iraq and pose heightened risks to U.S.
citizens and their family members residing in Iraq. See Country Reports on Terrorism
2016, US. Dept. of State (July 2017); Request for Administrative Notice, supra at 3-4.  
To deal with expanded terrorist attacks against U.S. citizens in Iraq, the U.S.
Embassy has expanded its temporary movement restrictions on Embassy personnel,
both inside and outside the international zone, in response to the recent announcement
that the United States recognizes Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. See Iraq 2017
Crime and Safety Situation, U.S. Department of State (March 2017); Security Message:
Expanded Temporary Movement Restriction, supra, at 2-3; and Request for
Administrative Notice, supra, at 4.
In December 2015, President Obama signed into law the Visa Waiver Program
Improvement and Terrorist Travel Protection Act of 2015, which amended the existing
Waiver Program. See H.R. 158 Visa Waiver Program Improvement and Terrorist Travel
Protection Act of 2015, enacted as Public Law 114-113 (129 Stat, 2242), Dec. 18, 2015.
Under the 2015 amendment, citizens of Iran, Iraq, Sudan, and Syria are ineligible to
travel or be admitted to the United States under the Visa Waiver Program. See Request
for Administrative Notice, supra, at 7 for additional coverage citation.
Iraq’s human rights record remains a poor one. Based on the U.S. State
Department’s most recent annual human rights report, violence continued throughout
2017, largely fueled by the actions of the Islamic state in Iraq (ISIS). See Statement for
the Record, Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community, supra.
After liberating all territory taken by ISIS by the end of 2017, Iraqi Security Forces (ISF)
have continued to pursue and restrict ISIS forces still active in Iraq. 
Reports of human rights abuses include allegations of unlawful killings by some
members of the ISF (particularly by some members of the Popular Mobilization Forces
(PMF)). Reports of human rights abuses also include allegations of unlawful killings,
torture, harsh and life-threatening conditions in detention and prison facilities,
criminalization of libel and other limits on freedom of expression, widespread corruption,
8
greatly reduced penalties for so-called honor killings, coerced or forced abortions
imposed by ISIS on its victims, legal restrictions imposed on the freedom of movement
of women, and trafficking in persons. See Country Reports on Human Rights Practices
for 2017, U.S. Department of State (April 2018); Request for Administrative Notice,
supra. 
Implications of the results of Iraq’s 2018 federal election on U.S. policy
In May 2018, Iraq held its parliamentary elections that many believed would
produce a new beginning for Iraq and foster progress in the country’s historically
intractable issues covering such areas as endemic corruption, violent instability, and
social/political polarization. See R. Alaaldin, What Iraq’s election Results Mean for U.S.
Policy at 1-6. Brookings at https://brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos (May 2018).
This parliamentary election marks the first such federal election since the defeat of ISIS
in December 2017 and was historic in many respects with over 7,000 candidates vying
for 329 seats. See The World Factbook: Iraq, supra and  R. Alaaldin, What Iraq’s
Election Results Mean for U.S. Policy, supra.
Despite heavy media coverage and high hopes surrounding election prospects
for the prime minister, al-Abadi failed to alleviate religious tension and develop a
national consensus in Iraq on the importance of secular governance (only 44.5 per cent,
the lowest turnout since 2003), Iraq’s elections did, however, herald a new chapter for
the victorious Sadrist movement headed by Shia cleric Muqtada al-Sadr and his millions
of underclass followers. See https://brookings.edu/blog/order-from-chaos, supra. 
According to Brookings reports, the Winner of the May 2018 election was al-Sadr’s al-
Sa’iroohn coalition with 54 seats, followed by the Fatah bloc, headed by Hadi al-Amiri
who has reported close ties with Iran, with 47 seats, and the Nasr coalition, headed by
al-Abadi with 42 seats. (id.) Election results were confirmed by Iraq’s top election body
in June 2018 following a country-wide manual count, clearing the path for political
parties to form a government. See  https://www.wsj.com (Aug. 9, 2018) 
While prospects for forming a government between the three principal coalitions
are still uncertain, reported public statements about creating an alliance between al-
Sadr’s and al-Bati’s respective coalitions offer promise for Iraq in the wake of widely
discredited elections. See F. Hassan and R. Nordland, Iraqi Political Alliance Unites a
U.S. Friend and Foe, https://www.nytimes.com. And although these reports do not
represent official U.S. pronouncements, they are illustrative of the major political
changes that are gaining traction in Iraq and bear watching.
For Applicant, a Sunni by birth, prospects for uniting the various sectarian groups
under a united umbrella headed by al-Sadr are not very promising. In Applicant’s
estimation, the formation of a new government comprised of the three principal Shiite
coalitions is likely to further marginalize Sunnis as a political force among Iraq’s
9
governing elites. (Tr. 74) Applicant posited that the cleric al-Sadr and all of the Shiite
parties in Iraq will continue to be influenced by Iran. (Tr. 74)
Current U.S. Relations with Iraq
The U.S. Mission in Iraq remains dedicated to building a strategic partnership
with Iraq and the Iraqi people. See U.S. Relations with Iraq at 1-2, U.S. Dept. of State
(July 2018). In coordination with the Global Coalition to defeat ISIS, the United States
assisted Iraq’s efforts to achieve the long-sought goal of liberating all of Iraqi territory
from ISIS. The Strategic framework agreement (SFA) between Iraq and the United
States provides the basis of the United States’s bilateral relationship with Iraq and
covers a wide range of bilateral issues, including political relations and diplomacy,
defense and security, trade and finance, energy, judicial and law enforcement issues,
services, science, culture, education, and environment. (id.)
U.S. bilateral assistance to Iraq is considerable and stresses economic reform,
assistance to vulnerable groups, and democracy and governance. See U.S. Relations
with Iraq, supra. U.S. security assistance supports the development of modern,
accountable, fiscally sustainable, and professional Iraqi military resources capable of
defending Iraq and its borders. The United States has designated Iraq as a beneficiary
developing country under the Generalized System of Preferences program and has
been proactive in the promotion of two-way trade between the United States and Iraq.
(id, at 2)  Noteworthy, Iraq’s re-integration into the international community has been
marked by their demonstrated cooperation with international institutions, including the
United Nations, International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and the Arab League.  (id.)
Applicant’s finances
Before immigrating to the United States in 2011, Applicant maintained an Iraqi
bank account from approximately 1966 through 2009, when he closed the account. (GE
2) The  account was opened by his father and was later supplemented by inheritance
funds from a real estate sale that approximated $80,000. (GEs 2 and 4; Tr. 37-38)
Combined with funds from his prior employment with U.S. companies, he amassed
$105,000 in the account by 2009. (GE 2)  
In preparation for his planned travels to Jordan in 2009, Applicant closed his
bank account and transferred $95,000 of the closed-out bank funds to his sister for
safekeeping during his travels, inclusive of the $80,000 of inheritance monies and the
additional $15,000 he had earned. (GE 2; Tr. 50-51) Before departing for his Jordan trip,
he retrieved the $95,000 he left with his sister and left the remaining $10,000 with his
middle brother for safekeeping. (GEs 2 and 4; Tr. 37-38) 
While traveling in Jordan and Lebanon in 2009-2010, Applicant lost most of these
inherited funds and continued to gamble with loaned funds from his sister and brother
10
($4,000 and $1,000, respectively). Applicant never told any of his family members that
he used his inherited $80,000 to gamble with, because in Iraq gambling is frowned
upon. (Tr. 53-54) And telling any of his family members about his gambling he believed
would have shamed him with family members and exposed him to potential blackmail.
(Tr.  53-54) Since ceasing his gambling activities, Applicant no longer fears telling his
younger brother about his past gambling and losses. (Tr. 55) 
After both of his Iraqi-based brothers applied for visas to come to the United
States, Applicant told his sister who lives in the United States not to tell any of his
brothers or other family members about his use of inheritance funds to further his
gambling, and she did not to Applicant’s knowledge. (Tr. 53) Other family members who
are citizens of Iraq include aunts, uncles, nephews, and nieces to whom he maintains
no contact, and presumably know nothing about his personal finances. 
When interviewed by an agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in
April  2017, Applicant traced his principal gambling activities to the 2009-2010 time
frame. (GE 4) He confirmed having $80,000 of inherited money, which he initially
deposited with a local Iraqi bank before withdrawing the monies ($95,000, inclusive of th
inherited funds) and placing them with sister for safekeeping before retrieving the funds
(save for the $10,000 he left with his youngest brother) and subsequently losing his
retrieved funds to gambling in casinos while traveling in Jordan and Lebanon. (GE 4) He
confirmed to the OPM agent that after migrating to the United States in 2011, he
continued his gambling, losing $1,000 or more a week, and all of the $10,000 he had
stored with his youngest brother and later carried with him to the United States in 2011.
(GE 4; Tr. 52, 56)
To finance his gambling interests, Applicant borrowed over $4,000 from his sister
and $1,000 from his brother. (GE 4) While denying any addiction to gambling, he
indicated that the stroke he suffered in August 2015 was likely attributable to losing all
of his savings to gambling. (Tr. 52-53) Still, he affirmed to the OPM agent that he
continued to gamble while avoiding any disclosure of his gambling to his siblings who
frown on the activity. (GE 4) 
Applicant assured at the hearing that he has learned important lessons of
conserving his financial resources since losing his inheritance money on gambling. (Tr.
57) In a March 2018 signed, sworn statement he provided at hearing, he pledged to
never excessively gamble again. (AE F) By 2015, Applicant (working three jobs) had
completed his instalment repayments of the monies he borrowed from his sister and
youngest brother. (Tr. 56-59)  Applicant’s assurances are credible and accepted.
In the personal financial statement he prepared in February 2017, Applicant
reported net monthly income of $899 (inclusive of $189 of food stamps) and monthly
expenses of  $657. (GE 3) He reported no outstanding debts and a net remainder of
$468. (GE 3)
11
Applicant’s screening questionnaire  omissions 
During a counter-intelligence-focused security clearance screening questionnaire
conducted in February 2017 by an authorized investigator of DoD, Applicant told the
investigator he transferred his inheritance money to his siblings for safe-keeping. (GE 2)
Whether the investigator ever asked Applicant if the monies were returned to him by his
sister prior to his departure for Jordan in 2009 is unclear. The screening questionnaire is
silent on the question, and Applicant could not remember if he was asked the question
by the agent. (GE 2; Tr. 50-51)
Without any evidence of Applicant’s being asked whether the monies were
returned by his siblings, no inferences of falsification of his screening questionnaire can
be reasonably drawn. Further, when afforded opportunities to voluntarily disclose his
gambling losses and loans from his siblings to cover his losses, he did so without
prompting.  (GE 4; Tr. 51-54)
Endorsements
Applicant is well regarded by U.S. advisors operating in Iraq who worked with
Applicant in the November 2004-March 2005 time frame. (AE C)  Project leaders in Iraq
who interacted with Applicant between 2004 and 2008 described him as highly
competent and honest in the translation services he provided. (AE C) They found him to
be honest, reliable, and trustworthy in the translation of documents assigned to him
despite his absence of formal training in translation services. (AE C) Many of his
translation assignments were difficult and required handling in dangerous conditions. 
Applicant is credited with completing a number of courses for his work with U.S.
advisors in Iraq. Certificates of training completion earned by Applicant include the
following areas: procurement systems, advanced driving, strengthening local
government and provincial  governance, and safety skills. (AE G) Applicant is credited
with receiving numerous awards in recognition of his contributions to the U.S. war effort
in Iraq in 2004-2008 
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include conditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and all of
the conditions that could mitigate security concerns if any. 
12
These guidelines must be considered before deciding whether or not a security
clearance should be granted, continued, or denied.  Although, the guidelines do not
require judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and
mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, judges must take into account the pertinent
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in 2(a) of the AGs,
which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the
context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a
sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct: (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not
limited to, business, financial, and property interests, are a national security
concern if they create circumstances in which the individual may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in a way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.  Assessment of
foreign contacts or interest is located, including, but not limited to,
considerations such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain
classified or sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
(see AG ¶ 6)
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
13
ability to protect classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  (AG, ¶ 15)
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in
illegal acts to generate funds. Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern insofar as it may result from
criminal activity, including espionage. (AG, ¶ 18)
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the revised AGs, a decision to
grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
14
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis
Applicant is a dual citizen of Iraq and the United States who has family
members (two younger brothers, a sister-in-law, and numerous relatives) who are
citizens and residents of Iraq. Trust concerns are raised under the foreign influence
guideline due to Applicant’s longstanding family ties to Iraq. Although his contacts with
his brothers and sister-in-law residing in Iraq appear to be somewhat limited, they do
involve close family members. While Iraq is a liberated ally of the United States, it is a
country that has encountered difficulty forming a government in the past and continues
to experience ethno-sectarian conflicts between principal factions and is considered
an with a poor human rights record and an unsafe country for U.S. citizens to visit by
the U.S. State Department. Additional security concerns over Applicant’s finances and
screening question omissions  are also raised.  
Foreign influence concerns
Key to the Government’s foreign influence concerns are Applicant’s immediate
family members (i.e., his two younger brothers and sister-law) who are Iraqi citizens
and still reside in Iraq, a country that is still in the process of establishing a stable
democratic government able to protect all of its disparate constituent groups and
maintain peace with its neighbors. Despite encouraging developments in Iraq following
the federal elections of May 2018, Iraq is still a very dangerous and volatile country in
certain sectors with an overall poor human rights record and heightened risks of
terrorism in most sectors of the country. 
Applicant’s historically close relationships with his two brothers and sister-in-law
residing in Iraq make them potentially vulnerable to coercion and non-coercive
measures because of their close familial family ties with Applicant. Because the Iraq
Security Forces (ISF) and non-governmental entities (principally ISIS) operating in
Iraq, as well as the former Iraqi military and intelligence authorities, have a history of
violating Iraqi domestic laws and regulations, and international laws, they are more
likely to use improper and/or illegal means to obtain classified information in
Applicant’s possession or control through his siblings and in-laws. 
Noting that Applicant’s contacts with his Iraqi family members typically take
place in potentially hostile security environs, the Government urges security concerns
over risks that his telephonic contacts with his family members (principally his younger
15
brothers and sister-in-law) might be subject to exploitation, coercion, or duress by Iraqi
military and government authorities to access classified information in Applicant’s
possession or control. Applicant’s activities warrant some application of two of the
disqualifying conditions of the foreign influence guideline: DC ¶ 7(a), “contact,
regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” The citizenship/residence status of Applicant’s
siblings and sister-in-law in Iraq pose some potential concerns for Applicant because
of the risks of undue foreign influence that could compromise sensitive or classified
information under Applicant’s possession and/or control. 
Although neither of Applicant’s siblings nor sister-in-law in Iraq have any
identified Iraqi military or government service, or other demonstrated links to the Iraqi
government, they remain potentially vulnerable to pressure and coercion for so long
as they reside in Iraq (even in places considered to be generally safe from terrorist
threats).  Were any of these family members to be placed in a hostage situation,
Applicant could be subject to conflicts over ensuring his family’s well being and
protecting classified information. For this reason, DC ¶ 7(b), “connection to a foreign
person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest
between the individual’s obligation to protect classified or sensitive information or
technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by
providing that information,” is applicable to the facts of this case. 
Still, from the evidence presented, neither of Applicant’s brothers and sister-in-
law residing in Iraq have any history to date of being subjected to any coercion or
influence. These historical antecedents limit the risk of any potential conflict situation. 
And while the absence of any past coercive measures taken by Iraqi authorities does
not absolve Applicant from coercive risks in the future given Iraq’s checkered history
of political instability, violence,  hostage taking, and abusive measures taken against
its own citizens, the absence of any evidence of pressure or coercion in their family
history is worthy of considerable weight in assessing foreign influence risks of a
potential hostage situation with Applicant’s family members residing in Iraq.
The AGs governing security clearances do not dictate per se results or
mandate particular outcomes for any chosen set of guidelines covering risks of foreign
influence.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country may not
be in another. While foreign influence cases must by practical necessity be weighed
on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing.  Personnel security
assessments necessarily embrace similar risk assessments under the new AGs for
assessing foreign influence risks and concerns associated with the individual's having
family abroad, which include both common sense assessments of country risks and
information available from public sources. 
16
Mitigation is available to Applicant under the foreign influence guideline of the
AGs.  Based on his case-specific circumstances, mitigating condition (MC) ¶ 8(a), “the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons
are located, or the persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that
it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the United States.” is  applicable to Applicant’s situation. Information about
Applicant’s family members residing in Iraq, while limited, is enough to permit safe
predictions about their future safety and exposure to risks of pressure and
compromise
Of benefit to Applicant is MC ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant’s demonstrated service to
U.S. defense contractors operating in Iraq, while still a resident and citizen of Iraq in
the 2004-2008 time period, is impressive and valued by the defense contractors and
U.S service members he worked for. His contributions to the U.S. defense effort are
substantiated by the numerous endorsements, certificates of training, and awards he
received while working as a linguist for U.S. contractors and military service members 
he worked with in Iraq between 2004 and 2008. Applicant’s documented  contributions
to the U.S. defense initiatives in Iraq are sufficiently demonstrated to warrant full
application of MC ¶ 8(b).
Heightened risks associated with Applicant’s presumed close relationships with
his younger brothers and sister-in-law residing in Iraq can be safely discounted
considering all the facts and circumstances associated with his work as a linguist for
U.S. contractors operating in Iraq and relationships with his siblings and sister-in-law
in Iraq. Iraq’s strategic location and political character and Applicant’s case specific
relationships with his family members in Iraq are reconcilable with his holding a
security clearance to continue his work as a linguist. His demonstrated honest,
integrity, and trustworthiness are established and enable him to overcome security
concerns over his having family members in Iraq and enable him to surmount foreign
influence concerns.  
Financial concerns
Applicant’s accumulated gambling losses with money inherited from his family
in 2009 and later borrowed from his brother and sister are fully documented and
provide ample proof of the source of his funds and losses. Applicant does not dispute
his use of family inheritance and loans in 2009 to pursue his gambling activities in
casinos located in Lebanon and Jordan. His claims that he has not engaged in
gambling of any kind since 2016 are supported by the admissions he provided the
17
OPM agent who interviewed him in May 2017 and his statement of intent. Based on
the evidence developed in the record, application of two of the disqualifying conditions
(DC) of the Guidelines are warranted: DC ¶¶ 19(h), “borrowing money or engaging in
significant financial transactions to fund gambling or pay gambling debts,” and 19(i),
“concealing gambling losses, family conflict, or other problems caused by gambling.”
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
government business. (see Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980))
Failure of an applicant to make more concerted efforts to pay or resolve his debts
when able to do so raises security-significant concerns about the sufficiency of the
applicant’s demonstrated trust and judgment necessary to safeguard classified
information.
Extenuating circumstances were never an issue in Applicant’s gambling
decisions. Applicant committed his inherited and borrowed funds he received from
family members to finance his gambling interests without any influence brought to
bear from family members and friends. His accrued gambling losses with the monies 
he received from his family in inheritance and loans from his sister and youngest
brother to cover additional gambling have since been repaid. 
Applicant has learned valuable lessons about the importance of conserving his
financial resources and has pledged to never excessively gamble again. (AE F)
Working three jobs, he completed his instalment repayments of the monies he
borrowed from his sister and youngest brother and is currently debt-free. Financial
concerns and personal conduct concerns associated with his past gambling losses are
mitigated. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
Guidelines F and E.
Falsification concerns
Additional security concerns are raised over Applicant’s falsifying his answers
to questions posed by a counterintelligence investigator in a February 2017 personal
subject interview by telling the investigator he transferred his inheritance money to his
siblings for safekeeping without disclosing his retrieval of the monies in preparation for 
his travel to Jordan. Applicant’s statements to the investigator were accurate regarding
his initial transfers to his siblings for safekeeping, but did not include any answers
about his ensuing retrieval of the funds he left with his sister for safekeeping. Applicant
was never asked by the DoD investigator whether these monies were returned to him
by his sister, and Applicant never volunteered the information. Without probative
18
evidence of Applicant’s withholding evidence from the DoD  investigator about his
retrieved funds from his sister, no inferences can be reasonably drawn of Applicant’s
intentionally withholding information.
Taking into account all of the evidence and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s omissions of the circumstances surrounding his disposition  of inheritance
and borrowed funds from his siblings after retrieving most of the funds, conclusions
warrant that the allegations are unsubstantiated. Favorable conclusions are warranted
with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline E. 
Whole-person assessment
Whole-person assessment of Applicant’s foreign influence risks to ascertain
whether they are fully compatible with eligibility requirements for holding a security
clearance takes account of Applicant’s immigration to the United States to pursue a
linguist career with the skills he acquired as a linguist in Iraq. The linguist services he
provided for defense contractors operating in Iraq in the 2004-2008 time frame were
well received by his superiors and are worthy of commendation. His valued services to
his defense contractor employers are enough to overcome the Government’s security
concerns over the heightened risks that his siblings and sister-in-law present as
citizens and residents of Iraq. Both foreign influence and financial concerns raised
over his gambling losses are mitigated. Further, security concerns raised over his
omissions of his gambling losses in the clearance screening questionnaire answers he
provided the interviewing investigator are unsubstantiated. Favorable conclusions are
warranted with respect to foreign influence, financial, and personal conduct concerns.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following
separate formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Subparas  1.a-1.d: For Applicant
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): FOR APPLICANT
Subpara. 2.a:                       For Applicant 
GUIDELINE E ([PERSONAL CONDUCT): FOR APPLICANT
Subparas 3.a-3.b: For Applicant
19
 Conclusions  
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information.  Clearance is granted 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
20
