 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00182 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, 
personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 16, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines F, financial 
considerations, and E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Appellant answered the SOR on February 19, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 10, 2014. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 
 
2 
 
 
25, 2014, and the case was scheduled for April 14, 2014. Applicant was unable to 
attend the hearing and an amended notice of hearing was issued on April 14, 2014. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled on April 28, 2014. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and they were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E. The record was 
held open until May 8, 2014, to provide Applicant the opportunity to present additional 
documents, which he did. The exhibits were marked as AE F through H and admitted 
into evidence without objection.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 6, 
2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He graduated from high school in 1990. He served in 
the Navy from 1991 to 2000 and was honorably discharged. He has never married. He 
has two children, ages 12 and 10, from a previous relationship. He pays child support to 
their mother.2  
 
 Applicant was in a car accident in November 2012. He was seriously injured and 
incurred numerous hospital and doctors’ bills. He was a passenger in the car. The 
driver’s insurance company paid part of the medical bills. He was living with his aunt at 
the time and her insurance policy also covered some of his medical bills. He was 
eventually offered a settlement amount of $24,273 from one insurance company. This 
was to pay the remaining medical and other expenses. The settlement required 
Applicant to waive his right to sue for further damages. Applicant accepted the 
settlement. Applicant used the settlement money and paid the debts in SOR ¶ 1.j 
($9,864) and ¶ 1.k ($125), which were for hospital expenses.3 The remainder of the 
money Applicant put in the bank and used it to pay the remaining medical debts.4 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶ 1.a through ¶ 1.i and ¶ 1.l are medical expenses from the 
individual doctors that treated Applicant. The individual doctors are part of a physicians’ 
group (group). Instead of billing the insurance company for their services, the group 
billed Applicant. At the time, he was unaware that the group did not bill the insurance 
company. When he learned of this error it was past the claims filing deadline, and the 
group was unable to bill the insurance company directly. Applicant went to the group’s 
office and paid $500 toward the aggregate that is owed. The group is aware that due to 
its error it cannot be compensated by the insurance company and was willing to 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s memoranda. 
 
2 Tr. 18-21. 
 
3 AE B. 
 
4 Tr. 21-28, 40-47, 50-52, 66-75. 
 
3 
 
 
negotiate a settlement with Applicant on the total amount. Applicant settled the debts. 
He credibly testified he has no other delinquent debts.5  
 
 Applicant admitted since 1994 he has had his driver’s license suspended so 
many times he cannot remember how many. In March 2005, he was convicted of driving 
with a suspended/revoked license. In September 2007, DOHA denied him a security 
clearance in part due to his conviction. He admitted that after his 2005 conviction he 
continued to drive on a suspended license. At some point his license was reinstated, 
and in July 2010, Applicant’s driver’s license was revoked for five years for habitual 
traffic offender. He was placed on supervised probation.6  
 
 A review of Applicant’s driver’s license record reflects numerous traffic offenses 
from 1998 to 2010. The offenses include reckless driving, careless driving, speeding, 
open container-alcohol, failure to pay traffic fine, failure to have continuous automobile 
insurance, failure to appear for traffic summons, and repeatedly driving on a license that 
was canceled, suspended or revoked.7  
 
Applicant realized that not having a driver’s license was costing him a lot of 
money and inconvenience. He had to pay people to drive him to work and other places. 
He began going through the process of obtaining a hardship license. He completed the 
terms of his probation a year early and has paid all fines owed. He completed an 
advanced driver improvement course. He stated he has had an administrative hearing 
and completed the court’s requirements to have his license reinstated in August 2014. 
When asked if he has driven on a suspended license since his last suspension in July 
2010, he stated “probably two or three times.”8 Applicant admitted he has made a lot of 
mistakes, especially concerning his driving. He took responsibility for his actions.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
5 Tr. 47-59, 66-77; AE C, F, G, H. 
 
6 Tr. 34-38, 84-85; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. 35; GE 2. 
 
8 GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. 37-39, 60-65, 83. 
 
4 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had approximately $13,674 of delinquent medical debts related to 
injuries he suffered in an accident in November 2012. I find there is sufficient evidence 
to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s inability to meet his financial obligations initially occurred due to an 
accident that was not his fault. These circumstances are unlikely to recur and do not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment. However, 
because Applicant is still resolving the debts to the physicians’ group, they are still 
current. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(a) only partially applies.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts are all for medical services incurred when he was 
injured. These financial problems were beyond his control. For the full application of AG 
¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. He reached a 
settlement with one of the insurance companies and paid the debts in SOR ¶ 1.j 
 
6 
 
 
($9,864) and ¶ 1.k ($125). The remaining debts were to be paid by the insurance 
company, but the group failed to file the claim timely. Applicant made a $500 payment 
toward the aggregate balance of the remaining debts owed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.i 
and 1.l. He and the group are negotiating a settlement for the remaining balance. He 
has the resources to pay the settlement when an agreement is reached. Applicant has 
acted responsibly. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant has no other delinquent debts. There is no evidence he has received 
financial counseling, but there are clear indications his financial problems are under 
control. He has initiated a good-faith effort to repay his creditors and resolve the 
remaining debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following potentially apply:  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; and  
 
(e) personal conduct, concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Since 1994 Applicant has had his driver’s license suspended numerous times for 
a myriad of offenses. In 2005, he was convicted of driving with a suspended/revoked 
license. After being denied a security clearance in 2007, due in part to his 2005 
conviction, he continued to drive on a suspended license. In 2010, his license was 
revoked for five years for being a habitual offender. AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) apply.  
 
7 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant has a long history of violating traffic laws. He repeatedly had his license 
suspended for various violations and he continued to drive. After his 2005 criminal 
conviction for driving with a suspended/revoked license, he had a security clearance 
hearing. He was denied a clearance, in part, due to his conviction. After being denied a 
clearance, he again was charged with driving on a suspended license. In 2010, he was 
found to be a habitual traffic offender. He was placed on supervised probation and his 
license was revoked for five years. Applicant has completed the terms of his probation, 
paid associated fines, and has had an administrative hearing. He indicated his license 
will be reinstated in August 2014.  
 
Applicant repeatedly violated traffic laws for more than 16 years. His conduct was 
egregious. He exercised a complete disregard for complying with the terms of his 
suspended/revoked license. He admitted he has driven a few times since his license 
was revoked as a habitual offender in 2010. His conduct was not minor or infrequent. 
He stated his actions have cost him a lot of money and inconvenience, which has 
motivated him to expedite the completion of the terms of his probation.  
 
Based on his past record and that he has driven a few times since his 2010 
license revocation, Applicant does not have a reliable track record that he will comply 
with the traffic laws once his license is reinstated. At this time, I am not convinced that 
he is completely committed to complying with all rules and regulations. Although he has 
acknowledged he has made mistakes and has taken some positive steps to reinstate 
his license, without a consistent record of compliance with traffic laws, I cannot find 
future misconduct is unlikely to recur. I find AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. AG ¶¶ 17(b) and 
17(c) partially apply, but there is insufficient evidence to overcome the security concern. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 42 years old. He served in the Navy and was honorably discharged. 
Applicant was in a serious accident and incurred numerous medical debts. He has paid 
some of the medical debts and is resolving the remaining ones. Applicant repeatedly 
violated traffic laws and continued to drive with a suspended/revoked license over a 
long period of time. His license will not be reinstated until August 2014. He does not 
have a track record of complying with rules and regulations. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline, but failed to 
mitigate the security concerns under the personal conduct guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.l:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
9 
 
 
  Subparagraph: 2.a:    Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
