 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-04970 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has mitigated the financial 
considerations concern raised by the foreclosure of three properties she owned jointly 
with her ex-husband. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 26, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing 
convened on March 25, 2014, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, as 
well as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through I, without objection. After the hearing, 
Applicant submitted AE J, also admitted without objection.3 I received the transcript (Tr.) 
on April 9, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 40, works as a project manager. She has worked for a federal 
contactor since separating from the Air Force in 1999 after eight years of active duty 
service. She has held a security clearance since 1992, without incident. The SOR 
alleges financial problems that occurred during the course of Applicant’s marriage, 
which lasted from October 2004 to January 2011.4 
 
Applicant and her husband purchased their home, Homestead, in November 
2004. Because she had the stronger credit history, Applicant financed the home, using 
80/20 financing. The primary mortgage on Homestead secured 80% of the $331,000 
purchase price and a secondary mortgage secured the remaining 20%. At the time of 
purchase, Applicant and her husband earned a household income of $150,000. Under 
their arrangement, Applicant paid the mortgage from her salary, which consumed her 
entire net pay, and her husband assumed responsibility for the household expenses. 
The couple withdrew $80,000 in equity from Homestead to fund upgrades to the 
property. In November 2005, Applicant and her husband purchased two investment 
properties, Blackacre and Whiteacre. Applicant also financed Blackacre and Whiteacre 
using 80/20 financing. Although Applicant obtained the financing on the properties 
alone, the properties were deeded to her and her husband jointly.5 
 
The couple intended to sell Blackacre and Whiteacre within 6 months of 
purchase. The sale of Blackacre was thwarted by the downturn in the real estate market 
in 2006. Although the couple had a buyer for Whiteacre, the buyer was unable to secure 
financing. Unable to sell the homes as planned, Applicant’s husband, acting as property 
manager for both properties, rented them from the summer of 2006 until September 
2009.6  
 
Soon after purchasing the investment properties, Applicant’s husband quit his job 
to start his own business. Applicant’s marriage began to strain under the financial 
                                                          
2 To assist in her preparation for the hearing, Applicant received correspondence from Department 
Counsel and the Chief Administrative Judge. These letters are appended to the record as Appellate 
Exhibits (AP) I and II. 
 
3 The Government’s position regarding Applicant’s post-hearing submission is appended to the record as 
AP III. 
 
4 Tr. 15-17; GE 1.  
 
5 Tr. 19-24, 27-28, 35-36, 45-47, 65-66. 
 
6 Tr. 37-40, 47-49. 
 
3 
 
pressures caused by their reduced household income and increasing financial 
obligations. Applicant borrowed money from her 401K account to cover the mortgages 
for Blackacre and Whiteacre to keep the mortgages on the properties current when their 
renters became unreliable. The couple separated in September 2009, which was also 
the last month they made the mortgage payments on Blackacre and Whiteacre. After a 
brief reconciliation in 2010, Applicant’s husband abandoned the marriage, absconding 
with half of the couple’s savings. Unable to maintain Homestead on her own, Applicant 
stopped paying the mortgages on the property in July 2010. Applicant attempted to 
negotiate new mortgage terms with her lender. She offered to surrender the deed to 
Homestead in lieu of foreclosure, and attempted to short sale the property, but the 
creditor rejected each offer. Applicant self-reported the status of the properties to her 
facility security officer (FSO). Applicant’s divorce was finalized in January 2011. The 
divorce settlement did not address the resolution of any deficiency balances on the 
three properties.7  
 
 In 2011, Applicant underwent a periodic reinvestigation. She reported the 
foreclosures as well as the delinquency on Homestead on her security clearance 
application. She also discussed the properties during her subject interview. When 
Applicant began her current position in September 2012, she reported the status of the 
properties to her new FSO.8  
 
 In July 2012, the mortgager for Homestead foreclosed on the property. In 
November 2013, DOD issued the SOR alleging that Applicant has delinquent account 
balances for the secondary mortgage on Homestead (¶ 1.b), both mortgages on 
Blackacre (¶¶ 1.a and 1.c), and the secondary mortgage on Whiteacre (¶ 1.d). In 
response to collection attempts by the creditors holding the secondary mortgages on 
Homestead and Whiteacre, Applicant negotiated settlements with the creditors. The 
Blackacre mortgages remain unresolved. The mortgagers have not made attempts to 
collect the debt. She has contacted the last known creditor, but it is unable to locate 
Applicant’s account.9  
 
 Before her marriage, Applicant maintained a favorable financial history. During 
her marriage, Applicant ceded financial control to her husband to stabilize the union. In 
doing so, Applicant admitted to making decisions that went against her better judgment 
to keep the peace. Applicant accepts full responsibility for the financial choices she 
made during her marriage, and she has worked diligently to rehabilitate her finances. 
She sought financial counseling and lives well below her means. Since 2012, Applicant 
has paid off all of her consumer debt in addition to $26,000 in personal loans to her 
parents. Applicant is rebuilding her cash and retirement savings.10  
 
                                                          
7 Tr. 25-26, 28, 31-32, 48, 66-67, 72-74. 
 
8 Tr. 75-76; GE 1-2.  
 
9 Tr. 28, 32-35, 40-44, 49, 51-56; GE 6-7; AE E-F, J. 
 
10 Tr. 18, 56-64; AE A, G.  
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”11 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Specifically, Applicant admits that between 2009 and 2010, she defaulted 
on the mortgages for the primary residence and two investment properties she owned 
with her ex-husband. Applicant’s failure to pay these mortgages demonstrates an 
inability to pay her debts and a history, albeit a brief one, of not doing so.12  
 
However, the record contains sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial 
concern. Although Applicant’s financial problems were not entirely beyond her control, 
she did handle the obligations attendant to having a security clearance responsibly.13 
Applicant timely self-reported her issues to her FSO at her former and current employer. 
She properly reported adverse information on her 2011 security clearance application 
and discussed the issues candidly throughout her re-investigation and the adjudication 
of these issues. In doing so, she eliminated her financial issues as a source of potential 
exploitation.  
 
Even though her ex-husband walked away from the financial fall-out from their 
marriage and failed real estate ventures, Applicant has made a good-faith effort to 
resolve all of her outstanding debt and to rehabilitate her finances.14 In addition to 
resolving her consumer debts and personal loans, Applicant has negotiated settlements 
to resolve the deficiency balances on the mortgages for Homestead (1.b) and Whiteacre 
(1.d). Applicant has received financial counseling and presented evidence that her 
finances are under control.15 She lives well below her means and has not incurred any 
new delinquent debt. Applicant’s financial problems were limited to her seven-year 
marriage, and it is unlikely that the circumstances leading to Applicant’s financial 
problems will recur.16  
 
 
                                                          
11  AG ¶ 18. 
 
12 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
13 AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
14 AG ¶ 20(d).  
 
15 AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
16 AG ¶ 20(a). 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I have no doubts or reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). The financial concerns in 
this case are mitigated even though the mortgages related to Blackacre remain 
unresolved.  Applicant acknowledged that she made mistakes that had great financial 
consequences in an effort to maintain her marriage. However, it is not the purpose of a 
security clearance adjudication to assign guilt or blame and then punish or sanction a 
person for their past actions. Likewise a security clearance case is not aimed at 
collecting debts. Rather the purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of 
a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable 
security risk.”17 Applicant has handled her obligations as a clearance holder 
appropriately. In doing so, she has proven that she takes the duties attendant to her 
fiduciary relationship seriously and that she continues to be worthy of the Government’s 
trust and confidence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
17 AG ¶ 2(a). 
