1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 12-02905
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Brian Cruz, Esquire
May 1, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On November 26, 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 16, 2013, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge (AJ). The case was assigned to
this AJ on February 10, 2014. DOHA first issued a notice of hearing on February 13,
2014, and the hearing was scheduled to be heard by video teleconference on March 12,
2014. The notice was amended on March 7, 2014, and the hearing was held at the
DOHA Telework Site on April 3, 2014. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 11,
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf and
submitted Exhibits A through R, which were also admitted without objection. At the
hearing, the record was kept open until April 17, 2014 to allow Applicant to submit
2
additional evidence. Two documents were received, and were identified and entered
into evidence as a Exhibits S and T. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr)
April 11, 2014. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of
Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 44 years old.  She was first married from 1989 to 2000, and she has
been married for the second time from 2001 to the present. Applicant has two adult
sons. She is a Security Manager and has been employed by her current employer, a
defense contractor, since 1990, with one year employment by another company in 2006
to 2007. Applicant is seeking a DoD security clearance in connection with her
employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists two allegations (1.a. and 1.b.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. Both SOR debts will be
discussed below in the same order as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for a mortgage account that went to
foreclosure. The SOR alleges that a deficiency balance of $73,123 is still owed.
Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR. At the hearing, Applicant testified
that this debt was for a second mortgage on a home that she and her husband
purchased in 2005. They purchased the home as their primary residence with a zero
down, adjustable rate mortgage. They also had a second mortgage from the same
creditor. The house cost $350,000 and the first mortgage was in the amount of
$270,000 and the second was $80,000. Three months after they purchased the home
Applicant’s husband was laid off after working at this place of employment for 18 years.
He was unemployed for approximately eight months. (Tr at 38-42.) 
In December 2007, the mortgage rate increased from six percent to nine percent.
They tried to refinance the loan to make the payments lower but they were denied.  Six
months later, the mortgage was scheduled to increase to 13 percent. They then tried to
sell the house through a short sale, but they were unsuccessful. When they realized
they could not refinance or resell the house they moved out of the house, but continued
to list it with a real estate agent in an attempt to sell it. They tried to sell it for
approximately $180,00, even though they had purchased it for $350,000 but they were
not successful.  The home was ultimately foreclosed in October 2008. (Tr at 42-43, 64-
66.) Applicant testified that they moved out of the house before it was foreclosed,
because she did not feel it was right to stay in the house if they could not pay the
mortgage.  (Tr at 68-69.)  
3
Applicant testified that she spoke to the branch manager of the bank that held
both mortgage accounts for their home, and asked him to review if she and her husband
owed anything to the bank for either mortgage. (Tr at 43-45.) Exhibit M is a letter from
the branch manager indicating that there is no active accounts on file for Applicant and
her husband. Exhibit P, a full data credit report from TransUnion, Experian, and Equifax,
dated February 28, 2014, shows that Applicant has no delinquencies from any of the
three credit reporting agencies. Additionally, Exhibit P shows that there is $0 past due
and $0 balance owed for both the first and second mortgages. I find that this debt has
been resolved and it not due. 
1.b. The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to pay property taxes in the
approximate amount of $6,000. Applicant denied this SOR allegation in her RSOR.
Applicant averred that she was advised by her real estate agent that when the house
was sold the new buyers would pay for the past property taxes. (Tr at 43-44.) 
Applicant testified that she went to the treasurer’s office for the county where the
house is located to see if she and her husband owed any taxes. She was informed that
everything on that property is current and no taxes are owed. (Tr at 48-49.) Exhibit N
indicates that for the years the house was owned by Applicant, 2006 through 2009,  the
property taxes were paid and no taxes are owed. Finally, Exhibit O is the current
property tax bill of Applicant’s former property for fiscal year July 1, 2013, through June
30, 2014. It shows that there are no unpaid prior tax years. I find that this debt has been
resolved and it not due. 
Applicant testified that her current financial situation is stable. She and her
husband both have full-time jobs that they have had for a long time. They have no other
debts that are overdue. They also are empty nesters, and since they do not need a
large house, they rent a town home near Applicant’s place of employment, where they
have lived for almost four years. (Tr at 37, 55-56.) 
Applicant submitted six very positive and laudatory character letters from people
who know her in her professional capacity. (Exhibits A through F.) Applicant was
described by one of the vice-presidents of her employer as “an extremely accomplished
Security Professional,” and “she has demonstrated the highest standard of character,
and has always treated others professionally and with respect.” Applicant also
submitted letters showing she has received awards and honors, as well as training
certificates for her employment. (Exhibits I through L.) Finally, Applicant submitted two
post-hearing documents to show that Applicant had no additional tax liability for the
foreclosed  mortgages. (Exhibits S and T.) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations,” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions did apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has
established that Applicant did initially incur delinquent debt when her house was
foreclosed.
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As
reviewed above, Applicant’s financial difficulties occurred because her husband lost his
employment shortly after they purchased their house, plus the interest rates on the
mortgage increased from seven percent to nine percent to 13 percent within one year,
and finally the downturn in the economy made it impossible to sell the house in 2008 for
$180,000 that they had purchased in 2005 for $350,000. I find that Applicant did act
responsibly to try to resolve the overdue debt, first by trying to sell the house and then
when they became aware that they could not make payments or sell the house, she and
her husband moved out so that she would not take advantage of the creditor by staying
there without making payments. Ultimately, Applicant is not overdue on any debts.
Accordingly, I find that this mitigating condition is applicable in this case. 
Additionally, I find that ¶ 20(d) is applicable, since Applicant has “initiated a good-
faith effort to repay her overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” and she now has
no outstanding overdue debts. Finally, Applicant’s current financial situation is stable,
with all of her financial obligations being met in a timely and responsible manner.
Therefore, I find Guideline F for Applicant.
6
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for
access to a classified position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on the evidence establishing
that Applicant has resolved the debts listed on the SOR, and her extremely positive
letters of recommendation, I find that the record evidence leaves me with no significant
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance,
under the whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has
mitigated the security concerns under the whole-person concept.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.: For Applicant
 
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
