The Government submitted nine items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ISCR Case No. 12-03250
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On November 6, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative
determination in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated November 6, 2013.  Applicant received the FORM on February1
27, 2014. He did not submit additional information for the record. I received the case
assignment on May 12, 2014. Based on a review of the case file, I find Applicant has
not mitigated the security concerns raised. Security clearance is denied.
Applicant listed unemployment from November 2009 until July 2010 and May 2007 to June 2007. However,      2
he noted that he was supported by his spouse and used his savings.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations under Guideline F,
¶¶ 1.a. through 1.w., with explanations.  (Item 4) 
Applicant is 30 years old. He is a production support specialist with a defense
contractor. He completed his high school education in 2001. He has taken college
courses since 2006, but has not obtained a degree. Applicant is married, and he has
two children. (Item 5) From September 2001 until September 2005, he served on active
duty in the Navy. He was honorably discharged. Applicant has been employed with his
current employer since March 2011.On January 5, 2012, he completed a security
clearance application. (Item 5) 
 The SOR alleges 23 delinquent debts totaling approximately $16,225. These
include collection accounts, medical accounts, and student loan accounts. (Items 7, 8
and 9) Credit reports confirm the debts. 
Applicant explained in his Answer, that when he completed his 2012 security
clearance application, he was the only member of the household working, but his
spouse recently started employment.  He emphasized that he planned to take action on2
all accounts after the first of the year. He did not provide documentary evidence of any
payments. 
When Applicant completed responses to DOHA interrogatories, he was candid
that he had not made payments on the SOR debts listed.  He told the investigators in
2012 that his financial problems were “just due to lack of income and lots of student
loans.” (Item 6)  
Applicant’s personal financial statement shows that his total monthly net income
is approximately $2,130. He estimates that his total household expenses are about
$2,167. He did not list any payments on debts. He has a negative net monthly
remainder of approximately $36. (Item 7) He has not received financial counseling or
assistance with financial planning. (Item 6)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
3
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a3
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  4 5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
4
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. “An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.”
Applicant’s admissions and credit reports establish his delinquent debts in the
amount of $16,225. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions
(FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c)
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is
left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” Applicant still has a
significant amount of delinquent debt. The delinquent obligations remain. Consequently,
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. Applicant did not provide
information to prove that the delinquencies were beyond his control and that he acted
responsibly. He had periods of unemployment, but he did not show a nexus between
the unemployment and his inability or unwillingness to pay on the delinquent accounts.
He has not indicated that he has a plan to pay his bills. He has not contacted his
creditors.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Applicant has failed to provide
documentation to show that he has a plan for the remaining delinquent debts.  He did
not present evidence that he received financial counseling. AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem) does not apply. I find that  there are
not clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved and are under
control. He has not met his burden of proof.
5
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 30 years old. He has worked for his current employer since 2011. Applicant
has held a security clearance. Applicant served in the military and received an
honorable discharge. While he made reference to his unemployment, he failed to
provide any specific information connecting his financial indebtedness to circumstances
beyond his control. Moreover, he did not demonstrate that he has taken responsible
steps toward the resolution of his debts. He has not provided sufficient evidence or
documentation to warrant mitigation in this case.  
Applicant steady employment, with the exception of two short periods of
unemployment, creates significant doubts about the eventual resolution of the SOR
debts and his overall solvency and financial integrity. Since his interview in 2012, he
has not put a plan in place to address his financial issues. His pattern of financial
irresponsibility and his failure to take action to resolve his debts do not show good
judgment or reliability. 
The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials. A denial of his security clearance does
not necessarily indicate anything adverse about an applicant’s character or loyalty. It
means that the individual has presented insufficient mitigation to meet the strict
standards controlling access to classified information. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a-1.w: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
