KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to issue a
favorable security clearance decision.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-03074.a1
DATE: 05/16/2014
DATE: May 16, 2014
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-03074
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
 Amy C. Broderick, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 10, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
1“[T]he conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss
of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances[.]”
2“[T]he person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that
the problem is being resolved or is under control[.]”
3“[T]he individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts[.]”
2
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On February 21, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Martin H. Mogul denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision.
The Judge made the following findings:  Applicant is 43 years old.  There are 32 overdue
debts listed in the SOR.  The Judge found that 2 of these debts are duplicates of one another.
Twenty-seven of those debts have neither been resolved or reduced.  Three of the debts have been
resolved and one has been reduced.  Applicant’s financial difficulties began in 2003 when her
husband became injured and could no longer work in construction.  He was unemployed for two
years.  During this period, Applicant went on maternity leave for three months.  Applicant and her
husband gave Applicant’s mother $5,000 in approximately 2009.  In 2010 she was laid off for three
months.  Applicant’s salary has fluctuated over the years.  In her current position she earns $90,000
per year.  Her husband started his own company in 2009, and his income varies.
Applicant currently has no credit cards and she is not incurring any additional overdue debts.
She has never consulted any debt consolidation company, nor has she taken any kind of financial
planning course.  She hopes to resolve an IRS debt of about $8,000 in a year and a half, after which
she plans to contact her other creditors and try to resolve her other debts.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant’s husband’s injuries, medical bills,
and period of unemployment could potentially make AG ¶ 20(b)1 applicable.  However, there is
evidence that Applicant made an attempt to resolve only four of the 32 overdue debts listed in the
SOR.  She has failed to even contact the other creditors to attempt to make any kind of plan to
resolve the other debts.  Applicant has not acted responsibly and the mitigating condition is not
applicable in this case.    AG ¶ 20(c)2 is not applicable since Applicant has not had any financial
counseling and AG ¶ 20(d)3 is not applicable since Applicant has not initiated a good-faith effort to
repay, or even contact, the vast majority of overdue creditors and has not otherwise resolved debts.
No other mitigating conditions apply to this case.  Additionally, Applicant has not mitigated the
security concerns under the whole-person concept.
4“[T]he behavior happened so long ago, or was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment[.]”
3
 Applicant argues that, contrary to the Judge’s findings, she has taken significant steps toward
resolving her debts, all of which were incurred as a result of circumstances beyond her control.  She
asserts that her financial troubles are directly related to her husband’s unexpected injury, and were
not a result of excessive spending or credit card abuse.  She states that she has been resolving her
debts slowly but surely, and that she has not resorted to irrational behavior in the midst of all her
family troubles.  She specifically argues that AG ¶ 20(a),4 AG ¶ 20(b), AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d),
when properly applied, support a favorable decision for her.  Applicant’s arguments do not establish
error on the part of the Judge.      
 The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a
favorable security clearance decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-25157 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 4,
2008).  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Applicant’s appeal brief essentially argues for an alternate interpretation of the record evidence.
  A review of the Judge’s decision reveals that the Judge listed the potentially applicable
mitigating conditions and then discussed the components of those factors in some detail in his
analysis.  The Judge offered a narrative explanation as to why the disqualifying conduct under
Guideline F was not fully mitigated, including in his discussion acknowledgments of the efforts
Applicant had made in resolving three debts and reducing the outstanding amount on one other.  The
gravamen of his decision, however, was based on the lack of evidence that Applicant had made any
attempt to resolve the majority of her past-due debts or to take a financial course to aid in debt
resolution.  The Judge noted his concern that, aside from the four debts that were either resolved or
reduced, Applicant had failed to even contact the numerous other creditors about her delinquent
accounts.  The conclusions of the Judge are reasonably supported by the record evidence.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
4
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan       
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed; Jeffrey D. Billett         
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody          
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
