Consisting of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), Items 1-9 and Applicant’s FORM Responses A and B.1
Response A was timely received. By letter dated 17 January 2014, the Government gave Applicant an
additional 30 days to respond because of procedural inadequacies related to the Directive. Response B was
not timely received, but Department Counsel raised no objection to the timeliness of the response, and
accordingly, I will consider Response B.
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXX, Xxxxxx Xxxxxxx )       ISCR Case No. 12-02315 
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  I deny Applicant’s clearance.1
On 10 September 2013, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) raising security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision without2
hearing by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The record in this case
closed in February 2014, when Department Counsel raised no objection to Applicant’s
However, this debt itself was a medical debt that had been referred to collection in May 2005.3
Applicant also claimed that SOR debt 1.f (which was alleged as a medical bill) was the same debt as SOR4
1.j and 1.m (which were alleged as cell phone bills). However, Applicant acknowledged in his 2011 subject
interviews that debt 1.f was a medical bill for which he was responsible (Item 5).
It took Applicant more than a year to sell his home. However, nowhere does he explain why he did not rent5
his home during the period he was unable to sell it or take other steps to mitigate the financial impact on his
family.
2
second response to the FORM. DOHA assigned the case to me 14 January 2014. By
letter dated 17 January 2014, the Government requested I delay my decision until
Applicant had adequate time to respond to the Government’s grant of 30 additional days
to respond to the FORM.
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted SOR financial allegations 1.g-h, 1.j, 1.l, and 1.r-s. He denied
the remaining allegations. He is a 41-year-old customer systems engineer employed by
a U.S. defense contractor since August 2003. He seeks to retain the clearance he
appears to have held since August 1996.
The SOR alleges, and Government exhibits (Items 7-9) substantiate, 19
delinquent debts totaling over $34,000. The debts consist of 17 collection accounts—11
of which are medical accounts—one charged-off debt, and one tax debt to the Internal
Revenue Service (IRS) for tax year 2012. Applicant admits six delinquent accounts
totaling over $30,000. Record evidence shows that SOR debt 1.p was paid in
September 2007,  that SOR debt 1.h was a duplicate of debt 1.I, and SOR debt 1.m is a3
duplicate of debt 1.j.  Accordingly, I find for Applicant on SOR debts 1.h, 1.m, and 1.p.4
Consequently, 16 debts totaling over $30,000 are at issue.
Applicant’s July 2011 clearance application (Item 4) lists 10 delinquent debts,
eight of which—totaling over $24,000—appear in the SOR. Of course, the IRS debt for
2012 did not exist at the time. In his clearance application, Applicant stated his intent to
pay three small medical bills totaling $46 (SOR 1.c-e) by his next payday, and
acknowledged his intent to pay the five larger debts (SOR 1.g-h, 1.l-m, and 1.r).
Applicant acknowledged that he had been working to clean up his debts for the last five
years. Applicant acknowledged the SOR debts, among others, during subject interviews
in August and October 2011, reiterating his intent to satisfy his debts. However, in fact,
the medical bills were not paid until June 2013, when they were paid along with three
other small medical bills (SOR 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d), all of which totaled under $200.
Applicant first paid minimal amounts on the five larger bills in October 2013.
 Applicant attributes his indebtedness to: 1) moving to a rental home from his
privately-owned home in 2008 (which required payment of both mortgage and rent);  2)5
his wife starting her own company in 2008, which precipitated the move to be closer to
However, Applicant appears to have medical insurance and in many instances the outstanding medical bills6
appear to be consistent with remaining out-of-pocket expenses like deductibles and co-pays.
3
her business; 3) ongoing medical expenses related to his wife’s chronic illness;  and 4)6
changes to company policies regarding stipends for maintaining a security clearance
and reimbursements for company travel. Tax issues have arisen because his wife is
now taking a salary from her company, without making quarterly income tax withholding
payments as required. This resulted in significant tax liabilities for 2010, 2011, and
2012—the latter of which Applicant has entered a repayment plan for.
With the increasing pressures on his family’s disposable income, Applicant
resorted to using credit cards to cover household expenses as well as some of his
wife’s company expenses. When Applicant finally realized he was losing control of his
finances, he stopped paying on many of the debts alleged in the SOR to focus on
several larger debts which did not appear in the SOR. Unfortunately, Applicant provided
no details about those accounts and how they affected his ability to pay on the SOR
debts.
In addition to the five medical debts (SOR 1.a-e) that Applicant paid in June
2013, Applicant was able to settle SOR debt 1.l (which had grown to over $11,000) for a
lump-sum payment of $2,160 in February 2014 (Response B). Applicant also paid off
the balance of his IRS debt (SOR 1.s) in February 2014. Applicant obtained the funds
for these two large payments by liquidating company stock from his stock plan. Finally,
he paid the remaining balance on his cell phone debt (SOR1.j) in February 2014.
Applicant has made regular monthly payments on SOR debts 1.g, 1.I, and 1.r
since October 2013. However, Applicant has not resolved the medical debts at 1.f, 1.k,
1.n, 1.o and 1.q. He claimed that he might have paid debts 1.n, 1.o, and 1.q in 2006, but
he has not provided any proof of payment. Nor has he documented any efforts to
dispute these five medical debts.
Applicant has not received any financial or credit counseling. He provided no
work or character references. 
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).7
¶19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;8
¶20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that9
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
4
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.7
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has an extensive history of
financial difficulties, which are ongoing, and seem unlikely to be resolved any time
soon.  Applicant’s financial problems date to at least 2006. Beginning in 2008, they8
were exacerbated by circumstances both within and without his control. Although he
was certainly aware of the Government’s concerns by the time of his subject interviews
in August and October 2011, it does not appear—despite his claims to the contrary—
that he began to take meaningful action on his debts until after he received the
Government’s interrogatories in May 2013. Since that time, he has been a whirlwind of
activity, satisfying a number of his outstanding debts. Not, however, until his answer to
the SOR and his responses to the FORM.
The mitigating factors for financial considerations provide mixed relief for
Applicant. His financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, although the immediate
causes of his problems are possibly unlikely to recur.  Significant factors contributing to9
his financial problems were within his control: Applicant was already experiencing
financial problems when he took on a rental payment in addition to his mortgage in
2008. His tax problems seem clearly related to his wife’s taking salary from her
business without properly addressing her tax liability for the income. Medical expenses
can certainly be beyond Applicant’s control, but beyond the evidence that his wife’s
condition is chronic, Applicant has not demonstrated how her condition—apparently
covered by health insurance—contributes significantly to his financial problems. Finally,
changes in company policy that reduced Applicant’s income were certainly beyond his
¶20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and10
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications11
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.12
5
control, but those changes occurred in 2009 and 2010, more than enough time to begin
changes to the family budget.
However, even if I concluded that the original debt was due to circumstances
beyond Applicant’s control, I cannot conclude that Applicant has been responsible in
addressing his debt.  Stopping payments on multiple accounts while addressing others10
(that apparently did not appear in the SOR) might be a reasonable approach, but only
with specifics about which accounts were being paid in lieu of the SOR debts, how
ignoring some accounts increased his resolution of those accounts, and when those
accounts were actually paid, thereby freeing up funds for the SOR debts. Further, this
approach still does not really explain his inability over at least two years to address the
ten SOR debts that were under $400 each. Five of those were under $100; another two
were under $200; only three were between $300-400. Moreover, satisfaction of two
large debts has only been possible because Applicant cashed out stocks from his
employee plan—not a sensible option to repeat. Applicant has received no financial or
credit counseling, and while his budget plan for satisfying his remaining debt addresses
his largest debts in a reasonable amount of time, he still has five medical debts that are
unresolved.11
Applicant’s efforts have taken place under the impetus of this clearance
proceeding. The Government is not the collection agent of last resort. Applicants are
expected to address their finances because of their moral and legal obligation to pay
their bills, not under threat of losing their clearances. Under the circumstances,
Applicant’s efforts cannot be considered a good-faith effort to address his debts.12
Moreover, Applicant has apparently disregarded his financial obligations for many
years. Applicant has stopped digging a financial hole and has begun to crawl away from
the hole, yet he is not so far from the hole that it is safe to say he will not fall back into
the hole. Further progress on his current debt is required before I can confidently
conclude that he has demonstrated that his finances no longer pose a security concern.
Accordingly, I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph h: For Applicant (duplicate of 1.i)
Subparagraphs j-l: Against Applicant
Subparagraph m: For Applicant (duplicate of 1.j)
6
Subparagraphs n-o: Against Applicant
Subparagraph p: For Applicant
Subparagraphs q-s: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
