 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-01783 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Corey Williams, Esq. 
 
 
May 20, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Applicant was 
alleged to be indebted to four creditors in the approximate amount of $210,505. He filed 
a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which was dismissed in November 2012. His debts were 
caused by unforeseen circumstances and he has addressed them in good faith as his 
resources would allow. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 19, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 13, 2014 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 3, 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on March 4, 2014, scheduling the hearing for March 27, 2014. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE I) and Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 9, and they were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits 
(AE) A through EE, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his 
own behalf. The record was left open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits, and on 
May 5, 2014, Applicant presented additional exhibits marked AE FF  through AE MM. 
Department Counsel had no objection to AE FF through AE MM, and they were 
admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 11, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer for seven years. He was a civilian employee of the Navy from 1981 to 
2003. He has held a security clearance for 23 years, without incident. Applicant 
separated from his wife in 2009, and they divorced in 2013. He has custody of his two 
children, ages five and eight. His ex-wife suffers from borderline personality disorder 
and does not pay child support. (GE 1; GE 2; AE O; AE II; Tr. 32-43.) 
 
 As stated in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be indebted to four creditors in 
the approximate amount of $210,505. He filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which was 
dismissed in November 2012. Applicant admitted the debts and bankruptcy listed in the 
SOR subparagraphs with explanations. His debts are found in the credit reports entered 
into evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 
6; GE 7; GE 9.) 
 
 Applicant attributes his SOR-listed debts to his ex-wife’s medical condition, their 
divorce, and an economic downturn in the housing market. Prior to Applicant’s ex-wife’s 
diagnosis, he had a credit rating score of 750 and had only had one late payment in the 
preceding 15 years. When his wife became ill in the mid-2000s, she was hospitalized 
and Applicant incurred additional expenses. After her hospitalization, she was unable to 
work, which resulted in less family income. She was unable to watch their children and 
Applicant had to find costly part-time day care. It was during that struggle that 
Applicant’s wife requested a divorce. At the same time, the economy slowed and 
Applicant’s property declined significantly in value, while his interest rates escalated. 
Applicant self-reported his financial difficulties to his Facility Security Officer in 
November 2010.  (GE 8; Tr. 44-45.) 
 
 Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy in November 2012. Applicant filed 
bankruptcy on the advice of his attorney to halt a foreclosure sale of his primary 
residence until a modification of the mortgage could be established. The bankruptcy 
was dismissed shortly after it was filed and a stay had been issued on the foreclosure 
sale. The mortgage is addressed in more detail, below. (AE Q; AE V; Tr. 60-66.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is indebted on a student loan in the amount of $14,012. Applicant 
incurred this debt by co-signing a student loan for his former wife. In their divorce, his 
ex-wife agreed to pay her debt. However, she stopped paying on her loan. Applicant 
contacted this creditor in September 2013 and established payment arrangements. Per 
the agreement, he made a first payment of $1,000 in September 2013 and has made 
monthly payments of $100 to this creditor since then. This debt is being resolved. (GE 
2; AE A; AE B; AE C; AE N; AE O; AE Q; AE EE; Tr. 48-52, 74-75.) 
 
 Applicant is delinquent on his primary residence mortgage in the amount of 
approximately $67,000. Applicant purchased this property in 2007 for $672,000, prior to 
his wife’s illness or marital problems. He financed $604,800 of the purchase price by 
obtaining a mortgage with this creditor. The real estate market declined shortly after he 
purchased the home. He estimated its current value to be approximately $450,000. 
Applicant attempted to negotiate affordable payments, but the bank was not willing to 
modify the loan to a payment he could afford. He hired a law firm to negotiate modified 
payments with the creditor and he also filed a suit against the creditor for unfair and 
unlawful lending and borrowing practices. The law suit is pending but will be dismissed 
when a settlement is reached. On May 5, 2014, Applicant presented a letter from his 
attorney that indicated Applicant was offered a modification “of a lowered principal 
balance of $530,507.93, a 40-year maturity term, a 4.875% interest rate, a principal and 
interest payment of $2,514.33 per month, plus taxes and insurance of $828.51 per 
month.” Further, if Applicant “successfully makes the payments under the modification 
for three (3) years, the deferred unpaid principal amount of $227,370.54 will be 
forgiven.” Applicant created a new budget that showed he could afford this payment 
plan and will have a small surplus left over at the end of the month. The letter from his 
attorney indicated Applicant accepted the settlement agreement and would be making 
his first payment May 1, 2014. Applicant did not submit proof he made a payment 
according to the agreement.  (GE 2; GE 4; AE H; AE I; AE J; AE K; AE L; AE M; AE Q; 
AE DD; AE KK; AE LL; AE MM; Tr. 66-68, 86-90.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted in the approximate amount of $8,493 for a vehicle that was 
repossessed after he missed a couple of payments. Applicant worked out a payment 
agreement of $100 per month until this debt is satisfied as documented in a letter from 
this creditor. He made his first payment in September 2013 and is current on his 
payment agreement. This debt is being resolved.  (GE 2; AE D; AE E; AE Q; AE R; AE 
Y; AE Z; Tr. 52-57.) 
 
Applicant is indebted in the approximate amount of $121,000 for a second 
mortgage on a former residence. He purchased that property in 1996 for $170,000. 
After Applicant moved, he rented it to tenants. Applicant refinanced this property several 
times. He owed $480,000 on the primary mortgage and $121,000 on the second 
mortgage. The second mortgage had an adjustable rate and, when the interest rate 
adjusted, Applicant was not able to make his payments. He attempted to short sell the 
property, but the home was foreclosed upon by the bank. The second mortgage 
became an unsecured debt. However, when Applicant inquired into making payments 
on this debt, he received a letter from the creditor stating the debt was “a paid 
settlement.” He also received at 1099-C, cancellation of debt, stating that the creditor 
 
4 
 
discharged $115,975.17 of debt. This debt is resolved. (GE 2; AE F; AE R; Tr. 57-60, 
78-79, 86-89.) 
 
 Applicant’s credit report dated March 24, 2014, identified an additional delinquent 
debt of $2,600 owed on an installment loan, which was not identified on the SOR. 
Applicant testified that he paid this debt on September 26, 2013. He provided 
documentation showing the account was settled. Applicant also has a federal tax liability 
of approximately $25,000 from tax years 2010 through 2012. He has an installment 
agreement with the IRS and makes monthly payments of $350. He began making 
payments to the IRS on this debt in July 2012 and is current on the payments. Since his 
divorce, he has resolved eight other debts that had been delinquent. He testified he is 
committed to satisfy all remaining financial obligations. (AE U; AE W; AE FF; AE GG; 
AE HH; Tr. 84-85, 93.) 
 
  Applicant completed six on-line financial-counseling courses on May 4, 2014. He 
provided certificates of completion and a three-page outline of the lessons he learned 
from the courses as part of his post-hearing documentation. He wrote, in part: 
 
The main point I learned from this training is to live within your means. In 
order to do this, you have to constantly work on a budget that includes all 
expenditures and incomes. Another important item to include in your 
budget is to save for emergencies. This way where there is some 
additional unforeseen expense, you can take it out of this fund so there 
would be no need to obtain additional credit. I learned the importance of 
borrowing and the total cost of the loan. Lastly, working to clean up and 
improve you credit rating will save me money with respect to lower interest 
payments and fees. (AE JJ.) 
 
  Applicant presented two letters of recommendation. They attest to Applicant’s 
good character and praise him for his dedication. A letter from his pastor indicates 
Applicant is a “man of integrity, dedication, wisdom, and goodness.” (AE P.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.” The 
 
5 
 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
6 
 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant incurred approximately $210,505 in delinquent 
debt. The debts have been delinquent since at least 2010. In 2012, he filed a Chapter 
13 bankruptcy to stay a foreclosure action on his residence. While Applicant is making 
payments on the repossessed vehicle and his ex-wife’s student loan, in its entirety, the 
Government has established its prima facie case against Applicant. The evidence 
shows Applicant’s “inability or unwillingness to satisfy” his mortgage debt. He has an 
overall “history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 Four Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 were 
considered, and found applicable, including:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s ex-wife’s medical condition, an unexpected divorce, and the 
economic downturn in the real estate market were events beyond Applicant’s control, 
which contributed to his financial difficulties. They are unlikely to recur. He is addressing 
all four debts identified on the SOR. He is making payments on two of the debts and 
intends to satisfy both; one unsecured mortgage debt has been forgiven by the creditor; 
and he has recently reached a settlement agreement on the primary mortgage for his 
current residence. After many years of negotiation with the lender, his attorney has 
negotiated a monthly payment that he can afford. Applicant is acting responsibly, under 
the circumstances. He also satisfied or made payment arrangements with a number of 
other creditors not alleged on the SOR. While he offered no documentation to establish 
he made his first payment on the settlement offer from his primary mortgage holder, he 
has a documented history of following through on his recent repayment agreements. His 
actions show responsibility in addressing his delinquencies and give clear indications 
that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. He actively 
 
7 
 
addressed each of his debts in good faith, as his circumstances would allow. He was 
honest and upfront with the government about his delinquencies. Further, he has 
participated in financial counseling classes that will help him budget for emergencies in 
the future.  
 
The Appeal Board has held, “A security clearance adjudication is not a 
proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s personal debts. Rather, it is a proceeding 
aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”1 Security 
clearance adjudications regarding financial issues are not debt collection proceedings. 
The purpose is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make 
an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”2 Applicant’s 
financial circumstances do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. The facts established by the evidence under AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), 
and 20(d) are mitigating. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is well 
respected by his colleague and pastor, who wrote letters in his support. He performs 
well at his job. He has never had a security violation, though he has held a clearance for 
over 20 years. He responsibly reported his financial delinquencies to his facility security 
officer as the debts were becoming delinquent. His financial difficulties are attributable 
to a series of events that he could not control. He has acted responsibly by negotiating 
settlements and actively engaging his creditors to resolve his debts, demonstrating a 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 27, 2003). 
2 AG ¶ 2(a) 
 
8 
 
commitment to managing his finances. There is little likelihood of recurrence, or 
potential for coercion. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
