 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-03589 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Curtis L. Thomas, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concern raised by his repeated failure to file federal and state income tax 
returns as required. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 24, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing.2 At the hearing 
convened on March 27, 2014, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, as well 
as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, without objection. After the hearing, Applicant 
submitted AE E, a copy of his IRS Forms 1040 from 2005 to 2011, which I also admitted 
without objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on April 7, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, a 52-year-old software architect, has worked for a federal contractor 
since 2010. This is his first application for a security clearance. Married since 2010, 
Applicant has one infant child.3  
 
Applicant completed his security clearance application in December 2011. In 
response to questions regarding his financial record, Applicant disclosed that he failed 
to file federal and state income tax returns from 2004 to 2010. Although Applicant did 
not file his income tax returns, each year he did a calculation to determine his federal or 
state tax liability, if any. In 2004, Applicant calculated that he owed a federal tax liability 
of approximately $2,500. He paid the estimated tax liability and filed for an extension to 
file his income tax return. Applicant failed to file his federal 2004 tax return by the 
August 2005 extension deadline.4 
 
Between 2007 and 2009, Applicant was underemployed, earning less than 
$5,000 in gross income each of those years. In 2010, Applicant timely filed an extension 
request with the IRS; however, Applicant failed to file by the deadline. In January 2012, 
Applicant was interviewed by a background investigator and discussed his failure to file 
his federal and state income tax returns. He informed the investigator that he planned to 
file his outstanding income tax returns by the end of 2012 and that he intended to 
comply with federal and state income tax filing requirements in the future. However, 
Applicant filed his 2011 and 2012 federal income tax returns late and he did not have all 
of his outstanding federal and state income tax returns until June 2013. Applicant did 
not have any outstanding federal or state tax liabilities and was owed federal tax 
refunds for 2005 through 2010.  Applicant filed his 2013 federal and state income tax 
returns before the filing deadlines.5 
 
At first, Applicant did not file his income tax returns because he was busy. 
Expecting federal and state tax refunds, Applicant did not make filing his income tax 
returns a priority. As the years passed, he became disorganized and the task of filing so 
many returns became overwhelming. At the hearing, Applicant again vowed to comply 
with the federal and state income tax filing requirements in the future. Applicant testified 
                                                          
2 To assist in his preparation for the hearing, Applicant received correspondence from Department 
Counsel and the Chief Administrative Judge. These letters are appended to the record as Appellate 
Exhibits (AP) I through III. 
 
3 Tr. 17-18, 23-24; GE 1. 
 
4 Tr. 24, 22; GE 1-2; Answer. 
 
5 Tr. 20-21, 29-30; GE 1-2; AE A-E; Answer.  
 
3 
 
that he does not want to engage in any behavior that could negatively impact his ability 
to obtain or hold a security clearance. Although Applicant has not held a security 
clearance before, his job does require him to work with sensitive information protected 
by a federal statute. As a result, he is required to undergo annual training on the proper 
handling and protection of that information. Applicant has handled the security 
responsibilities related to this sensitive information without incident.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
6 Tr. 19-20, 27, 38-39, 44; GE 1-2. 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure to . . . meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”7 Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. The security concern under the financial considerations guideline is not 
limited to an applicant’s failure to pay monetary debt. As is alleged here, an applicant’s 
failure to file annual federal or state income tax returns, as required, also raises a 
concern and is potentially disqualifying.8  
 
Neither party presented evidence to establish whether or not Applicant was 
required to file federal and state income tax returns for the years alleged in the SOR. 
The SOR allegations and Applicant’s admissions to them are based on the supposition 
that all individuals who earn income are required to file federal and state income tax 
returns. This is not the case. Each year, the IRS and Applicant’s state of residency 
issue guidelines to the public outlining filing requirements.9 Applying the IRS and state 
guidance, Applicant was not required to file federal or state income tax returns for the 
2007 through 2009 tax years because his gross income fell below the minimum filing 
requirement.10 However, Applicant’s gross income exceeded the federal minimum gross 
income requirements for the 2004 through 2006 and 2010 through 2011 tax years.11 As 
such, he was required to file federal income tax returns for those years.12 Under the 
                                                          
7  AG ¶ 18. 
 
8 AG ¶ 19(g).  
 
9 The federal and state income tax filing guidelines, which are appended to the record as AP IV and V, 
are applied to this case over Department Counsel’s objection. The Government argues that it is beyond 
the scope of authority for a DOHA administrative judge to interpret IRS rules and regulations and apply 
them to a specific set of facts as necessary to determine whether or not Applicant had an obligation to file 
federal and state income taxes as alleged. Instead, the Government argues, that an administrative judge 
is limited to the facts established by the record evidence and cannot speculate as to how another agency 
would apply its regulation to those facts. However, the language of the disqualifying condition and the 
allegation necessitates a finding on whether or not Applicant was required to file federal and state income 
tax returns for the years alleged in the SOR. The parties’ positions on these issues are appended to the 
record as AP VI. 
 
10 AE E; See AP IV. 
 
11  AE E. 
 
12 See AP IV.  
 
5 
 
state rules, Applicant was required to file a state income tax return for each year he was 
required to file a federal return.13 The record contains evidence of Applicant’s multiple 
failures to perform duties required by law over an eight-year period.   
 
Applicant’s failure to file his federal and state income tax returns was not 
motivated by a desire to avoid any potential financial obligations to the Government. 
Applicant is not a tax protestor. However, this does not mitigate Applicant’s repeated 
failure to file his federal and state income tax returns on time. Nor is Applicant’s conduct 
mitigated by the fact the he was entitled to refunds for each of the years alleged in the 
SOR. While Applicant receives partial mitigation for filing his outstanding tax returns 
prior to the issuance of the SOR,14 he has not presented sufficient evidence to show 
that his failure to file will not recur in the future. Applicant’s failure to file his state and 
federal income tax returns was not caused by events beyond his control. He allowed his 
tax reporting obligations to fall victim to the banalities of life. He was busy, disorganized, 
and eventually overwhelmed by the seeming enormity of the task of filing state and 
federal income tax returns for multiple years. His assurances that he will comply with 
filing requirements in the future carry little weight because Applicant has timely filed his 
federal and state income tax returns only once in the last 10 years. Applicant’s failure to 
comply with state and federal income tax filing requirements continue to raise concerns 
about his judgment, reliability, and willingness to abide by rules and regulations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
After reviewing the record, I have doubts about Applicant’s current suitability for 
access to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concern 
raised by his history of failing to file his federal and state income tax returns as required. 
Because Applicant has not demonstrated a clear track record of rehabilitation or reform, 
it is not appropriate to grant him access to classified information at this time. However, 
the award of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on 
applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. 
Applicant, who has appropriately handled sensitive information relevant to his job 
requirements since 2010, may well establish a record of his a ability to comply with rules 
and regulations and honor his basic obligations to the Government. At this time, 
however, Applicant’s request for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
13 See AP V. 
 
14 AG ¶ 19(c). 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.b – 1.c:    Against Applicant15 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
15 With exception of tax years 2007 through 2009, for which Applicant was not required to file federal or 
state income tax returns.  
