 
1 
 
 
 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-04746 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher P. Heise, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) lists 28 collection, charged-off, or delinquent accounts totaling more than 
$38,000. He has addressed some, but not all of the delinquent accounts. Additionally, 
he provided false information on a security clearance questionnaire. He has failed to 
mitigate the financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns. Clearance 
is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on August 20, 
2013, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance. On September 23, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a hearing. On December 30, 2013, I was assigned the case. On December 
30, 2013, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing to be convened on January 15, 2014. Applicant requested a 
continuance in the case, which for good cause was granted. On February 19, 2014, a 
second Notice of Hearing was issued for a hearing to be held on March 3, 2014. Due to 
inclement weather the case was continued. On March 27, 2014, the third Notice of 
Hearing was issued for a hearing which was convened on April 14, 2014. 
 
 At the hearing, eight Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 8 and two Applicant’s 
Exhibits A and B were admitted, without objection. Applicant, his wife, and step-son 
testified at the hearing. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
information. Additional material (Ex. C through P) was submitted and admitted into the 
record without objection. On April 22, 2014, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted 14 delinquent obligations 
including unpaid taxes, collection, charged-off, and past–due accounts, which total 
$27,415. He denied 14 charged-off, collection, and past-due accounts, which total 
$11,422. He also denies the personal conduct factual allegations in SOR 2.a. His 
admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, 
and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old systems administrator who has worked for a defense 
contractor since May 2010, and seeks to maintain a secret clearance. (Ex. 2) He served 
honorably in the U.S. Air Force from April 1971 through May 1978. (Ex. 3) When 
discharged, he was a sergeant (E-4). (Ex. I) In his SOR Response he stated, “I have 
served in some capacity of the defense department for over 35 years.” A coworker who 
has known Applicant for 14 years and last worked with him in 2005, stated Applicant 
was a team player, polite, respectful, easy to work with, whose work ethic was 
professional and resourceful, and who was focused on results. (Ex. G) Another 
coworker who worked with Applicant for ten years and last worked with in him 2005, 
stated Applicant was professional, competent, had unquestioned integrity, was 
dedicated to doing his best, and “the only one we would ask for when we needed help 
with our secured computers.” (Ex. H)  
 
 From March 1987 through September 2005, Applicant worked for the 
Department of the Army. (Ex. 2) He was unemployed from September 2005 to January 
2006. From August 2009 through May 2010, he worked for a DoD contractor at an Army 
post. (Ex. 2) From May 2007 to June 2009, he worked full-time as a systems security 
engineer at a private company. He received severance pay when he left the company. 
(Ex. 2)  
 
 In September 2005, Applicant, then a GS 12, received a letter of unacceptable 
performance. (Tr. 52) A week later, he agreed to leave government service in lieu of 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
removal action for unacceptable work performance and a negotiated settlement 
agreement was signed (Ex. 5) between Applicant and the Department of the Army. That 
agreement reads in part: 
 
b. It is mutually recognized that management would have initiated removal 
proceedings under 5 CFR 432 based on his [Applicant’s] recent 
performance deficiencies documented in the memorandum for record 
attached hereto. (Ex. 5) 
 
 The agreement indicated Applicant would submit a discontinued service 
retirement application immediately after the effective date of his removal. (Ex. 5) The 
Agency agreed to support the retirement application. (Ex. 5) If the retirement application 
was disapproved, Applicant would return to work and immediately have his grade 
changed from GS 12, Step 5 to GS 11, Step 10. The grade change would reflect that it 
was at Applicant‘s request. (Ex. 5) Applicant states that after he filed a grievance he 
was given the option to retire or to take a downgrade in position. (Tr. 41-42) 
 
 In December 2005, three months after signing the negotiated settlement 
agreement, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions, 
Standard Form (SF) 86. (Ex. 4, Tr. 54) He answered “no” to question 22 which asked if 
during the previous seven years he had been fired from any job, quit after being told he 
would be fired, left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct, or left 
a job by mutual agreement following allegations of unsatisfactory performance. (Ex. 4) 
In January 2006, a month after completing his SF 86, Applicant completed a Declaration 
for Federal Employment. (Ex. 3) He answered “no” to question 12 which asked if during 
the previous five years he had been fired from any job, quit after being told he would be 
fired, or left by mutual agreement because of specific problems. (Ex. 3, Tr. 55) 
 
 Applicant, in his Personal Subject Interviews in early 2012, told the investigator 
he left in September 2005 after retiring from civil service employment. (Ex. 2) On 
December 2, 2011, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). He answered “no” when asked if had left a job within the last seven 
years following notice of unsatisfactory performance.  
 
 Applicant alleged he misinterpreted the questions about leaving a job after being 
told he would be fired. (Tr. 40) He interpreted the question to mean, did he have any 
problems before receiving the negative performance evaluation that resulted in his 
termination. (Tr. 40, 58) Additionally, he answered as he did because he had been 
allowed to retire from his position with the Department of the Army. (Tr. 56)  
 
 Applicant’s credit report dated December 2011, lists 11 delinquent accounts. (Ex. 
7) The April 2013 credit report, lists 15 of the delinquent SOR debts. (Ex. 8) During his 
PSI in early 2012, Applicant was asked about his delinquent accounts which are listed 
in the SOR. (Ex. 2) In May 2013, he answered written financial interrogatories. (Ex. 2) 
As of May 2013, his monthly net remainder (net monthly income less monthly expenses 
and monthly debt payments) was $2,898. (Ex. 2) From January 2012, the time of his 
interviews with an Office of Personnel Management agent when he was questioned 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
about his delinquent accounts, until the hearing in April 2014, he had made payments of 
$175 on the SOR debts. (Tr. 68, 95) He was unable to document payments to the IRS, 
but claimed he made a $100 payment. (Tr. 69)   
 
 In August 1999, Applicant filed for bankruptcy protection due to a divorce and 
debts. (Tr. 86) He stated his financial problems started in May 2006, when another 
divorce proceeding was commenced. (Ex. 2) In June 2005, Applicant cosigned on a 
loan when his stepson purchased a vehicle. (Ex. 7, Tr. 95) The loan went into default 
(SOR 1.n, $11,474). He now disputes this debt, and it was listed as disputed on his 
December 2011 credit report. (Ex. 7) He contacted the creditor on the loan and was told 
the lender could locate no delinquent account using his social security number. (Ex. N, 
O) 
 
 In 2007, Applicant purchased a $22,763 vehicle with $530 monthly payments. In 
late 2011, the loan went to default. (Ex. 2) Applicant stated he had made payments on 
the vehicle for four years and was told he still had to make payments for two additional 
years. (Tr. 32) He decided to allow the vehicle to go to repossession so he could use 
the money for other bills. (Tr. 34) The credit report indicates he was late 30 to 90 days 
for each of the 24 months prior the repossession. (Ex. 7, Tr. 88) At the time of the 
hearing, he had yet to contact this creditor to discuss the repayment of this debt. (Tr. 
67) Following the hearing, Applicant contacted the creditor who offered to settle the debt 
for $4,378. (Ex. J) The first payment was to be made on April 28, 2014. No 
documentation showing payment was received. Applicant currently drives a 2006 Ford 
car, on which he has missed some monthly payments, but has brought his vehicle 
payments current. (Tr. 36) 
 
 In 2007, Applicant entered into an on-line arrangement where he would receive 
checks, deposit them to his credit union account, withdraw ten percent as his fee, and 
forward the balance to a person by Western Union. (Tr. 31) He cashed two or three 
checks at his credit union. The checks were not honored and the credit union 
demanded repayment. (Ex. 2) He made a complaint with the FBI. (Tr. 32) At the time of 
the hearing, he had yet to contact his credit union to arrange repayment of this debt. (Tr. 
67) Following the hearing, Applicant paid $1,420 by debit card and obtained a $4,260 
loan to pay the balance of this debt. (Ex. M) 
 
 During his 2012 PSI, Applicant stated he had obtained two signature loans from 
the credit union (SOR 1.r, $414 and SOR 1.aa, $1,500). (Ex. 2) During the same PSI, 
he stated he would start making monthly payments on the accounts “as soon as 
possible.” (Ex. 2) He provided documentation showing any payments made to resolve 
these two debts. 
 
 In 2010, Applicant took out a $5,280 loan to repay two previous loans used to 
purchase a vehicle. (Ex. O) In April 2012, the note was paid in full.  
 
 In 2011, Applicant worked for two divisions of his company at two separate 
locations. When his 2011 taxes were prepared and submitted in 2012, one W-2 showing 
$28,000 in income was not reported on his federal income return. (Tr. 46) The error in 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
reporting resulted in $5,800 of additional taxes owed. He asserted, but did not 
document, that he and the IRS had an agreement whereby he initially paid $100 
monthly on his back taxes. Applicant asserts the first three checks he sent the IRS were 
returned. (Tr. 49) Applicant asserted, but did not document, that he arranged a new 
agreement with the IRS whereby he was to pay $85 monthly. (Tr. 47, 49) In February 
2013, he asserted he was paying this debt. (Ex. 2) On April 15, 2014, the day after the 
hearing, he sent the IRS two checks paying the balance on the back taxes. (Ex. E) He 
presented the front side of the two checks, but failed to show the checks were 
negotiated or that he had made any previous payment to the IRS.  
 
From July 2010 to October 2011, Applicant employed a debt consolidation 
company paying them $40 monthly. (Ex. 2) He stopped the service when he realized 
the company was not making significant progress on his debts. The company had 
submitted letters disputing his debts, but he received no response to those dispute 
letters. (Tr. 65) No debt counseling was received from this company. (Ex. 2) Between 
October 2011, when he left the company, and March 2014, the date of his second 
scheduled hearing, he took no action to dispute any of his delinquent accounts 
discussed in his 2012 PSIs. (Tr. 66) 
 
 In March 2014, the day before Applicant’s second scheduled hearing appearance 
he entered into a debt management agreement with a new company. (Ex. B, L, Tr. 27, 
66) The agreement requires him to pay a $40 monthly maintenance fee plus a $296 
monthly payment. A portion of this monthly payment is then to be applied to 17 
accounts listed in the agreement. (Ex. B) Applicant was to pay $75 to establish the 
account and was to make the initial $336 payment on April 10, 2014. (Ex. B) Additional 
monthly payments were to be made on the 28th of every month thereafter. The 
agreement also authorized the company to electronically transfer $336 from his 
checking account each month starting May 28, 2014. (Ex. B) The company sent an 
email stating a $75 draft had been submitted to his bank account on April 7, 2014 and 
another draft of $336 was scheduled for April 28, 2014. (Ex. K) No documentation was 
received showing payments made under the agreement. He asserted he intended to 
continue paying this company. (Tr. 97) He received very limited financial counseling by 
telephone from the company. (Tr. 37, 94)  
 
 Applicant has had four surgeries in the last two years to remove a kidney stone, 
prostate surgery, to repair a triple hernia, and hip surgery. (Tr. 26, 74) The SOR lists a 
delinquent dental bill (SOR 1.y, $200) for service received in February 2011, a hospital 
bill (SOR 1.z, $250) for service received in May 2011, and 12 delinquent medical bills, 
which total $1,949. Applicant had federal retirement health insurance and health 
insurance from his DoD contractor. (Tr. 73) During his 2012 PSI, he stated he would 
start that month making monthly payments on the dentist account. This he never did. 
(Ex. 2) On April 22, 2014, one week after the hearing Applicant paid the $200 dental bill 
for the treatment received in May 2011. (Ex. 2) During his 2012 PSI, he stated he had 
made two monthly payments of $25 each and would continue with monthly payments 
until the balance was paid. (Ex. 2) He provided no documentation of payment of this 
debt.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 Applicant denied 11 delinquent medical accounts (SOR 1.a, b, c, e, f, g, j, k, t, w, 
and x). Each of the medical debts was less than $500. In his PSI, he asserted the debts 
listed in SOR 1. a and 1.b ($32 and $30) had been paid. However, these two debts are 
listed in Applicant’s March 2014 debt management agreement. The debt management 
agreement also lists the medical debt listed in SOR 1.e ($268), SOR 1.g ($93), SOR 
1.w ($200), and SOR 1.y ($114). (Ex. B) The debt management agreement lists an 
additional $204 medical debt, which Applicant did not indicate was SOR debt.  
 
 The debt management agreement includes a $142 delinquent account for 
television service (SOR 1.d), a $144 debt for telephone service (SOR 1.i), a $472 credit 
card debt (SOR 1.o), a $248 debt for garbage service (SOR 1.u) and a $2,391 bank 
debt (SOR 1.p). (Ex. B) The debt management agreement also contains four other 
creditors: $629, $268, $568, and $956. Applicant failed to indicate which SOR debts, if 
any, these four accounts referenced. 
 
During Applicant’s 2012 PSIs, he stated he was disputing an internet service 
debt (SOR 1.h, $141) indicating he was overcharged. (Ex. 2) However, in his 2012 
PSIs, he said he would make payment on this account after paying off the repayment 
agreements he had already established. (Ex. 2) He provided no documentation 
substantiating the basis of the dispute or showing the action had been resolved. The 
same debt is listed in SOR 1.s ($141). 
 
Applicant’s annual salary with the DoD contractor is $78,000. (Tr. 79) He makes 
$11,000 annual from a part-time job at a home improvement store. A division of his 
federal retirement provided him with $34 monthly and his ex-wife receives $385 
monthly. (Tr. 78) His current wife’s annual salary is approximately $82,000. (Tr. 79) The 
household’s annual gross income is more than $171,000. He has a $1,600 monthly 
mortgage payment on a $172,000 home. (Tr. 80) His wife has $240 monthly car 
payment. (Tr. 81) He pays $450 monthly for his health insurance. (Tr. 82) His wife owns 
two rental properties. One of the properties recently suffered fire damage. (Tr. 103) The 
properties’ expenses are covered by the rent received. (Tr. 84) Monthly auto and 
property insurance is $338. (Tr. 84) His wife has a $664 loan payment. (Tr. 85)  
 
 Applicant is helping to support his stepson who receives $2,896 monthly social 
security disability payments following five back surgeries. (Tr. 113) He is totally 
disabled. (Tr. 108) The stepson’s wife is a school teacher with a $21,000 annual 
income. (Tr. 113) Applicant’s wife helps her son financially by paying his rent ($995) 
each month and helps pay for groceries, doctor bills for him and his two children, and 
other expenses. (Ex. 34, 109) Applicant and his wife married in January 2007, but have 
known each other for forty-nine years. (Tr. 38) There have been times when their 
employment required them to maintain two households and the expenses associated 
with each. (Tr. 90)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. The SOR lists 28 delinquent 
accounts which totaled in excess of $38,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Following the hearing, Applicant paid three SOR debts: the $200 dentist bill 
(SOR 1.y) that had been delinquent since February 2011 and paid his credit union debt 
(SOR 1.m, $5,681), and his federal taxes for tax year 2011 (SOR 1.bb, $5,000). The 
mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does apply to these three debts, and I find for 
him on these debts.  
 
 Applicant has had four surgeries which resulted in delinquent medical bills of less 
than $2,000. He maintained health insurance from his DoD contractor job and as a 
retired federal employee. Following the hearing, he has included some of the delinquent 
medical accounts in a debt management agreement. Due to him having medical 
insurance when the treatment was obtained and due to the small amounts of the 
medical debts, six of which were under $100 each and all of which were under $500 
each, I find for Applicant as to the delinquent medical accounts.  
 
In Applicant’s 2012 PSI, he admitted obtaining two loans from his credit union 
and stated he would start making payment on them as soon as possible. He provided 
no documentation showing payment on the obligations. I find against Applicant as to 
SOR 1.r ($414) and SOR 1.aa ($1,500). 
 
In March 2014, Applicant entered into a debt management agreement. The 
agreement requires him to pay a $40 monthly maintenance fee plus a $296 monthly 
payment. A portion of this monthly payment is then to be applied to 17 accounts listed in 
the agreement. He paid $75 to set up the account and was required by the wording of 
the agreement to make the initial $336 payment on April 10, 2014. This he did not do. 
Additional monthly payments were to be made by electronic transfer on the 28th of every 
month starting May 28, 2014. He asserted he intended to continue with his payments 
once they start. The company sent an email stating a $75 draft had been submitted to 
his bank account on April 7, 2014. There is no documentation showing the $336 draft, 
scheduled for April 28, 2014, was made. 
 
 The debt management agreement included the following SOR debts: SOR 1.a 
$32), SOR 1.b ($30), SOR 1.d ($142), SOR 1.g ($93), SOR 1.i ($144), SOR 1.l 
($1,288), SOR 1.o ($472), SOR 1.p ($2,391), (SOR 1.q ($2,552), SOR 1.u ($248), SOR 
1.w ($200), and SOR 1.x ($144). The debt management agreement also contains 
payment arrangements with four additional creditors: $629, $268, $568, and $956, 
however, Applicant failed to indicate which SOR debts, if any, these accounts 
referenced.  
 
A promise to make future payments is insufficient to establish a “meaningful track 
record” of financial responsibility. The concept of “meaningful track record” includes 
evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. An applicant is not required 
to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is 
required is for him to demonstrate he has established a plan to resolve his delinquent 
debt and has taken significant action to implement that plan. There is no requirement 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a 
reasonable plan may provide for payment on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there 
is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt 
plan be the ones listed in the SOR. He has made a repayment plan but has only paid 
the $75 set-up fee. This does not constitute significant action to implement the plan.  
 
 The current debt management agreement must be viewed in the context of 
Applicant’s prior conduct. In his 2012 PSIs, he made similar promises to pay his debts 
which he failed to meet. It is noted the debts have existed for a number of years. He 
was made aware of the Government’s concern about his finances during his 2012 PSIs, 
his May 2013 written financial interrogatories, and in the August 2013 SOR. Although 
aware of the Government’s concerns he appeared at the hearing having paid less than 
$200 on his debts. Without payment on the new agreement, he has failed to establish a 
track record. Although the debt management agreement lists the debts in SOR 1.d 
($142), SOR 1.i ($144), SOR 1.l ($1,245), SOR 1.o ($472), SOR 1.p. ($2,337), SOR 1.q 
($2,477), and SOR 1.u ($248), the agreement without a history of payments does not 
mitigate these debts. 
 
 For similar reasons, I find against Applicant as to the debt listed in SOR 1.n 
(currently $14,624) arising from a vehicle repossession. Following the hearing, he 
provided an offer whereby the creditor agreed to settle the debt for $4,378. However, he 
failed to provide any documentation that he accepted the offer or made any payment in 
accord with the offer. The first payment was to be made on April 28, 2014, following the 
hearing. 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to the telephone 
service charge listed in SOR 1.h ($141), because Applicant has not provided 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the disputed account. He disputed this 
debt, but stated in his 2012 PSIs that he would pay the account. I find against Applicant 
as to SOR 1.h. SOR 1.s ($141) is a duplication of this debt, and I find for him as to SOR 
1.s due to the duplication. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to the debt listed in SOR 1.v 
($5,955). Applicant admits cosigning with his stepson on a vehicle that was later 
repossessed. He now disputes the debt and sent letters to each of the credit bureaus 
disputing the debt. He also says he talked to the bank, but he provided no proof that the 
loan on which he cosigned has been paid or otherwise resolved. I find against him as to 
SOR 1.v. ($5,955). 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Applicant received 
limited financial counseling by telephone from the debt management company. It is too 
soon to state his financial difficulties are resolved or are under control. I conclude 
Guideline F against Applicant.  
 
Personal Conduct  
 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 15 articulates the security concerns relating to 
personal conduct: 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
 (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 In September 2005, Applicant received a letter of unacceptable performance. He 
agreed to leave government service in lieu of removal action for unacceptable work 
performance and a negotiated settlement agreement. The agreement stated 
management would have initiated removal proceedings based on Applicant’s recent 
performance deficiencies.  
 
 Applicant agreed to submit a discontinued service retirement application 
immediately after the effective date of his removal, and the Agency agreed to support 
the retirement application. Three months after signing the negotiated settlement 
agreement, Applicant completed an SF 86 in which he answered “no” to question 22. 
The question asked if he had been fired from any job, quit after being told he would be 
fired, left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct, or left a job by 
mutual agreement following allegations of unsatisfactory performance during the 
previous seven years. A month after completing his SF 86, he completed a Declaration 
for Federal Employment in which he answered “no” to a question which asked if during 
the previous five years he had been fired from any job, quit after being told he would be 
fired, or left by mutual agreement because of specific problems.  
 
 Applicant, in his Personal Subject Interviews in early 2012, told the investigator 
he left in September 2005 after retiring from civil service employment. He never 
mentioned he left by mutual agreement following allegations of unsatisfactory duty 
performance. Six years later, in December 2011, he completed an Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) in which he answered “no” when 
asked if had left a job within the last seven years following notice of unsatisfactory 
performance.  
 
 
12 
 
 
 
 
 I do not believe Applicant’s explanation that he misinterpreted the questions 
about leaving a job after being told he would be fired. None of the personal conduct 
mitigating conditions apply. The concealed information was relevant to a clearance 
decision. Applicant did not disclose his termination even at his subject interview. His 
failure to disclose that he left his job after allegations of unsatisfactory performance 
shows a lack of candor required of cleared personnel. The Government has an interest 
in examining all relevant and material adverse information about an applicant before 
making a clearance decision. The Government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose 
adverse information in a timely fashion, not when they perceive disclosure to be prudent 
or convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about 
himself provides some indication of his lack of willingness to report inadvertent security 
violations or other security concerns in the future, something the Government relies on 
to perform damage assessments and limit the compromise of classified information. 
Applicant’s conduct suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate 
Government interests. Guideline E, personal conduct, is resolved against Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s efforts to address his 
delinquent accounts have been minimal. At the time of the hearing, Applicant’s gross 
household income was in excess of $170,000. He had paid less than $200 on the SOR 
debts. After his hearing, he provided proof that he paid 1.m ($5,681), the dentist bill 
(SOR 1.y, $200), and his taxes (SR 1.bb, $5,000). As of 2012, he knew of the 
Government concern about his delinquent debts.  
 
The Government does not have to prove that an applicant poses a clear and 
present danger to national security, or that an applicant poses an imminent threat of 
engaging in criminal acts. Instead, it is sufficient to show that an applicant has a history 
 
13 
 
 
 
 
of unresolved financial difficulties that may make him more vulnerable to financial 
pressures. Additionally, Applicant provided false answers on numerous government 
security questionnaires which specifically asked if he had left a job by mutual agreement 
following allegations of unsatisfactory performance.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to meet the 
financial considerations security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not 
a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying 
and mitigating, to the evidence presented. In the future, if Applicant has paid his 
delinquent obligations, established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise 
substantially addressed his past-due obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive 
evidence of his security worthiness as to financial considerations. However, a clearance 
at this time is not warranted.  
 
His long-standing failure to repay his creditors, at least in reasonable amounts, or 
to arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance as does his falsification of his answers on security clearance 
questionnaires. Overall, Applicant has failed to mitigate the financial considerations and 
personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, financial considerations:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e – 1.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j and 1.k:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.n – 1.r:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.s and 1.t:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.u and 1.v:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.w - 1.z:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.aa:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.bb:    For Applicant    
    
 Paragraph 2, personal conduct:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
   
 
14 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
