 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )   ISCR Case No. 13-01093 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Laura J. Baker, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on February 28, 2013. On 
November 20, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) citing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence). DOD 
acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR and timely requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 28, 2014. A notice of 
hearing was issued on March 10, 2014, scheduling the hearing for March 27, 2014.  
The hearing was postponed for good cause and rescheduled for April 24, 2014. 
 
2 
 
 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted Applicant 
Exhibits (AX) A-P, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript 
(Tr.) on May 2, 2014.  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and Taiwan. The request and supporting 
documents are attached to the record as HX I. Applicant also presented administrative 
notice and supporting documents. (HX II) I admitted the documents into the record and 
took administrative notice as requested by Department Counsel and Applicant. The 
facts administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR 
under Guideline B and offered explanations. She provided additional information to 
support her case. Her admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in 
my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant was born and educated in Taiwan, receiving a university degree. 
Applicant came to the United States 33 years ago (1979), and became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in September 1981. In December 1980, she married an American citizen 
who worked abroad in various locations. She accompanied him and lived in Taiwan, 
Moscow, Pakistan, Spain, and China. They are now divorced. Applicant received 
another degree from a U.S. university. During that time, she worked for the U.S. 
government and had clearances from another agency. This is her first application for a 
DOD security clearance. (GX 1)   
 
Since 2010, Applicant has been the CEO of her own consulting firm. The 
company provides technological service to federal government agencies. (Tr. 24) She 
employs about 100 persons, including her son and daughter, who are both U.S. 
citizens. (Tr. 23)  She has worked as a defense contractor since 1999. (GX 1) All of 
Applicant’s business interests are in the United States. 
 
 From 2004 until 2006, Applicant worked for a quasi-governmental organization 
in Taiwan as a senior systems engineer. The company promotes information technology 
(IT) services. Applicant translated information. She noted that this was the only job that 
she could find. (Tr. 51) Applicant began this work shortly after she visited her mother 
who was ill. In 2005, Applicant wanted to spend some time with her mother whom she 
rarely saw. Applicant spent 18 months in Taiwan. She did not have any contacts with 
Taiwanese officials. (Tr. 52) 
 
Applicant’s two half brothers are citizens and residents of China. They are both 
retired. She has not seen them, except for five times in 32 years, nor does she have 
 
3 
 
 
direct phone contact with them. They do not speak English or use the internet. They 
have not served in the military. Applicant acknowledged that she has no communication 
with her half sister who is a citizen and resident of China. In fact, she has never met her. 
(AX B)  Applicant’s mother died in 2008.  
 
Applicant’s three former co-workers are citizens and residents of Taiwan. Two of 
them are a married couple, who temporarily lived in one of Applicant’s rental properties 
in the United States. (Tr. 41) They no longer do so. Applicant has seen them twice in 
the last five years. (Tr. 26) Applicant sponsored them for work visas (H-1B) and they 
both work in public trust positions for her company. The third person works as a 
computer programmer in a federal agency that her company supports as a contractor. 
(AX B) 
 
 Applicant’s company sponsors two Indian citizens who reside in the United 
States. One person has received a green card and works as a software developer for a 
federal agency. The second person has applied for a green card and works as a web 
developer for a U.S. Government agency in the United States. A third person no longer 
works for Applicant and she has no contact with her.  
 
A co-worker who is a citizen of Malaysia and resides in the United States has a 
green card. He works as a senior developer for a federal agency.  
 
 Applicant maintains contact with a friend who is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. 
Applicant met her in 2005, but she is now retired. Her husband is a U.S. citizen.  She 
talks to her friend via Skype or Google talk about once a month.  
 
A high school friend of Applicant’s, who lives in South Africa, is a dual citizen of 
Taiwan and South Africa. Applicant has met with her less than five times in the last 30 
years. They seldom communicate.  
 
Applicant has a college friend who is a dual citizen of Taiwan and Canada, but 
resides in Canada. Applicant acknowledges that she sees her once every five years.  
 
Applicant explained that she takes great pride in providing employment to a 
diverse set of people and makes it her personal mission to help them find success in the 
United States as she did. (Tr. 23) She noted that a background check is completed on 
employees who are foreign nationals. Since the projects serve the federal government, 
all of the workers are required to have a clearance process. This security clearance 
process is conducted by the U.S. government. 
 
In 2006 and 2011, Applicant traveled to Taiwan for a conference as part of her 
employment with a contractor. She reported such travel to authorities. (Tr. 30)  She 
stated that she has never been contacted by anyone from Taiwan seeking employment 
in her firm. (Tr. 42) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant is involved in the community. She is a member of the Taiwanese 
American Chamber of Commerce. (Tr. 63)  She and her son are also involved in various 
charitable organizations. She traveled to Afghanistan last year with her son to distribute 
clothing, shoes, books, and computers to children. Applicant reports and registers the 
project and trips with the U.S. Embassy.   
 
 In 2014, Applicant testified before a Senate committee concerning U.S. Taiwan 
relations and their role in regional prosperity and stability. She spoke about the 20 years 
of environmental cooperation between the United States and Taiwan. She noted that 
Taiwan participates in about 60 international organizations as well as hundreds of 
international NGOs. (AX 1) 
 
 A federal contractor praised Applicant’s firm and noted that since 2012, the 
company has been a major partner to a large government agency. Applicant’s company 
has supported its mission to enhance emergency services. Applicant and her staff were 
described as hard working, dedicated individuals who support and serve the  public. (AX 
G) 
 
Administrative Notice  
 
 China is an increasingly industrialized world economic and military power. The 
country has a population in excess of one billion people who are governed by an 
authoritarian, communist regime. Geographically vast and developmentally diverse, the 
country has significant natural resources to help support its growing economy. China 
devotes most of its industry and domestic production to its military forces, and it has a 
strategic nuclear arsenal. China is in direct competition with the United States in many 
geopolitical and economic areas, and is known to actively collect military, economic, 
and industrial information from and about the United States. In 2012, it was reported to 
Congress that the Chinese are the world’s most active and persistent perpetrators of 
economic espionage. Chinese attempts to collect U.S. technological and economic 
information will continue at a high level and will represent a growing and persistent 
threat to U.S. economic security. The nature of the cyber threat will evolve with 
continuing technological advances in the global information environment. 
 
 However, China and the United States are also major trading partners and share 
other common interests. After the terrorists attacks of September 2001, the two 
countries worked closely in counter-terrorism efforts. China and the United States also 
have worked closely on regional issues, especially those involving North Korea. 
However, U.S.-China relations are sometimes complicated by events in Taiwan and 
Hong Kong. China is one of the most active collectors of U.S. defense information and 
technology. 
 
 The Chinese government has an abysmal human rights record. Officials continue 
to engage in suppression of personal and electronic expressions of political dissent. 
Arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture, and other prisoner 
 
5 
 
 
mistreatment are commonplace. Government and law enforcement practices are largely 
unchecked by any independent review. 
 
 Taiwan is a modern democracy with vibrant public participation during which 
demonstrations may become confrontational. The U.S. Department of State urges 
caution within the vicinity of any public demonstrations. Overall crime is noted as low.   
 
 Taiwan has a close relationship with the United States in international trade, 
scientific and technological cooperation, environmental protection, and security 
protection.  The United States recently emphasized its friendship with Taiwan and its 
commitment to strengthening U.S.-Taiwan relations through Taiwan Relations Act. 
 
      Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
 
6 
 
 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case.  First, 
a disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” (AG ¶ 7(a)) Second, a disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information.”  AG 7(b) 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen from Taiwan. She has lived in the United 
States since 1979. She was married to a U.S. citizen and as a result of the marriage, 
her two adult children are U.S. citizens.  She has two half brothers and a half sister who 
are citizens and residents of China and Hong Kong. She maintains contact with a friend 
who is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. Applicant visited her ill mother in 2005 and 
worked for a quasi-governmental organization, while in Taiwan with her mother. But her 
mother is now deceased. The other persons listed are either employees who are living 
in the United States or friends who reside in other countries.     
 
A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 
01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has ties of 
affection to family members who are citizen-residents of China and Taiwan. Her contact 
with them ranges from calls to visits. Applicant has not rebutted this presumption.  
 
After considering the totality of Applicant’s family ties as well as each individual 
tie, I conclude that Applicant’s family ties are sufficient to raise a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Applicant traveled 
to Taiwan several times for work and to visit family. Based on all these circumstances, I 
conclude that AG ¶¶ 7(a) and, (b) are raised.   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
 
8 
 
 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). China engages in economic and industrial espionage, and it has 
been involved in incidents involving illegal importation of restricted, dual-use technology 
from the United States. Applicant lived and worked in Taiwan, not China.  Taiwan does 
not pose the same heightened risk in industrial espionage. For these reasons, I 
conclude that AG ¶ 8(a) is established.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing “there is no 
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant is a U.S. citizen and was educated in the United States. I accept her claim 
that she is a loyal American. She has longstanding ties and relationships in the United 
States, and a long career working for U.S. national interests, both abroad and stateside. 
She is the founder and CEO of a growing business that supports U.S. government 
missions. Her two children are U.S. citizens and work with her in the United States. Her 
half brothers and sister have no knowledge of her work. She has not even met her half 
sister. Her other family members are in the United States. She has spoken about her 
undivided loyalty to the United States. All of Applicant’s business interests are in the 
United States. Applicant travels to Taiwan for her work and has reported the travel. The 
employees that were hired and mentioned in the SOR have been screened by the 
United States government in background investigations. I find Applicant has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in America that she can be expected to 
resolve any conflict between the interests of the United States and the interests of her 
contacts in China or Taiwan in favor of the United States. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 
8(b) is established.  
 
 On balance, Applicant has met her burden of persuasion in response to the 
Government’s case. The security concerns about possible foreign influence are 
mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
9 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 I have evaluated the facts presented in this case and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under Guideline B. I have also reviewed the case in the 
context of the whole-person factors. Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen. She has 
longstanding ties and relationships in the United States.  Her immediate family is in the 
United States. Her financial assets are substantial and in the United States. She has no 
foreign business interests. Applicant has worked for many years in missions supporting 
the United States.  
 
 Applicant’s half brothers and half sister have no knowledge of Applicant’s work.  
Applicant’s primary concern is for her children and her business. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude she has carried 
her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a-1.k:                                                   For Applicant 
           
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
