 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00561 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, 
but failed to mitigate the concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 17, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The DOD acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 22, 2013, and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
 
2 
 
 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on February 27, 2014. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant and she received it on March 28, 2014. Applicant was given an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She 
submitted one document, Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted into the record 
without objection. The case was assigned to me on April 30, 2014.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of facts 
concerning the country of Pakistan.1 Department Counsel provided supporting 
documents that verify detail and provide context for these facts in the Administrative 
Notice request. See the Pakistan section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, 
for the material facts from Department Counsel’s submissions on Pakistan.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.2 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted all the allegations, and provided 
explanations concerning the personal conduct allegations. Those admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old. She was born in Afghanistan in 1972. Her mother took 
her and two brothers to Pakistan in 1989 after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, where 
they were registered as refugees. She remained in Pakistan while her parents and 
some siblings immigrated to the United States in 2001. She married in 2000 and she 
and her husband came to the United States as refugees in 2001. She became a 
naturalized citizen of the United States in 2010. She worked as a linguist for a defense 
contractor from December 2011 to September 2013. She has taken some college 
courses. She has never held a security clearance.4   
  
 Applicant’s brother (B1) was born in Afghanistan in 1982. He is a citizen of 
Afghanistan and currently resides in Pakistan. He left Afghanistan with Applicant and 
                                                          
1 FORM p. 2. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). 
 
3 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
4 Items 4-6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
their mother in 1989. He remained in Pakistan and became a dentist until he immigrated 
to the United States in February 2001. Later, he met and married a Pakistani-born 
resident of the United States. After he obtained his U.S. permanent resident card, he 
and his wife moved to Pakistan in 2007 so his wife could be closer to her family. He 
continues to work as a dentist in Pakistan. Applicant states she has not had contact with 
him since 2008.5 
 
 On December 13, 2011, Applicant completed her security clearance application 
(EQIP). In completing section 18, which asks for information about all relatives, living or 
deceased, she listed three brothers: B2, B3, and B1. She failed to list two deceased 
brothers (B4 and B5) and two living brothers (B6 and B7). All of her brothers except for 
B1 reside in the United States. On December 29, 2011, during an interview by a counter 
intelligence screener, she would not provide contact information for her brothers until 
the screener explained multiple times that it was a requirement. She also stated she 
intentionally did not list her living brothers on the application form because she is 
embarrassed by their actions and not close to them. She became estranged from her 
living brothers because she converted to a different religion when she married her 
husband, who is now deceased. She did not list her deceased brothers because their 
deaths were “very sad.”6 
 
 Applicant provided supporting letters from three service members who worked 
with her in deployed locations under combat conditions. She is described as 
“industrious, brave, selfless, and intelligent” by one officer. Another officer described her 
as, “one of our most skilled linguists.” A third officer, an Army colonel, stated she 
“exhibited decorum and professionalism required at a diplomatic level.” She also 
received two certicates of appreciation from the units she supported during her 
deployments.7 
 
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic with a population of more than 167 
million people. After September 11, 2001, Pakistan supported the United States and an 
international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom to remove the Taliban from 
power. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in the Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan and in the Balochistan Province, which 
borders Iran and Afghanistan. The leaders of the Taliban operate openly in Pakistan, as 
do extremists from the Pakistani Taliban and Al Qaida. Taliban financing has been 
traced from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to 
strengthen its military and technical capabilities. Pakistan has intensified its 
counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has been mixed. 
                                                          
5 Items 3-7. 
 
6 Items 4-7. 
 
7 Item 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The U.S. State Department has defined several areas of Pakistan to be terrorist 
safe havens. The security situation in Afghanistan worsened in 2008, driven in part by 
insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous Afghan-
Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide vital 
sanctuary to Al Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups. 
Al-Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the Afghan 
insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and Western interests 
in Pakistan and worldwide. Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremists 
groups, Al Qaida uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare 
regional and transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and 
supplies. Al Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of destabilizing suicide 
attacks throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high-profile government, military, and 
western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in 2008 due to such attacks. 
In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan conducted at least 40 
suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed about 600 Pakistani 
civilians and security force personnel.   
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to 
Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several American citizens present in 
Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other reasons. The human rights situation 
in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, and disappearances occur. 
Arbitrary arrests occur and governmental and police corruption is widespread. The 
Pakistani government maintains several domestic intelligence agencies to monitor 
politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
intelligence agents. Credible reports indicate that authorities use wiretaps and monitor 
mail without the requisite court approval, and also monitor phones and electronic 
messages. In addition, Pakistan continues to develop its own nuclear infrastructure, 
expand nuclear weapon stockpiles, and seek more advanced warhead and delivery 
systems. In the aftermath of Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United 
States cut off military aid to Pakistan for several years.  
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the United States in 
counterterrorism. Pakistan committed to elimination of terrorist camps on the Pakistan-
Afghanistan border and subsequently sent thousands of troops and sustained hundreds 
of casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency efforts, 
and demonstrated determination and persistence in combating militants. The United 
States is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster Pakistan’s military forces and 
security. In 2003, President Bush announced that the United States would provide 
Pakistan with $3 billion in economic and military aid over the next five years beginning 
in 2005. On May 1, 2011, U.S. Special Forces personnel raided a large al-Qaida 
compound located in Pakistan where they found and killed Osama bin Laden, the leader 
of al-Qaida. He was found in a residential neighborhood in Pakistan.   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant’s brother, B1, is a citizen of Afghanistan and currently resides in 
Pakistan. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, their immediate family members. Applicant attempted to rebut this 
presumption by stating that she has not had contact with B1 since 2008. Applicant’s 
relationship with her brother living in Pakistan is sufficient to create “a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” It creates a 
concern about Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology” and 
her desire to help her relative in Pakistan. For example, if the Pakistan government or 
terrorists in Pakistan wanted to expose Applicant to coercion, it could exert pressure on 
her brother living there. Applicant would then be subject to indirect coercion through her 
relationship with her brother and classified information could potentially be 
compromised. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Pakistan 
is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has 
a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
 
7 
 
 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members and friends are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member or friend is associated with or dependent 
upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations 
against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
The relationship of Pakistan with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her relationship 
with her relative living in Pakistan does not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where she might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist her relative living in Pakistan who might be coerced by 
terrorists or other governmental entities in Pakistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”8 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or 
her relative living in Pakistan, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
Although Applicant’s communications with her brother have been limited, she continues 
to feel an obligation to him and affection for him. Department Counsel produced 
substantial evidence to raise the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. Both AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about 
potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
The relevant conditions under AG ¶ 8 that could mitigate foreign influence 
security concerns are as follows:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
                                                          
8 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant has limited contact with her brother living in Pakistan. The amount of 
contacts between an applicant and relatives living in a foreign country is not the only 
test for determining whether someone could be coerced through their relatives. 
Because of her connections to her brother, Applicant is not able to fully meet her burden 
of showing there is little likelihood of a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.  
 
Applicant’s relationships in the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by her relationships with her relative who lives in 
Pakistan. There is no evidence that terrorists, criminals, the Pakistan government, or 
those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or her brother in 
Pakistan to coerce Applicant or her brother for classified or sensitive information. 
Applicant has not yet received access to classified information and as such, there is a 
reduced possibility that Applicant or her family would be specifically selected as targets 
for improper coercion or exploitation. The evidence shows that Applicant has supported 
U.S. interests and performed dangerous duty as a translator assigned to military units in 
Afghanistan. Her military supervisors have commended her duty performance. This 
goes a long way to show deep loyalties toward the United States and indicates that she 
would resolve conflicts in favor of U.S. interests.  AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited 
applicability, but ¶ 8(b) fully applies. Applicant mitigated this security concern. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
9 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant admitted to providing intentionally false information about her brothers. 
AG ¶ 8(a) applies. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and found the following relevant: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
  Although Applicant eventually provided truthful information about her brothers’ 
status, it was only after the investigator repeatedly questioned her about the subject. 
This does not constitute prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the falsification. AG ¶ 17(a) 
does not apply. 
Intentionally failing to provide truthful and complete information on a security 
clearance application is never a minor offense. Her untruthful answers cast doubt on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
10 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support denial of Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
toward approval of her clearance at this time. She faithfully supported the U.S. military 
efforts in Afghanistan through her translator duties; however, her admitted intentional 
lack of candor about her brothers’ status when filling out her security clearance 
application is cause for concern. Therefore, she failed to provide sufficient evidence to 
mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
although Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign 
influence, she failed to mitigate the concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a (1-3):    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
