 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 13-01181 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on March 13, 2013. 
On December 12, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The DOD acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 22, 2014, and requested a decision on 
the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written 
case on March 19, 2014. On March 25, 2014, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
 
 2
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He 
received the FORM on April 1, 2014. DOHA received no response from him by the due 
date of May 1, 2014. However, he responded and submitted additional documents that 
were received on May 6, 2014. Department Counsel did not object to the untimely 
submission, and it has been included in the record. The case was assigned to me on 
May 7, 2014.  
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.d.1 He denied ¶ 1.e. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 71-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since June 1985. In his response to the FORM, he stated that he 
has been a facility security officer (FSO) for 11 years. He served in the U.S. Marine 
Corps Reserve from April 1961 to April 1967, held a security clearance while in the 
Marines, and received an honorable discharge. Applicant married in January 1965. He 
and his wife have two adult children. He received a security clearance from another 
government agency in 1985. He received a DOD security clearance in June 1990. (GX 
8 at 30.) 
 
 Applicant admitted in his answer to the SOR that he neglected to file state and 
federal income tax returns from 1997 to 2007, due to procrastination. He knew that his 
payroll deductions exceeded the taxes due for those years. Starting in 2006, he began 
making withdrawals from his Individual Retirement Account (IRA), in order to provide 
financial support to family members. The withdrawals increased his income to the point 
that he owed federal and state taxes. In 2010, he was notified by both state and federal 
tax authorities that he owed taxes as well as fines, penalties and interests for not filing 
timely returns. (GX 8 at 30.) 
 
 Applicant was familiar with the collection methods utilized by the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS), because in 1990 the IRS had previously garnished his pay for a 
federal tax debt of $24,734 from tax year 1985. (GX 4.) He did not list this tax debt or 
the garnishment in his SCA, because it was outside the seven-year window of the 
questions regarding unpaid taxes. It is not alleged in the SOR.  
 
In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant submitted federal tax transcripts 
reflecting that he owed about $20,830 in federal taxes for 2010; $4,151 for 2011; and 
$16,379 for 2012. The transcripts reflect that he paid $16,138 for tax year 2011 in April 
2012. They also reflect that he paid the $20,830 due for 2010 in February 2012, but not 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.a to confirm to the evidence by alleging that Applicant 
failed to timely file state and federal income tax returns from about 1997 to about 2007, instead of from 
about 1997 to about 2012, as originally alleged. Applicant did not object to the amendment, and I granted 
the motion to amend. 
 
 3
the penalties and interest. (GX 8 at 20-26.) His payment history reflects one additional 
$1,500 payment in February 2014 on his tax debt for 2010, apparently for penalties and 
interest not covered by his February 2012 payment of $20,830. (Response to FORM at 
5-6.)  
 
 Applicant entered into a payment agreement with the IRS in August 2012, 
providing for monthly $200 payments. (Response to FORM at 4.) His payment history 
reflects three $200 payments in October 2012, December 2012, and January 2013; a 
$6,000 payment in January 2013; and three $1,000 payments in March, April, and May 
2013 on his tax debt for 2011, which is now settled. He made one $1,000 payment, nine 
$1,500 payments and one $10,000 payment on his tax debt for 2012. (Response to 
FORM at 5-6.) In May 2014, he received a refund of $1,801 for overpayment of his 2012 
federal income taxes. (Response to FORM at 3.) 
 
 During a personal subject interview (PSI) in April 2013, Applicant told the 
investigator that he believed he owed about $1,300 in state taxes, and that he would 
pay them when he filed his 2012 state tax returns. (GX 8 at 31.) He was questioned 
about several federal tax liens that were filed and then released when the taxes were 
paid. He told the investigator that he did not pay much attention to the liens because he 
has no plans to sell his home. He also told the investigator that he has never received 
credit counseling, but that he is current with all his creditors and has “great credit.” 
Finally, he told the investigator that he has learned his lesson and will never again leave 
tax issues or financial issues unattended. (GX 8 at 31-32.)  
 
The evidence reflects that a state tax lien for $1,729 was filed against Applicant 
in March 2013. (GX 10.) His March 2014 credit bureau report (CBR) reflects that the lien 
is unsatisfied. (GX 11.) He submitted no evidence that his state income taxes are 
resolved.  
 
 In his answer to the SOR and his response to the FORM, Applicant denied owing 
the $31 medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. However, the debt is still listed on his March 
2014 CBR. (GX 11.) He presented no evidence that he had disputed the debt with the 
creditor, filed a dispute with the credit reporting agencies, or otherwise resolved it.  
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement (PFS) in response to DOHA 
interrogatories in August 2013. His PFS reflects net monthly income of about $8,550; 
living expenses of about $2,438; debt payments of about $6,928, including $1,500 per 
month to the IRS; and a net monthly remainder of $1,622. It also reflects that he has 
real estate valued at about $290,000 and stocks and bonds in an IRA account worth 
about $513,057. (GX 8 at 16.) He also submitted evidence that he has a 401k 
retirement account worth about $405,010. (GX 8 at 18.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
 
 4
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 
 5
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant did not timely file his state and federal income 
tax returns from about 1997 to about 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.a as amended). It also alleges that 
he owes federal income taxes of $16,378 for tax year 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.b); federal income 
taxes of $3,668 for tax year 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.c); state income taxes of about $1,729 
(SOR ¶ 1.d); and a $31 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.e). 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the corroborating documentary evidence in the 
FORM establish the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(g): failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns 
as required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 The evidence reflects that Applicant has sufficient income and financial assets to 
pay his debts, but that he has demonstrated unwillingness to pay them in a timely, 
responsible manner.  
 
 
 6
 Applicant denied the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, but it remains on his 
most recent CBR. It is well settled that adverse information from a credit report will 
normally meet the requirement in Directive ¶ E3.1.14 that an allegation be supported by 
substantial evidence. ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010.) Applicant 
submitted no evidence of efforts to resolve the debt, dispute it, or have it removed from 
his credit record.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) are not established. Applicant’s debts are recent, several 
are unresolved, and they did not arise under circumstances making them unlikely to 
recur. His tax debts occurred due to his procrastination, not circumstances beyond his 
control.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not fully established. Applicant has not sought or received 
counseling. The state tax lien and the medical debt are unresolved. However, he 
receives some credit under this mitigating condition because the evidence reflects that 
his federal tax debts are being resolved. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not fully established. Good faith means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case 
No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A security clearance 
adjudication is aimed at evaluating an individual’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. 
 
 7
Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) Applicant learned from his prior experience with delinquent taxes in 
1990 that the IRS will aggressively pursue delinquent tax payers and would impose 
severe financial penalties and likely garnish his pay if he did not take prompt action.2 He 
resolved the unpaid federal taxes alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, but payment of those 
debts does not end the inquiry. His failure to timely file his federal and state tax returns, 
which caused a significant amount of his tax debt, raises concerns about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment, and those concerns are not mitigated.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established for the state tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d or the 
medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant’s March 2014 CBR reflects that they are 
unresolved, and he presented no evidence of efforts to resolve them. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant has denied the medical debt, but he 
produced no evidence that he has disputed it with the original creditor, the collection 
agency, or the credit reporting agencies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR cross-alleges Applicant’s failure to timely file income tax returns under 
this guideline. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. . . .” Applicant’s admitted failure to comply with 
federal and state tax laws establishes the following disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s delinquent taxes for 1985 and the garnishment action in 1990 were not alleged in the SOR. 
Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide whether 
a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or 
changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or 
as part of a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have 
considered Applicant’s 1985 tax debt for these limited purposes. 
 
 
 8
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and  
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. While some of Applicant’s financial delinquencies 
are arguably “minor” when considered individually, they raise serious concerns 
collectively. They are numerous and did not occur under circumstances making them 
unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(d) is partially established, because Applicant has acknowledged his 
behavior. However, he has presented no evidence of positive steps to prevent 
recurrence, other than to assert that he has learned his lesson. He did not learn from 
the 1990 garnishment of his pay, and his assertion that he has now learned his lesson 
is not persuasive. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) is partially established. Applicant’s resolution of the federal tax debt 
has reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
 
 9
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Because Applicant requested a determination on the record without a hearing, I 
have had no opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on his demeanor. 
See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). He received an 
honorable discharge for his Marine Corps service. He has worked for his current 
employer and held a security clearance for almost 30 years. However, he submitted no 
evidence of the quality of his performance of duty or his reputation for trustworthiness 
and reliability. His procrastination regarding his federal and state tax obligations raises a 
concern that he would also procrastinate regarding other unpleasant tasks, such as self-
reporting personal conduct raising security issues or reporting and correcting security 
issues arising in his area of responsibility as a facility security officer 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 10
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
