 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 13-01140 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under the guidelines for drugs and 
personal conduct. His eligibility for a security clearance, therefore, is granted. 
 
                                         Statement of the Case 
 
On February 6, 2013, Applicant signed and completed a security clearance 
application (SCA). In the SCA, he admitted using marijuana once in 2009 after having 
been previously granted a security clearance. On November 19, 2013, the Department 
of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a December 6, 2013, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the facts 
underlying the two allegations raised and requested a hearing before a Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. I was assigned the case on 
 
2 
 
 
March 12, 2014. On March 13, 2014, a notice was issued setting the hearing for April 
16, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
 
At the hearing, the Government presented three documents, which were 
accepted into the record as exhibits (Exs.) 1-3. Applicant gave testimony, introduced 
two witnesses, and presented six documents, which were accepted into the record as 
Exs. A-F. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on April 25, 2014, and the 
record was closed. Based on a thorough review of the record, I find that Applicant 
mitigated Guideline H and Guideline E security concerns. Security clearance is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2005. In 2007, he became the organization’s business 
financial manager. Applicant has a bachelor’s degree in political science. He is married 
and has no children.  
 
 In 2001, while in college, Applicant took one inhalation of marijuana being 
consumed by a peer. This occurred on one occasion. (Tr. 35) He did not like the drug. 
Applicant went on to complete his collegiate studies in May 2003, then he interned for 
almost two years. He started working full-time for his present employer in 2005, and 
was granted a security clearance shortly thereafter. He did not note his experiment with 
marijuana on his 2005 SCA. His omission was inadvertent. (Tr. 37-38) The single 
inhalation in 2001 was not memorable. (Tr. 38)  
 
 In July 2009, Applicant and his then-fiancée went to the out-of-state wedding of 
one of her cousins. While there, his fiancée decided she wanted to try marijuana, which 
was offered to them during their stay. Applicant knew he had a security clearance and 
knew it was wrong for him to use the drug, but he did so anyway. The next morning, 
Applicant and his fiancée discussed the incident. They found marijuana and its use to 
be “stupid and pointless.” (Tr. 41) They jointly decided not to use the drug again. 
 
Upon returning to work, Applicant did not report the incident. To date, he is 
unsure whether he knew he had any obligation to do so at that time. Applicant and his 
fiancée married in 2012. When Applicant applied for a higher level of clearance in 
February 2013, he noted the 2009 drug use in response to a question regarding illegal 
drug use in the preceding seven years. In September 2013, he explained the 
circumstances regarding his use of marijuana in both 2001 and 2009.   
 
 Applicant earnestly laments his 2009 lapse of judgment in using marijuana. He 
has no intention of using marijuana or any other illegal drug in the future. He has signed 
a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation in 
compliance with AG ¶ 26(b)(4). (Ex. C) Applicant’s wife has not tried marijuana again 
and has no intention to do so. Applicant rarely has contact with his wife’s cousins. He 
does not associate with those who use drugs, or frequent places where drugs are used.  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s witnesses describe him as a man who has matured into a highly loyal 
and effective employee. His supervisor notes that Applicant is trustworthy, moral, 
ethical, and patriotic. (Ex. B). The president of the company employing Applicant has a 
very high degree of trust in Applicant, noting that he has been impressed as to how 
Applicant has made no excuses for his temporary lapse of judgment in 2009. Applicant 
is appreciative of their trust, his flexible terms of employment, and his salary of about 
$100,000. He is sincere in his intent to not violate his witness’ faith and trust in him. (Tr. 
32) He has no intention of jeopardizing either his career or his current income level.   
 
Applicant submitted two negative drug tests from late 2013 and early 2014, 
respectively. (Ex. D and Ex. F) The latter negative test was based on a hair sample, 
which is considered a superior test to the extent it can discern the trace presence of 
drugs over a longer period. (Tr. 30; Ex. F) Applicant is willing to repeat such drug 
testing. 
 
     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and derived 
from the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
4 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. (AG ¶ 24) “Drugs” are defined as mood and behavior altering 
substances and include drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens) and inhalants and 
other substances. (AG ¶ 24(a)(1-2)) “Drug abuse” is the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction. (AG ¶ 24(b)) 
 
Applicant admits using marijuana in 2009, after having been granted a security 
clearance in 2005. This is sufficient to raise Drug Involvement Disqualifying Conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a) - any drug abuse, and  
 
AG ¶ 25(g) - any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
With disqualifying conditions thus raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate 
related security concerns. 
 
Applicant’s single inhalation from a marijuana source while in college took place 
when he was a teen. It was an isolated incident that can be categorized as a youthful 
indiscretion. Of immediate concern is his second use of marijuana in 2009, after he had 
been granted a security clearance. This occurred when he and his then-fiancée were 
out of town at a wedding, where one of her cousins offered the couple marijuana. 
Applicant’s future wife, who had never tried marijuana, expressed an interest in trying 
the drug. They tried the drug, then decided against using it in the future after a candid 
discussion the next day. To date, neither has used marijuana or any other illegal drugs 
since that time. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant is clearly contrite about his 2009 lapse in judgment. He is fully aware 
that using marijuana after being granted a security clearance presents a grave breach 
of trust. He has no intention of using marijuana or any other illegal drug in the future. 
Applicant has signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation in compliance with AG ¶ 26(b)(4). He does not associate with those who 
use drugs, or frequent places where drugs are used. His wife has no intention of using 
marijuana again, and the couple has little contact with Applicant’s wife’s cousins. Since 
the 2009 incident, Applicant has married and grown professionally. His superiors report 
that he has matured over time and grown into a highly reliable, forthright, ethical, and 
loyal employee who possesses sound judgment. Applicant enjoys his work, is indebted 
to his superiors, and is appreciative of his salary. There is little chance he will again 
jeopardize his job or career. In light of such considerations, I find that the following 
mitigating conditions apply:  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) - the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 26(b) – demonstrated intent not to abuse drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) - disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) - changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
 
(3) - an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) - a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
Under this guideline, the SOR repeats the allegation noted under Guideline H. 
Specifically, it alleges and Applicant acknowledges that he used marijuana in 2009 after 
having been granted a security clearance. Although the Guideline H disqualifying 
condition at AG ¶ 25(g) specifically covers this fact pattern, disqualifying condition AG ¶ 
16(e) can apply: 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) - personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
The facts noted in the above analysis regarding Guideline H are identical here. 
Using illegal drugs while holding a security clearance was a unique, one-time lapse from 
when Applicant was in his 20s. Five years have passed without recurrence. He and his 
wife have jointly decided not to use marijuana again. Applicant has expressed that 
same intent independently, and signed a statement of intent not to use drugs again. He 
has been open about the incident with his superiors, including the company president, 
since noting it on his SCA. Given Applicant’s obvious contrition, maturation, subsequent 
successes, and desire to maintain his lifestyle, it is highly unlikely he will again manifest 
such behavior. I find the following personal conduct mitigating conditions apply: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c) - the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e) – the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have 
incorporated my comments under the three above-referenced guidelines in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed above, but some 
warrant emphasis or additional comment.  
 
Applicant acknowledges that his 2009 drug use violated the Government’s trust 
and he accepts full responsibility for his poor judgment. In mitigation, he showed that he 
has matured over the past five years, no longer associates with those who use drugs or 
frequents places where drugs are present, and has made a commitment with his wife 
that they will not use marijuana again. Applicant has signed a statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. His superiors speak of him in the 
highest terms, especially with regard to ethics, reliability, and judgment. Applicant 
appreciates their trust, his work, and his salary. It is highly unlikely he will again 
 
7 
 
 
jeopardize his career. In light of these considerations and five years of abstinence, I find 
that Applicant mitigated drug involvement and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
