 
1 
 
 
                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                                      )          ISCR Case No. 13-00509      
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
   
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the record in this case, I conclude that Applicant 
mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference, 
and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. However, he failed to mitigate security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                               Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant signed and certified an electronic questionnaire for investigation 
processing (e-QIP) on March 6, 2012. On July 12, 2013, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline C, Foreign Preference; Guideline B, Foreign Influence; and Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within 
DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On August 11, 2013, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
without a hearing from an administrative judge at the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on 
March 14, 2014.1 The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 10. 
Additionally, in the FORM, the Government requested that the administrative judge take 
administrative notice of certain facts about Afghanistan.2  
 
On March 14, 2014, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with 
instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of 
receipt. Applicant received the file on April 6, 2014. His response was due on May 6, 
2014. Applicant timely filed additional information in response to the FORM. On April 24, 
2014, the case was assigned to me for a decision. 
 
Department Counsel objected to documents in the German language included in 
Applicant’s response to the FORM.3 Additionally, Department Counsel objected to an 
unauthenticated translation of one of the documents into English, and he noted that it 
was not possible to identify which of the German language documents had been the 
subject of the translation. I marked all documents provided by Applicant in his response 
to the FORM as Item A, and I admitted them to the record. However, I sustained 
Department Counsel’s objection to the German language documents and the 
unauthenticated translation into English of one of the German language documents. I 
will not consider those documents in this decision.                   
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five factual allegations under AG C, Foreign Preference (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e); nine factual allegations under AG B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶  
2.a. through 2.i.); and two factual allegations under AG E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 
3.a. and 3.b.). Applicant provided two sets of answers to the SOR. In one set of 
answers, Applicant answered briefly by writing “I Admit” or “I Deny.”4 In his second set 
of answers, Applicant provided more detailed responses. Taken together, the two sets 
of answers reveal the following: Applicant admitted three Guideline C allegations (SOR 
¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., and 1.d). He denied the Guideline C allegation at SOR ¶ 1.a. He admitted 
and denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.e. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
                                            
1 The FORM is incorrectly dated March 14, 2013. The correct date for the FORM is March 14, 2014. 
(FORM.) 
  
2 The Government provided a summary document, drawn from six official U.S. documents, containing 
facts about Afghanistan. I marked the Government’s administrative notice summary as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) A and entered it in the record without objection.  
  
3 Department Counsel’s memorandum of objection is marked as HE B. 
 
4 In his shorter answer to the SOR, Applicant neither admitted nor denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.d. In 
his longer response, he admitted the allegation. (Item 4.)  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant admitted all nine Guideline B allegations. He initially denied the 
Guideline E allegation at ¶ 3.a., and he admitted the allegation at ¶ 3.b. However, in his 
more detailed answer, Applicant denied both Guideline E allegations and provided 
additional information. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact. (Answer to 
SOR.)   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including exhibits, relevant 
policies, and the applicable adjudicative guidelines, I make the following additional 
findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant, who is 66 years old, was born and raised in Afghanistan. Applicant is 
employed as a linguist by a government contractor, and he seeks a security clearance. 
(Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant is married and the father of five living children, all of whom are adults. 
In about 1990, a sixth child, a son, was killed by communist forces in Afghanistan for 
teaching English to Afghan soldiers, a fact incorporated in SOR ¶ 2.i. (Item 6; Item 8.) 
 
 Three of Applicant’s children are U.S. citizens and reside in the United States. 
One child is a citizen and resident of the United Kingdom. Applicant’s wife and a fifth 
child are citizens of Afghanistan and reside in the United States, facts which are 
incorporated in SOR ¶ 2.a. (Item 6; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and brother-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. Applicant’s brother-in-law served as an officer in the Afghan army. These 
facts are incorporated in SOR ¶¶ 2.b., 2.c., and 2.d. (Item 6.) 
 
 During a counterintelligence interview, Applicant stated his concern that his life 
could be in danger if he worked in Afghanistan. He stated that if his wife’s family told 
anyone in the Afghan community that Applicant was employed by U.S. forces, he would 
be considered an infidel and might be captured or killed. These facts are incorporated in 
SOR ¶ 2.h. (Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant owns a home in Afghanistan with an estimated value of $100,000. He 
and his wife stay in the home when they visit Afghanistan. These facts are incorporated 
in SOR ¶¶ 2.e. and 2.f. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant also has a bank account in Afghanistan, which he opened to provide 
for the upkeep of his home. He opened the account in about 2004 with a deposit of 
$8,000. He estimates that his current balance is less than $225. This information is 
alleged at SOR ¶ 2.g. (Item 4; Item 8; Item 9.) 
 
    Applicant came to the United States for the first time in 1967. He attended a six-
month course at a U.S. university, and he returned to Afghanistan, where he was 
employed until about 1988.  
 
 
4 
 
 
 In 1980, Applicant was imprisoned and tortured by communist government 
security forces because he had worked with Americans. His wife paid $30,000 to the 
authorities so that Applicant could be released from prison. (Item A.) 
 
 In 1988, Applicant traveled with his wife to an Asian country where she sought 
medical treatment. While in the Asian country, Applicant obtained work with an 
international organization. When he and his wife returned to Afghanistan in 1989, he 
continued his work for the international organization. In 1994, he was assigned by the 
international organization to a position in another Asian country, where he worked for 
about four years. (Item 7.) 
 
 During a security interview, Applicant stated that while working in the Asian 
country for four years, he applied for refugee status to 32 countries. Several countries 
denied his request because of his prior education and residency in the United States. 
Applicant told the interviewer that the United States was not his first choice when 
applying for refugee status. In 1998, he was assigned by the international organization 
to work in the United States. This information is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. The interviewer 
concluded that Applicant’s many applications for refugee status raised a question about 
his loyalty. (Item 7.)  
 
 Applicant entered the United States on a nonimmigrant visa for international 
employees. He applied for refugee status but was denied because he was in the United 
States legally. In 1999, he was granted asylum in the United States. He became a U.S. 
permanent resident in 2004. (Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant returned to Afghanistan in 2003 and was employed there by the Afghan 
government until May 2004. In November and December 2006, Applicant worked as a 
consultant in Pakistan. For five months, from July to December 2008, Applicant worked 
for an element of the Afghan government. These facts are alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., 
and 1.d. (Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
 In 2009, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen. He relinquished his Afghan 
passport in November 2009. (Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
 During a security interview, Applicant told an investigator that when he went, as a 
U.S. citizen, to relinquish his Afghan passport in 2009, he disclosed that he was seeking 
employment with the U.S. Government. Applicant reported to the investigator that he 
asked the Afghan official for a job with the Afghan government and expressed his 
willingness to retain his foreign passport. This information is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.e. The 
investigator concluded that Applicant’s willingness to work for a foreign government 
reflected on his loyalty and character. In his short answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted this conduct. However, in his longer answer, he denied it. (Item 4; Item 7.) 
 
 During a security interview, Applicant told an investigator that he and his wife 
kept their money in a safe place in their home and not in a bank account because they 
wanted to claim eligibility for free Government health care. He stated that when 
 
5 
 
 
individuals apply for free health care, their bank accounts are checked, and they did not 
want to reveal how much money they had because they were afraid that their income 
might be too high to qualify for the free care. This information is alleged at SOR ¶ 3.a. 
(Item 7.) 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied telling the investigator that he kept 
money at home in order to misrepresent the size of his income and thereby qualify for 
medical benefits. He pointed out that he and his sons gave his wife money to manage 
their household, and she kept the money in a purse. He stated, however, that when he 
is unemployed, he and his wife seek medical care at a free clinic. (Item 4.) 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant again denied that he hid his money in his 
house to qualify for free health care. He asserted that when he is employed his 
paychecks are deposited in his bank account. (Item A.) 
 
 Applicant was employed as a government contractor for approximately two 
months in 2010. During a security interview, he told an investigator that his coworkers 
accused him of falling asleep on the job, and he left the job for medical reasons. These 
facts are alleged at SOR ¶ 3.b. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant further explained 
that he suffered a stroke while working overseas for the contractor and was evacuated 
and treated for a medical condition which apparently precluded his return to work 
overseas for a period of time. He provided letters of support and certificates of 
appreciation from the military commanders overseas with whom he worked in 2012. 
(Item 7; Item 4; Item A.) 
 
 On his e-QIP, Applicant reported that he had traveled to Afghanistan to visit 
family and friends in 2005, 2006, and 2010. In 2011, he visited Afghanistan twice to visit 
family and friends. Applicant also reported the following periods of unemployment: 
December 2006 to March 2007, May 2007 to July 2008, January 2009 until February 
2010, and June 2010 to March 2012. During his unemployment, he was supported by 
one of his sons. (Item 4; Item 7.)  
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about Afghanistan. The facts in 
the following summary were provided by Department Counsel to Applicant and to me. I 
have omitted the footnotes provided in the original summary document, and I have, in 
part, paraphrased Department Counsel’s summary. 
 
AFGHANISTAN 
 
The conclusion of virtually every Administration and outside assessment has 
been that Afghan central governmental capacity and effectiveness has increased, but 
that local governance remains weak and all levels of government are plagued by 
governmental corruption. 
 
Afghanistan's national institutions continue to improve their ability to provide 
constitutional, stable, effective, and responsive governance, but still face sizable 
 
6 
 
 
challenges. Corruption, ineffective program monitoring, budget shortfalls at all levels, 
inability to generate revenue, and limited public financial management capacity continue 
to plague the national government.  
 
The convergence of insurgent, terrorist, and criminal networks is pervasive and 
threatens Afghanistan's stability. Criminal networks, insurgent groups, and corrupt 
government officials are often interlinked via multi-layered connections, making ties 
between the officials and criminal activity difficult to prove and prosecute. These factors 
all contribute to popular disaffection with the government and create opportunities for 
the insurgency. 
 
Security in Afghanistan is challenged by several armed groups, loosely allied with 
each other. The core insurgent faction in Afghanistan remains the Taliban movement. 
Another militant faction, cited by U.S. officials as perhaps the most potent threat to 
Afghan security, is the "Haqqani Network," which the Administration reported to 
Congress meets the criteria for FTO [Foreign Terrorist Organization] designation in 
September 2012. A major Pakistani group, the Pakistani Taliban (which the State 
Department designated as a FTO in September 2010), supports the Afghan Taliban and 
some of its fighters are operating from safe havens in Taliban-controlled areas on the 
Afghan side of the border. Another Pakistani group said to be active inside Afghanistan 
is Lakshar-e-Tayyiba (LET), which some assess as also active in South Asia and 
elsewhere, and could rival Al Qaeda or AI Qaeda affiliations as potential threats to U.S. 
interests.  
 
A major concern, particularly during 2012, [were] "insider attacks" (attacks on 
ISAF forces by Afghan security personnel, also known as "green on blue" attacks). 
These attacks, some of which apparently were carried out by Taliban infiltrators into the 
Afghan forces, declined by late 2012 but . . . continued occasionally in 2013. 
 
In 2012, insurgents conducted some of the largest vehicle-borne improvised 
explosive device attacks since 2001, targeting Provincial Reconstruction Teams, large 
Coalition Forces (CF) bases, and Afghan government buildings, mostly in eastern 
Afghanistan. Insurgents across Afghanistan used a variety of tactics to target Afghan 
security personnel and CF in well-coordinated, complex attacks in major cities and rural 
areas, seeking to expand their territorial influence and control.  
 
The most significant human rights problems included credible reports of torture 
and abuse of detainees by Afghan security forces; widespread violence, including 
armed insurgent groups' killings of persons affiliated with the government and 
indiscriminate attacks on civilians; pervasive official corruption; and endemic violence 
and societal discrimination against women and girls. Corruption is endemic throughout 
society, and . . . money from the military, international donors, and the drug trade 
continue[s] to exacerbate the problem. 
 
Other human rights problems included extrajudicial killings by security forces; 
poor prison conditions; ineffective government investigations of abuses and torture by 
 
7 
 
 
local security forces; arbitrary arrest and detention, particularly of women accused of so-
called "moral crimes"; prolonged pretrial detention; judicial corruption and effectiveness; 
violations of privacy rights; restrictions on freedom of speech and of the press; 
restrictions on freedom of religion; limits on freedom of movement; underage and forced 
marriages; abuse of children, including sexual abuse; discrimination and abuses against 
ethnic minorities; trafficking in persons; discrimination against persons with disabilities; 
societal discrimination based on race, religion, gender, sexual orientation and HIVIAIDS 
status; abuse of worker rights; and sex and labor trafficking. 
 
The Department of State warns U.S citizens against travel to Afghanistan and 
warns that the security threat to all U.S. citizens in Afghanistan remains critical. No 
province in Afghanistan should be considered immune from violence, and the potential 
exists throughout the country for hostile acts, either random or targeted, against U.S. 
and other Western nationals at any time. Travel in all areas of Afghanistan remains 
unsafe due to military combat operations, landmines, banditry, armed rivalry between 
political and tribal groups, and the possibility of insurgent attacks, including attacks 
using vehicles or other improvised explosive devices (IEDs). The security situation 
remains volatile and unpredictable. There is an ongoing and significant risk of kidnaping 
and assassination of U.S. citizens and non-governmental organization (NGO) 
employees. Kabul City and its suburbs are also considered at high risk for militant 
attacks, including rocket attacks, vehicle-borne IEDs, direct-fire attacks, and suicide 
bombings. 
 
The Department of State also warns that, in addition to being subject to all 
Afghan laws, Afghan-Americans may also be subject to other laws that impose special 
obligations on Afghan citizens. U.S. citizens who are also Afghan nationals do not 
require visas for entry into Afghanistan. Likewise, for U.S. passport holders born in 
Afghanistan, a visa is not required for entry. For these individuals, the Embassy of 
Afghanistan issues a letter confirming nationality for entry into Afghanistan. 
 
                                                           Policies  
  
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
8 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
 
9 
 
 
the United States.”  Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying.  These disqualifying conditions are as follows: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and  
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 Applicant sought asylum status from many countries when his native country was 
at war. In 1999, he was granted refugee status in the United States, and he obtained 
permanent resident status in 2004. Then, in November and December 2006, he 
accepted employment as a consultant in Pakistan, and for about five months in 2008, 
he was employed as consultant to an element of the Afghan government. After 
becoming a U.S. citizen in 2009, Applicant expressed an intent to relinquish his Afghan 
passport. The SOR alleges that Applicant told an Afghan embassy official that he would 
 
10 
 
 
retain his Afghan passport if he could work at the embassy. Applicant denied the 
allegation. He relinquished his Afghan passport.  
 
 While he held permanent resident status, Applicant performed duties that served 
the interests of a foreign organization or government. His actions raise a security 
concern under AG ¶ 10(c). 
 
Five mitigating conditions are applicable to allegations under the Foreign 
Preference adjudicative guideline. Under AG ¶ 11(a), dual citizenship might be 
mitigated if “it is based solely on [an applicant’s] parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign 
country.” Under AG ¶ 11(b), an individual’s dual citizenship might be mitigated if he or 
she “has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.” Under AG ¶ 11(c), an 
individual’s “exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship might 
be mitigated if it occurred before becoming a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a 
minor.” Under AG ¶ 11(d), an individual’s use of a foreign passport might be mitigated if 
it were “approved by the cognizant security authority.” Under AG ¶ 11(e), an individual’s 
use of a foreign passport might be mitigated if he or she presents credible evidence that 
“the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or 
otherwise invalidated.” 
 
 None of those mitigating conditions applies to the facts of this case. However, it 
must also be noted that Applicant’s work as a contractor for a foreign government and 
for an element of a foreign government occurred before he became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. Since becoming a citizen of the United States, Applicant has not performed or 
attempted to perform duties to serve the interests of a foreign group or government that 
might conflict with national security interests. I conclude the Guideline C allegations for 
Applicant.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 A Guideline B decision assessing the security worthiness of a U.S. citizen with 
close familial contacts in Afghanistan must take into consideration the unstable political 
situations in Afghanistan in which terrorist groups target U.S. interests. Under these 
 
11 
 
 
circumstances, American citizens with immediate family members who are citizens or 
residents of Afghanistan could be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the foreign influence 
guideline. The facts of Applicant’s case raise security concerns under disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(d), and 7(e).5  
 
 AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. However, 
the facts must demonstrate a risk higher than normally occurs when a family member 
lives under a foreign government. The activities of al-Qa’ida, Taliban, and other militant 
groups in Afghanistan, and the country’s mixed record of dealing with these groups, are 
sufficient to establish the “heightened risk” required in AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
 Applicant has been affected by the long years of war and turmoil in Afghanistan. 
In 1990, one of his sons was killed by communist soldiers for teaching English to 
Afghan soldiers. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that his wife and one of 
his sons are citizens of Afghanistan and resident in the United States. Applicant’s 
mother-in-law and brother-in-law are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. The brother-
in-law was an officer in the Afghan army. Applicant resides in the United States with his 
wife. 
 
Applicant owns a home in Afghanistan which he has valued at $100,000. He also 
maintains a small bank account in Afghanistan. When Applicant and his wife travel 
together to Afghanistan to visit family and friends, they reside in the home they own 
there. Applicant has traveled five times to Afghanistan to visit since 2005, even though 
he has stated that he would fear for his life if his wife’s relatives knew he was working 
for U.S. Forces in Afghanistan. 
 
When family ties to a foreign country are alleged, the totality of an applicant’s 
family ties as well as each individual family connection must be considered. ISCR Case 
No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). Applicant’s close relationships and 
contacts with his family members who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan, a 
country with a poor human rights record and a high risk of terrorism, is sufficient to 
establish AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). 
 
                                            
5 AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or 
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a 
foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.”  AG ¶ 7(d) reads: “sharing living quarters 
with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(e) reads: “a substantial business, 
financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, 
which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 
12 
 
 
 Moreover, Applicant shares living quarters with his wife, a citizen of Afghanistan, 
who also has family contacts with citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant’s 
familial relationships and contacts with his relatives and his wife’s relatives create a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, or coercion. 
Additionally, Applicant owns a home and a bank account in Afghanistan, which could 
also expose him to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. 
 
Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. If “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, 
financial, or property interest is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual” then 
AG ¶ 8(f) might apply to Applicant’s home and bank account in Afghanistan.  
 
AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply in mitigation to the facts of this case. Applicant has   
immediate family members who are citizens of Afghanistan.   
 
AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(c) also do not apply to this case. After becoming a permanent 
U.S. resident in 2004, Applicant spent time living and working in Pakistan and 
Afghanistan. Since becoming a U.S. citizen in 2009, he has traveled to Afghanistan with 
his wife to visit family and friends. Applicant’s loyalty and sense of obligation to his 
family members is strong and enduring. From my careful review of the record in this 
case, it is clear that Applicant’s relationships with his family members who are citizens 
of Afghanistan are neither casual nor infrequent. It is also not clear to me that Applicant 
would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States.  
 
Applicant owns a home in Afghanistan that he values at $100,000. He also has a 
bank account in Afghanistan. It is not clear that Applicant’s possession of these assets 
is routine or that he might not be required to leverage them to support himself and his 
family. These assets could be a source of conflict and they could be used to influence, 
manipulate, or pressure Applicant. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 8(f) does not apply 
in mitigation. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
 
13 
 
 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” 
   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 During an interview with an authorized investigator, Applicant made statements 
about his money management and his reason for leaving his most recent job that the 
investigator concluded demonstrated questionable judgment and indicated that 
Applicant might not properly safeguard protected information. Applicant’s personal 
conduct raises security concerns under AG ¶ 16(c), which reads: 
 
Credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information. 
 
Applicant denied both Guideline E allegations and provided additional information 
in rebuttal. I have carefully reviewed the Guideline E mitigating conditions, and I 
conclude that AG ¶ 17(f) applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. AG ¶ 17(f) reads: “the 
information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability.” 
 
 The investigator’s report, while presumed to be reliable, contains insufficient 
record evidence about Applicant’s financial decisions and health record to substantiate 
a conclusion that Applicant may not properly safeguard protected information 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
14 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole-person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant first came to the United States in 1967 to study. When his country was at war, 
he was imprisoned and tortured. One of his sons was killed by Communist soldiers for 
teaching English to Afghan troops. Applicant later sought asylum or refugee status from 
several countries. He was granted refugee status in the United States in 1999, and he 
obtained permanent resident status in 2004. He became a U.S. citizen in 2009. 
 
Since 2005, Applicant has traveled to Afghanistan five times. He owns a home in 
Afghanistan, and he and his wife stay in the home when they are in Afghanistan visiting 
friends and relatives. Applicant has stated that he would fear for his life if his wife’s 
family members in Afghanistan learned he was working for U.S. Forces in Afghanistan.  
 
Applicant is a devoted and loyal family member, and his contacts with his wife, 
son, mother-in-law, and brother-in-law, all of whom are citizens of Afghanistan, and 
close and enduring. The record in this case reveals foreign contacts and connections 
that continue to raise security concerns. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline C, 
Guideline B,  and Guideline E, and after evaluating all the evidence in the context of the 
whole person, and mindful of my obligation to decide close cases in favor of national 
security, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate security concerns based on foreign 
influence. It is evident from the record in this case that Applicant has failed to carry his 
burden of persuasion to demonstrate that his foreign contacts and connections do not 
raise security concerns that could preclude entrusting him with sensitive and classified 
information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.e.:   For Applicant 
 
15 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:                       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.h.:                       Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.i.:                                   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:                       FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a.- 3.b.:                        For Applicant 
 
                                        Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
 
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
 
