 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00603 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 May 6, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Security concerns are raised under the Guideline for Personal Conduct because 
Applicant made intentionally false statements to an investigative agent. Additionally, 
Applicant was terminated by three different employers for misconduct. Applicant failed 
to mitigate the Personal Conduct concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on September 20, 2011. On July 29, 2013, the Department of Defense issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under the 
guideline for Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) in an undated submission received by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on October 9, 2013, and requested an 
administrative determination be made without a hearing. On February 19, 2014, 
Department Counsel issued Applicant an Amendment to the SOR (ASOR), which 
withdrew all of the allegations under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and 
replaced them with new security concerns under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
Department Counsel requested a hearing in this matter by letter dated February 20, 
2014. Applicant answered the ASOR on March 24, 2014. The case was assigned to me 
on March 3, 2014. A notice of hearing was issued to Applicant on March 4, 2014, 
scheduling a hearing for March 26, 2014. On March 26, 2014, the hearing convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered the ASOR. Applicant had no objection to the 
ASOR, and the amendment was granted.  
 
The Government presented Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through G, which were admitted into the record without objection. Applicant requested 
that the record be left open to allow her to submit additional evidence and her request 
was granted. Applicant presented an additional exhibit, marked AE H. Department 
Counsel had no objection to AE H, and it was admitted into the record. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 3, 2014. The record closed on April 28, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 35 years old. She is divorced and has one minor child. She passed 
the General Education Development (GED) test, but did not graduate from high school. 
She attended some college classes, but did not earn a degree. She is a self-educated 
cyber security expert. She has worked in the field of cyber security since at least 2001. 
She currently is the managing member and founder of a cyber-security firm. She seeks 
a security clearance in connection with that firm. She hopes to procure defense 
contracts. (GE 1; Tr. 42, 47-49.)  
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because she 
engaged in conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. The ASOR alleged nine 
subparagraphs (1.a through 1.i) under Guideline E. Applicant admitted ASOR 
subparagraphs 1.b, 1.c, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i. Applicant denied subparagraphs 1.a, 1.d, 1.e, 
and 1.f.  
 
Applicant’s employment was terminated by four different employers between 
2001 and 2009. Her employment in 2001 was terminated for publishing a vulnerability 
finding she generated for her employer, as alleged in ASOR subparagraph 1.i. She 
explained that she tested a technology for security vulnerabilities at the instruction of 
her employer. After she discovered vulnerabilities, she prepared a report. The 
manufacturer of the technology was not taking action to patch the identified 
vulnerabilities. She testified that her supervisor requested that she publish the 
vulnerability finding, but she produced no documentation to support her claim that her 
supervisor instructed her to publish the report. She published the findings online in a 
 
3 
 
public forum, and her employment was terminated as a result. She explained in her 
testimony that she “serve[s] two masters”; she had a duty to the vendor of the 
technology, but she also had to “serve other fellow security engineers” by alerting them 
to the problem. She acknowledged that by publishing her findings, she also put people 
at risk of being hacked until patches were created to fix the vulnerabilities, because 
publishing the findings made hackers aware of the existence of vulnerabilities. (GE 1; 
GE 2; AE A; Tr. 60-75.) 
 
Applicant’s employment was terminated in April 2004 for misuse of equipment 
and company information, as alleged in ASOR subparagraph 1.h. Applicant testified that 
while working for this employer, she started her own company in the evenings. She 
thought that the software she developed in her outside company could be helpful to her 
employer, so she prepared a PowerPoint presentation and used both her employer’s 
logo and her own company’s logo together in the presentation. About a year after 
preparing the presentation, a human resources officer from her employer approached 
her with a printout of the PowerPoint slides. Applicant claims she was accused of falsely 
telling people that her employer was a client of her outside business. Her employment 
was terminated as a result of the allegations. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 76-80.) 
 
In December 2004 Applicant’s employment with another employer was 
terminated for taking excessive sick leave, as alleged in ASOR subparagraph 1.g. She 
had only worked for that employer for three months and was in a probationary period of 
employment. She caught the flu and missed two weeks of work. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 80-
81.) 
 
In June 2009 Applicant was terminated from a fourth employer (Company 4) for 
requesting personal user information regarding a customer, as alleged in ASOR 
subparagraph 1.a through 1.c. Applicant contended that she was a paid confidential 
informant for a U.S. intelligence agency, outside of her employment with her employer. 
She was researching a subject for the intelligence agency and by coincidence, 
discovered that the subject was Company 4’s customer. She instant messaged her 
supervisor and requested personal information on the user. She did not attempt to 
obtain the information through hacking into her Company 4’s computer system or 
through other illicit means. The day after she requested the user information her 
employment was terminated for “conflict of interest.” (GE 1; GE 2; AE A; Tr. 81-106.) 
 
Applicant explained that her job terminations were not her fault, but occurred 
because she possessed leadership qualities. She sees herself as an entrepreneur who 
has successfully created several companies. (Tr. 44-45.) 
 
Applicant completed an e-QIP on September 20, 2011. On her e-QIP she 
disclosed that at the time she was working for Company 4, she “was also working as 
part of a special program with a US Intelligence Agency,” as alleged in ASOR 
subparagraph 1.e. She failed to further identify that intelligence agency elsewhere on 
her e-QIP. When asked about this statement by an investigator for the U.S. Office of 
Personnel Management, Applicant explained she “did not list it as employment as it was 
undercover and classified,” as alleged in ASOR subparagraph1.f. She disclosed to the 
 
4 
 
investigator only that she was a paid undercover informant for an intelligence agency 
and was tracking a target that she discovered was using her employer’s site, as alleged 
in subparagraph 1.d. On May 29, 2013, she authenticated the report of investigation 
that contained the assertion that she could not list this employment on her e-QIP 
because it was undercover and classified, without any additions or deletions.  
 
At the hearing, Applicant admitted she never previously possessed a security 
clearance and that the information about her role as a confidential informant with an 
intelligence agency was not classified. She claims she signed a non-disclosure or 
confidentiality agreement and did not believe she was permitted to discuss the details of 
her activities with the intelligence agency with “anyone, including within the U.S. 
Intelligence Community or law enforcement.” She did not recall “using the term 
classified” with the agent. In her post-hearing submission, she provided emails she 
received from an agent purportedly with the intelligence agency in connection with her 
work. She identified the agency in her cover letter. She did not provide a copy of a non-
disclosure agreement. She testified that she worked for the agency from 2007 to 2009. 
She was paid cash for her services and she did not disclose the payments on her 
income tax returns. (GE 1; GE 2; AE A; AE H; Tr. 51, 81-106.) 
 
Applicant is an articulate and intelligent cyber-security expert. She has an 
impressive resume and has worked in high-level positions of trust. She presented 
several endorsements that indicate she is known for her creativity and intelligence. 
According to one letter of recommendation, she has “a strong sense of integrity and 
commitment to purpose.” (AE B; AE C; AE D; AE E; AE F; AE G.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching the 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
 
5 
 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. The 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
 
6 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combine with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1)untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other 
government protected information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer’s time or resources. 
 
 Applicant identified her work as a confidential informant with an intelligence 
agency on her e-QIP in explaining her termination from Company 4. While she did not 
list the name of that agency, I find that her disclosure shows she intentionally put the 
Government on notice of her activities and that she did not intentionally omit or falsify 
her e-QIP. However, when she was asked about her involvement with that intelligence 
agency, she told the investigator she did not list it as employment as it was undercover 
and classified. She adopted her statement to the investigator in May 2013 in her answer 
to interrogatories, and did not alter her explanation. She later admitted that she has 
never held a security clearance and the information about her role as a confidential 
informant was not classified. She deliberately provided false or misleading information 
concerning her role with the intelligence agency to the investigator. AG ¶ 16(a) is 
inapplicable, but ¶ 16(b) applies. 
 
 Applicant’s employment was terminated by four different employers between 
2001 and 2009. While her termination due to illness cannot be said to be a case of poor 
judgment on Applicant’s part, the remaining three terminations were directly attributable 
to her poor judgment. Additionally, her publication of vulnerability findings was a breach 
of client confidentiality. Applicant acknowledged that she has a strong entrepreneurial 
spirit and that as a cyber-security expert, she sometimes serves two masters. That 
entrepreneurial drive has created conflicts between her employer’s policies and her 
ethics. Her decisions, which resulted in three terminations, support a whole-person 
 
7 
 
assessment that she may continue to exercise questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, and unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations; and therefore may not properly safeguard protected information. AG ¶ 
16(c) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, none of 
them were established in this case. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts 
to correct her falsification or concealment. She provided no information that indicates 
she was ill-advised on the security clearance process. Falsifying material information is 
a serious offense and Applicant has done nothing to show that similar lapses in 
judgment are unlikely to recur. Further, she failed to take responsibility for her actions 
and continued to assert that she played no role in her terminations from three 
companies.  She has not provided sufficient evidence to meet her burden of proof for 
her personal conduct.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a talented and dedicated cyber-security expert. She is well respected 
by her customers and those that wrote letters of support on her behalf. She was 
terminated from three different employers for misconduct and made false statements to 
an investigative agent. She failed to establish that future misconduct would be unlikely. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
