 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00698 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated foreign influence and personal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 17, 2014, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 2, 2014. The Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 2, 2014, 
scheduling the hearing for May 1, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 9, 2014.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Pakistan. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
Applicant did not object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in 
HE I. The facts are summarized in the written request and will not be repeated in this 
decision.   
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through C, which 
were admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old linguist sponsored for a security clearance by a 
defense contractor. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he has held since 
about 2009. He has a bachelor’s degree, and he has taken post-graduate classes 
without earning a post-graduate degree. He is married with three minor children.1 
  
 Applicant was born in Pakistan to Pakistani parents. His parents are now 
deceased. His wife was also born in Pakistan. Applicant came to the United States in 
1985. He married his wife in Pakistan in 1995. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 1996. 
His wife is also a U.S. citizen. Their three children were born in the United States. The 
children received Islamic education online from an individual who is a citizen and 
resident of Pakistan.2 
 
 Applicant has three siblings who are citizens and residents of Pakistan. One of 
his siblings is a school teacher, the other two are farmers. Applicant does not get along 
with the two siblings who are farmers, and he has not had any contact with them since 
2008. He communicates with the school teacher, but he has not seen that sibling since 
2008. Applicant transferred an interest in inherited land to his wife in 1995. The 
estimated value of the land is $5,000. The land is farmed by the two siblings that are 
estranged from Applicant. Applicant and his wife receive no value from the property.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 18, 23, 53-58; GE 1-3, 5, 6. 
 
2 Tr. at 18, 21; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3, 5, 6. 
 
3 Tr. at 27-31, 36-37; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3, 5, 6. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Pakistan. They were both involved in education, but are now retired.4 
 
 Applicant’s wife has two siblings who are citizens and residents of Pakistan. 
Applicant has cousins and friends who are Pakistani citizens and residents. One of his 
friends was killed in a terrorist attack. Applicant stated that he does not have any 
contact with his cousins, and he does not remember the last time he saw or talked to 
them. None of Applicant’s family has any association with the Pakistani government.5 
 
 Applicant worked in Afghanistan as a linguist for a defense contractor in 2009 
and 2010. He worked in Pakistan in 2010 through 2011. He met a Pakistani national at 
a social event. At some point, Applicant agreed to invest in a business venture operated 
by the Pakistani. Applicant opened a bank account in Pakistan. His wife wire transferred 
$10,000 from the United States directly to the Pakistani national’s bank account in June 
2011. She wired another $20,000 to Applicant’s bank account in Pakistan. In July 2011, 
Applicant gave the Pakistani an additional 700,000 Pakistani Rupees, which equated to 
about $7,500 in U.S. currency.6 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
November 30, 2011. He listed the Pakistani national that he was in business with as a 
foreign contact. He did not report their business relationship, instead, he described the 
individual as a “friend.” Question 20A asked about foreign financial interests within the 
time frame of the last seven years, and stated to “[i]nclude stocks, personal property, 
company shares, investments, or ownership of corporate entities,” and to “[e]xclude 
U.S. based fund managers and accounts managed through your employer.” Applicant 
listed his real estate in Pakistan under the appropriate question, but he answered “No” 
to the following questions: 
 
1. Do you have or have you EVER had any foreign financial businesses, 
foreign bank accounts, or other foreign financial interests of which you 
have direct control or direct ownership?  
 
2. Do you have or have you had any foreign financial interests that 
someone controls on your behalf?7 
 
Applicant intentionally failed to divulge his interest in the Pakistani business and his 
Pakistani bank account, which contained about $12,000 at the time.8 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 31-32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3, 5, 6. 
 
5 Tr. at 23-27, 32-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-3, 5, 6; AE C. 
 
6 Tr. at 26, 37-45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3, 4. 
 
7 GE 2. 
 
8 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant completed a Counterintelligence-Focused Security Screening 
Questionnaire on December 7, 2011. It appears that much of the questionnaire was 
completed by someone asking the relevant questions to Applicant and then filling in the 
answers for him. Applicant answered the following questions in the negative: 
 
What assistance, gifts, money, or other items of value have you provided 
to non-U.S. persons, organizations, foundations, or governments, or any 
organizations whose focus is on issues or areas outside the U.S? How did 
you make the transfers? 
 
Do you have any foreign bank accounts? If so, what is the purpose and 
balance of those accounts?9 
 
Applicant intentionally failed to divulge his Pakistani business interest and bank 
account.10 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation by an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator on December 8, 2011. He was asked about 
his Pakistani “friend” that he listed on the SF 86. Applicant told the investigator that he 
and the individual were strictly friends. He stated that the individual owned his own 
business, but Applicant did not know the name of the business or what kind of business 
he operated. Applicant intentionally told the investigator false information about his 
relationship with his Pakistani business partner.11 
 
 Applicant was interviewed again for his background investigation on October 4, 
2012. Applicant was asked if he had ever wire transferred funds to anyone other than 
the individual who taught an online course to his children. He answered “no,” and 
intentionally failed to divulge the wire transfer to his Pakistani business partner. The 
investigator then told Applicant that the investigation disclosed that funds were wire 
transferred from his bank account to a foreign country. Applicant stated that his wife 
wire transferred $20,000 to her father, who shared the same name as Applicant. The 
investigator then asked about the business owned by his Pakistani partner. Applicant 
stated that the money was wired to the Pakistani, who then gave it to Applicant’s father-
in-law.12 
 
 Applicant called the OPM investigator on October 5, 2012, and told the 
investigator that he had to meet the investigator and tell him everything. They met later 
that same day. Applicant admitted the facts surrounding the wire transfers and his 
business venture with the Pakistani. He also admitted that he lied on his SF 86, during 
                                                          
9 GE 5. 
 
10 The falsification of the Counterintelligence-Focused Security Screening Questionnaire was not alleged 
in the SOR. It will not be used for disqualification purposes. It may be considered in assessing Applicant’s 
credibility, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
11 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
12 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
5 
 
his December 2011 interview, and during his interview on October 4, 2012. He 
apologized profusely for his fabrications.13 
 
 Applicant closed his foreign bank account, and he dissociated himself from his 
foreign business interest. He is deeply remorseful for lying to the DOD about his 
Pakistani business connections. He is unable to explain why he did it, other than to say 
that he made a mistake. He pleaded for another opportunity to prove that he can be 
trusted, and he promised that all future statements will be completely truthful. He listed 
all his foreign contacts and business connections on the SF 86 he submitted in April 
2013.14 
 
 Applicant worked overseas under combat conditions. He submitted 
commendatory material and letters from U.S. military and civilian personnel, who 
praised his character, abilities, and service to the mission. One military officer wrote that 
Applicant’s “advice and cultural understanding was indispensable and possibly single 
handedly saved the lives of the men and women assigned to [military unit] on many 
occasions.” He further stated that in his 22 years of service, he “had not seen a more 
professional or qualified linguistic expert.”15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 58-59; GE 3. 
 
14 Tr. at 18-22, 45-47, 58-61; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 3. 
 
15 Tr. at 20, 50-52, 55-56; GE 3; AE A-C. 
 
6 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
7 
 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s siblings, in-laws, extended family members, and friends are citizens 
and residents of Pakistan. He owns property in Pakistan. Pakistan continues to have 
human rights problems, and it has been victimized by terrorist attacks. Applicant’s 
foreign contacts and property interests create a potential conflict of interest and a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and 
coercion, both directly and through his wife. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(d), and 7(e) have been 
raised by the evidence.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.g allege information that is already addressed under 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.f. When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the 
same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant’s 
favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged 
twice). Accordingly, SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.g are concluded for Applicant. 
 
There are no disqualifying conditions raised by Applicant’s children receiving 
Islamic education online from an individual who is a citizen and resident of Pakistan. 
SOR ¶ 1.n is concluded for Applicant  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
 
8 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation;  
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Pakistan. Guideline B is not 
limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.16  
 
The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 1985. He became a U.S. citizen in 1996. 
His wife is a U.S. citizen, and his three children were born here. He is not close to his 
cousins and other non-family associates in Pakistan. The land that he gave to his wife in 
1995 holds little value to him and his wife. He closed his foreign bank account, and he 
dissociated himself from his foreign business interest. AG ¶¶ 8(c) and 8(f) are applicable 
to those foreign contacts, which are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i through 1.m.  
 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
9 
 
 Applicant worked overseas under dangerous conditions in support of the national 
defense. The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s proven record of action in 
defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an 
applicant in a Guideline B case.”17 Notwithstanding, AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of national security.” Applicant lied about his foreign contacts on 
multiple occasions. It is difficult to take any information provided about Applicant’s 
foreign contacts at face value. Because of Applicant’s close family ties to Pakistan, I am 
unable to find any of the mitigating conditions to be fully applicable to his remaining 
family members in Pakistan. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information about his foreign financial 
interests on his November 2011 SF 86, during his December 2011 background 
interview, and during his October 2012 interview. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) are applicable.   
SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b both allege that Applicant falsified the same question on the 
same SF 86. They are duplicative allegations. Accordingly, SOR ¶ 2.b is concluded for 
Applicant. 
SOR ¶ 2.e alleges that Applicant entered into a business relationship with a 
Pakistani national without obtaining authorization or guidance from his employer or a 
                                                          
17 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
10 
 
U.S. official. There was no evidence presented that Applicant was required to obtain 
authorization or guidance before entering the business relationship. There are no 
disqualifying conditions raised by that conduct. SOR ¶ 2.e is concluded for Applicant  
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant did not correct his false SF 86 during his December 2011 
Counterintelligence-Focused Security Screening Questionnaire, his December 2011 
interview, or his October 2012 interview. Instead, he continued to lie about his business 
relationship with the Pakistani national. He receives credit in mitigation for calling the 
interviewer after his October 2012 interview and telling the interviewer that his 
statements were false. However, the mitigating conditions, individually or collectively, 
are insufficient to mitigate Applicant’s multiple false statements. With unresolved doubts 
about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment, I conclude that 
personal conduct security concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
11 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence, his work overseas, and 
the dangers involved in that work. However, he lied on multiple occasions about his 
foreign connections.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated foreign influence and personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i-1.n:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.c-2.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
