 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 13-01331 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established her eligibility for access to classified information by 
mitigating the security concerns raised by her past financial instability. Her past financial 
problems were mainly attributable to matters outside of her control, principally, a sudden 
and unexpected separation from her husband that left her solely responsible for the 
care and support of her four children. She secured full-time employment, took control of 
her finances, and resolved her past-due debts. Applicant’s recent track record of debt 
repayment and responsible management of her finances mitigates the security 
concerns at issue. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 11, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD), in accordance with 
DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). On March 15, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing (Answer). With her Answer, Applicant submitted 13 enclosures (Encl.). 
 
 
2 
 
 
On April 8, 2014, I was assigned Applicant’s case. After coordinating with the 
parties, I scheduled the hearing for May 14, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
Department Counsel offered exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 10 in their case-in-chief. Applicant 
testified and offered exhibits (Ax.) A – F. All exhibits were admitted without objection. 
The hearing transcript (Tr.) was electronically received on May 22, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 32, has been working for her current employer since about October 
2013. She is married, but separated from her husband. She has four children who she 
is supporting and raising principally on her own. She suffered from periods of 
unemployment and underemployment following the birth of each of her children. She is 
currently pursuing a college degree while working full time. She submitted a security 
clearance application in connection with her current job as a defense contractor. 
Applicant’s supervisor, co-worker, and professor write favorably regarding her judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. (Tr. at 30-31; Gx. 1; Ax. F)  
 
 Applicant married in 1999, when she was 17 years old. She allowed her 
husband, who was the primary breadwinner, to manage the family’s finances. After 
some time, she realized that he was overspending and they were unable to pay for their 
recurring and unanticipated medical expenses. Applicant tried to convince her husband 
to follow a budget, but he refused. His overspending and her inability to secure suitable 
employment left them unable to pay their debt. In 2004, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy and had about $15,000 in marital debt discharged. The majority of the debt 
was for uninsured medical expenses. (Tr. a 31-33; Answer; Gx. 1 – 3) 
 
 Following the 2004 bankruptcy discharge, Applicant and her husband’s finances 
stabilized for a time. However, the purchase of a home at the height of the recent 
housing bubble, his overspending, and her inability to secure suitable long-term 
employment again left them unable to pay their debts. In 2010, Applicant and her 
husband filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The Chapter 13 approved bankruptcy plan 
required payments of $658 per month for 55 months. Applicant paid on a consistent 
monthly basis for about three years, paying a total of nearly $18,000 into the plan.  
 
In about May 2013, Applicant’s husband left the marital home. He stopped 
contributing towards the household expenses and, initially, did not provide financial 
support his children. Applicant lost her job a few weeks later and was unable to continue 
paying the Chapter 13 plan. Upon the advice of counsel, Applicant voluntarily dismissed 
the bankruptcy case. She did not convert to Chapter 7 because she wanted to do the 
right thing and repay her creditors. (Tr. at 30, 33-39, 47; Gx. 4 – 7; Answer, Encl. 3) 
 
 Applicant secured full-time employment in October 2013 and shortly thereafter 
addressed her debts. She has satisfied all the SOR debts. With her Answer, Applicant 
submitted documentary proof of settling and paying the six debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d 
– 1.g and 1.k, which total nearly $5,000. (Answer, Encl. 7 – 11) She also submitted 
proof of disputing and the basis of her dispute for the cellphone debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
 
3 
 
 
1.c. She subsequently won the dispute with the creditor and paid the actual amount 
owed. (Answer, Encl. 1 – 2, 6; Ax. A, B, E) Applicant also submitted documentation of 
initially disputing the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h. She then worked out a settlement with the 
creditor and authorized an automatic payment from her checking account to pay the 
debt. Before the payment transaction was completed, the creditor recognized her 
dispute and removed the debt from her credit report. (Answer, Encl. 1 – 2, 12 – 13) As 
for the two delinquent credit card debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j, Applicant 
contacted the creditor collecting on these two debts, negotiated a settlement, and paid 
both debts.1 (Tr. at 39-40, 45-46; Answer at 4; Ax. A, C – E)  
 
 Applicant was able to resolve her debts by using an $8,000 tax refund and 
applying it to pay her past-due debts. She also receives a grant from her school for 
living expenses, which provides extra income and offsets the lack of adequate financial 
support for her children from their father. She is currently in the process of getting a 
divorce from her estranged husband. She has no credit cards and does not have any 
consumer-related debt. Applicant is a self-professed “extreme couponer”2 and shops 
only at thrift stores for clothing for herself and her children. Applicant’s frugalness has 
allowed her to pay her family’s monthly expenses on time and set aside money to pay 
debts and unexpected emergencies, without having to rely on high-rate credit cards or 
loans. She is currently pursuing an undergraduate degree in business management and 
accounting. She established a budget for her family based on the financial principles 
learned from her accounting courses. (Tr. at 31, 41-49)  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
                                                          
1 The SOR does not list the amount allegedly owed on either of these debts. After reviewing Gx. 6 and 
Ax. C – D, I find that these debts together totaled less than $2,000. 
 
2 Tr. at 46-47. 
 
4 
 
 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.3  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.4 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The potential security concern regarding an applicant with financial problems is 
explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
                                                          
3 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”) 
 
4 See ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013) (security clearance determinations require 
administrative judges to make predictive judgments).  
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s history of financial instability raises this concern and establishes the 
disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 
19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions were raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
 Applicant’s recent financial problems were mainly attributable to matters outside 
of her control, notably, her estranged husband’s decision to abandon the family. 
Applicant was left to financially support herself and her four children. She then lost her 
job on the heels of the separation and was unable to continue paying the Chapter 13 
plan, which she had consistently paid for three years. Applicant did not walk away from 
her debts. Instead, after securing full-time employment and taking control of her family’s 
finances, she contacted her creditors and resolved her debts. She either negotiated a 
settlement and paid or successfully disputed her debts. Applicant’s recent track record 
of debt repayment and how she responsibly manages her finances mitigate the financial 
considerations concern. Her past financial problems no longer raise doubts about her 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
 
6 
 
 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).5 Applicant is a dedicated mother who is raising four 
children on her own while working full time and going to school. She married at a young 
age and for far too long placed the trust of the family’s finances in the hands of her 
estranged husband. Although it took Applicant some time to remedy her financial 
situation, she now has a firm control over her family’s finances, responsibly manages 
her finances, and established that it is unlikely she will repeat the financial missteps of 
the past. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
5 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
