 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------  )  ADP Case No. 13-01059 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns regarding financial 
considerations.  Eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) I/II/III (public 
trust position) is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 3, 2013, Applicant applied for a public trust position and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On November 6, 2013, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility – Industry Division (CAF) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (effective within the DOD 
                                                          
1
 Item 5 ((SF 86), dated June 3, 2013).  
 
2 
                                      
 
on September 1, 2006) (AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under 
the Directive. The SOR alleged trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators could not make a 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for occupying an ADP I/II/III 
position to support a contract with the DOD, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether such eligibility should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 18, 2013. In a written 
statement, notarized on December 2, 2013, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations 
and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.2 A 
complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was prepared by 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The FORM was provided to 
Applicant on February 28, 2014, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 
30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the FORM on March 17, 2014. Applicant’s 
response was due on April 16, 2014, but as of May 12, 2014, he had not submitted any 
response. The case was assigned to me on May 12, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations (¶ 1.a. 
through 1.h.) of the SOR. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
retain his eligibility for occupying an ADP I/II/III position to support a contract with the 
DOD. A June 1998 high school graduate, Applicant received an associate’s degree from 
a community college in December 2006, and subsequently attended a university and a 
community college for nearly two years. He did not obtain another degree. Applicant 
enlisted in the U.S. Marine Corps (USMC) in September 1998, and remained on active 
duty until he was honorably discharged in September 2002. That same month he joined 
the USMC Inactive Reserve, and remained with that component until he was again 
honorably discharged in September 2006. Applicant has worked in a variety of positions 
with different employers. He was a part-time dishwasher, part-time package handler, 
glass seamer, data entry clerk, and technician before being hired by his current 
employer as a data entry operator in May 2013. He was unemployed from December 
2012 until May 2013.3 He was granted a secret security clearance in July 2007.4 
Applicant has never been married and has no children. 
  
                                                          
2
 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR). 
 
3
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 13-23. 
 
4
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 37-38. 
 
3 
                                      
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until January 2007, when 
he moved across country for unspecified reasons. A series of events occurred that 
Applicant contends negatively impacted his finances: he used his credit card to pay for 
moving and living expenses; he broke his lease when he moved; he expected to receive 
a large settlement stemming from a 2004 wrongful death lawsuit involving his deceased 
sister, but lost the case; his automobile was destroyed in a crash, and he had to 
purchase a new vehicle; he had several expensive automobile repairs; some of the 
benefits he had received from his GI Bill were not used for the designated purposes 
when he had to withdraw from some classes, and an overpayment resulted; he has had 
many years of low income work; and, he has had “periods of long unemployment.”5 
 
Applicant had anticipated being able to resolve all of his debts when he expected 
to receive the large settlement stemming from his sister’s wrongful death lawsuit, but 
when the verdict went against him, all of his plans collapsed. In June 2013, he stated “If 
I obtain a steady, decent paying job then I will be able to start repaying. . . .”6 His current 
plans are:7 
 
I will be able to make payment arrangements/settlements for all of my 
debts listed here once I have worked for some further period of time and 
catch up with current financial issues after my last long period of 
unemployment during which time I had no income for roughly 7 months. 
 
Although Applicant has held his current position since May 2013, he has not submitted 
any information or documentation to indicate that he has contacted his creditors, made 
any payments, or attempted to establish any repayment plans. 
 
The SOR identified eight purportedly continuing delinquencies as reflected by 
credit reports from June 2013,8 and October 2013,9 totaling approximately $26,590. 
Some accounts listed in the credit reports have been transferred, reassigned, or sold to 
other creditors or collection agents. Other accounts are referenced repeatedly in these 
credit reports, in many instances duplicating other accounts listed, either under the 
same creditor name or under a different creditor name. Some accounts are identified by 
complete account numbers, while others are identified by partial account numbers, in 
some instances eliminating the last four digits and in others eliminating other digits. 
Some accounts reflect no account number. Those debts listed in the SOR and their 
respective current status, according to the credit reports, other evidence already in the 
case file, and Applicant’s submissions regarding the same, are described below. 
                                                          
5
 Item 4, supra note 2. 
 
6
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 40. 
 
7
 Item 4, supra note 2. 
 
8
 Item 6 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated June 12, 2013). 
 
9
 Item 7 (Experian Credit Report, dated October 1, 2013).  
 
 
4 
                                      
 
(SOR ¶ 1.a.) There is a bank credit card with a credit limit of $5,500 and unpaid 
balance of $6,767 that was past due in the amount of $1,718 when the unpaid balance 
was charged off in January 2008.10 Applicant used this credit card to pay for his moving 
and living expenses. He has not made any effort to approach the creditor to establish a 
repayment plan because he does not have sufficient funds to start making payments. 
The account has not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.) There is a bank credit card with a credit limit of $500 and a past-due 
and unpaid balance of $991 that was closed by the creditor, placed for collection, and 
charged off.11 Applicant also used this credit card to pay for his moving and living 
expenses. He has not made any effort to approach the creditor to establish a repayment 
plan because he does not have sufficient funds to start making payments. The account 
has not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.) There was a disbursement of $6,000 from the Department of 
Veterans Affairs which was to be used by Applicant to pay college tuition, books, 
supplies, and living expenses under Applicant’s GI Bill benefits. When Applicant 
withdrew from college, the funds not used by him for the declared purposes were to be 
refunded.12 He has not made any effort to approach the creditor to establish a 
repayment plan because he does not have sufficient funds to start making payments. 
The account has not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.) There is a bank credit card with a credit limit of $1,300 and high 
credit of $1,763 that was closed, placed for collection, and sold to a bad debt 
purchaser.13 The debt purchaser increased the unpaid balance to $2,447.14 Applicant 
also used this credit card to pay for his moving and living expenses. He has not made 
any effort to approach the new creditor to establish a repayment plan because he does 
not have sufficient funds to start making payments. The account has not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.) There is an apartment lease that Applicant broke when he moved 
from his apartment leaving an unpaid balance of $6,023 that was placed for collection in 
2007.15 The unpaid balance was subsequently increased to $6,152.16 Applicant has not 
made any effort to approach the new creditor to establish a repayment plan because he 
does not have sufficient funds to start making payments. The account has not been 
resolved. 
 
                                                          
10
 Item 6, supra note 8, at 5; Item 7, supra note 9, at 1. 
 
11
 Item 6, supra note 8, at 7; Item 7, supra note 9, at 1. 
 
12
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 1. 
 
13
 Item 6, supra note 8, at 7. 
 
14
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 1. 
 
15
 Item 6, supra note 8, at 12. 
 
16
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 1. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.) There is a bank credit card with a credit limit of $3,000 and high 
credit of $3,906 that was over 120 days past due that was closed by the creditor, placed 
for collection, and transferred in 2008.17 Applicant also used this credit card to pay for 
his moving and living expenses. He has not made any effort to approach the creditor to 
establish a repayment plan because he does not have sufficient funds to start making 
payments. The account has not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.) There is a department store account with a credit limit of $590 and 
high credit of $891 that was closed, placed for collection, and sold to a bad debt 
purchaser claiming to be a factoring company.18 The debt purchaser increased the 
unpaid balance to $1,141.19 Applicant also used this credit card to pay for his moving 
and living expenses. He has not made any effort to approach the new creditor to 
establish a repayment plan because he does not have sufficient funds to start making 
payments. The account has not been resolved. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.h.) There is a cable television account with an unpaid balance of $92 
that was placed for collection in 2007.20 Applicant claimed he was unaware of the 
outstanding balance as he had never received a final bill following his move across 
country. He has not made any effort to approach the creditor to establish a repayment 
plan because he does not have sufficient funds to start making payments. The account 
has not been resolved. 
 
It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be for he has not 
submitted a personal financial statement to indicate his net monthly income, his monthly 
rent, debt, or household expenses, or whether or not he has any funds remaining at the 
end of each month for discretionary use or savings. There is no evidence to indicate 
that Applicant ever received financial counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”21 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive 
                                                          
17
 Item 6, supra note 8, at 9; Item 7, supra note 9, at 2. 
 
18
 Item 6, supra note 8, at 6, 9; Item 7, supra note 9, at 2. It should be noted that a "factoring company" is a 
company that buys "accounts receivable" from a current creditor and then collects on those receivables from the 
debtor. A factored account is not supposed to be an account that is charged off or uncollectible.   
 
19
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 6. 
 
20
 Item 6, supra note 8, at 13; Item 4, supra note 2. 
 
21
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
positions.”22 “The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties is 
that, based on all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security.”23 DOD contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made.24  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a public trust 
position. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and common 
sense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”25 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.26  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
                                                          
22
 Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
23
 Id. at ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
24
 See Id. at ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
25
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
26
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.  
Furthermore, security clearance determinations, and by inference, public trust 
determinations, should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”27 In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise 
security concerns. Commencing in 2007, Applicant found himself with insufficient funds 
to continue making his routine monthly payments, various accounts became delinquent, 
and they were placed for collection, charged off, or sold. Hoping to be able to resolve 
his delinquent debts through a large settlement stemming from his sister’s wrongful 
death lawsuit, all of his plans collapsed when the verdict went against him and there 
was no settlement. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. Evidence 
that the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
                                                          
27
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control is potentially 
mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.28  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) only minimally applies. Applicant’s financial problems commenced in 
2007 when a series of events occurred that Applicant contends negatively impacted his 
finances. He failed to explain why those events were largely beyond his control, or why 
they should not be considered normal, anticipated events in one’s life. He broke his 
lease, failed to resolve his cable account, and moved across country without explaining 
why he decided to do so, using his credit card to pay for moving and living expenses. 
His automobile was destroyed and he had to purchase a new vehicle that had several 
expensive repairs. The benefits he had received from his GI Bill were not used for the 
designated purposes when he had to withdraw from some classes, and an overpayment 
resulted. He claims he had many years of low income work, but failed to explain if he 
sought other positions to supplement his income. Applicant also claimed he had 
“periods of long unemployment,” but except for his one period from December 2012 
until May 2013, he never described any other such periods except while he was a 
student. It is apparent that Applicant continued to live his life unaffected by most of the 
above events because of his unrealized expectation that he would receive a large 
wrongful death settlement. In fact, Applicant gambled on winning, but he lost, and the 
financial issues were left unresolved. Applicant failed to act responsibly under the 
circumstances.29  
 
AG & 20(a) does not apply. The nature, frequency, and relative recency of 
Applicant’s financial difficulties since 2007 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred 
“so long ago” or “was so infrequent,” especially since those financial problems are 
continuing.  
 
                                                          
28
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
29
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)).  
 
 
9 
                                      
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply because there is no evidence that Applicant has ever 
received financial counseling or debt consolidation guidance. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because Applicant failed to initiate any effort, much 
less a “good-faith effort,” to start repaying any of his creditors. Applicant never 
contacted any of the creditors to try to make repayment arrangements, even for an 
account as little as $92. Over the years, Applicant did not act aggressively, timely, or 
responsibly to resolve his delinquent debts. Instead, he ignored his debts and continues 
to do so, claiming he “will be able to make payment arrangements/settlements for all of 
[his] debts listed . . . once [he has] worked for some further period of time and catch up 
with current financial issues. . . .  Applicant has been with his current employer since 
May 2013 – one year – and some positive movements should have already taken place 
to resolve some of his delinquent accounts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance or suitability for a public trust position by 
considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The 
administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance or suitability for a public trust position must be an overall commonsense 
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person 
concept.        
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He was 
honorably discharged from the USMC after serving on active duty and in the reserves. 
With the exception of his period of unemployment from December 2012 until May 2013, 
Applicant has generally been employed in either part-time or full-time positions. He has 
repeatedly declared his intention of resolving his delinquent accounts once he has the 
funds to do so.  
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial 
than the mitigating evidence. While the unemployment and reduced earnings were 
circumstances beyond his control, Applicant either had no ability or no intention to pay 
his delinquent accounts. He did not make any efforts to pay his creditors, generally 
 
10 
                                      
 
ignoring them, even after he had acquired his current position in May 2013. His long-
standing failure to repay creditors, at least in reasonable amounts (such as his $92 
delinquent account), or to arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns 
about his fitness to hold a security clearance or a public trust position.  
 
I am mindful that any one factor, considered in isolation, might put Applicant’s 
credit history in a sympathetic light. I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in 
light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal 
analysis.30 The absence of any efforts or evidence to reflect actual payments to his SOR 
creditors are sufficient to raise continuing security concerns. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through 
AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:31 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated a negative track record of making no efforts to pay 
his creditors, and generally ignoring them until he is financially able to address his 
delinquent debts.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
from his financial considerations.  
 
 
  
                                                          
30
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
31
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
11 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy an 
ADP I/II/III position to support a contract with the DOD.  Eligibility for public trust position 
is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
