KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings of fact are based on substantial record evidence. 
Adverse clearance affirmed
CASENO: 13-01187.a1
DATE: 05/16/2014
DATE: May 16, 2014
In Re:
--------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 13-01187
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 9, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
1In the File of Relevant Material (FORM) at 7, Department Counsel stated the following, in boldface type:
“[Applicant] has not provided any documentary evidence of the steps she has taken in recent years to address her
delinquent debts.  With her Response to the [FORM], [Applicant] has an opportunity to provide documentation
to support her claims that she has made payments towards resolving her delinquent debts . . . At this time,
however, there is no documentary evidence that [Applicant] has take any steps to resolve the 11 alleged delinquent
debts in the Statement of Reasons.”   Despite this highlighted language, Applicant did not submit a response to the
FORM.  Decision at 2. 
2
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On April 10, 2010, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Claude R. Heiny denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for a Defense contractor since 2010.  She seeks to maintain a secret
clearance.  There is no evidence in the record as to the nature of her professional duties; her
husband’s occupation and income; or her monthly expenses.
Applicant co-signed student loans so her daughter could attend a university.  These loans
equaled about $89,000, and two of them were charged off in amounts totaling nearly $22,000.  The
last actions taken on these accounts was in 2009 and 2010.
In 2011, her daughter divorced, left the university, and, along with her child, moved in with
Applicant.  The next year, other student loans became due, of which about $4,000 is over 150 days
late.  Applicant also has past-due debts for credit cards, medical expenses, and telephone services.
She settled a number of credit card accounts not listed in the SOR.  There is no evidence in the
record of financial counseling or of any efforts by Applicant to contact her creditors.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial circumstances raised concerns under
Guideline F, as asserted in the SOR.  Among other things, the Judge stated that Applicant’s expenses
increased when her daughter and grandchild moved in with her.  In concluding that Applicant had
failed to mitigate those concerns, he cited to a paucity of record evidence of debt resolution, of
recent unemployment by Applicant, or of efforts to contact creditors.  He stated that Applicant failed
to submit relevant and material information regarding her circumstances, relying instead on what
he termed “a scant paragraph of explanation.”  Decision at 6.  He concluded that the record did not
support a favorable decision.1
Discussion
2This last asserted error appears not in the Judge’s findings but in the FORM prepared by Department Counsel.
We find no error in the Judge’s statements regarding Applicant’s employment.
3
Applicant challenges the Judge’s findings of fact.  She states that she did not stop paying her
bills when her daughter moved in with her.  She also states that the daughter with the student loans
is not the same daughter as the one who divorced and that she had worked at three different facilities
since 2001, not, as she interpreted the Judge to mean, only one.2   Examining the Decision in light
of the record, we conclude that the Judge’s material findings of security concern are based upon
substantial record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-12172 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 9, 2014).  Any
error in the Judge’s findings did not likely affect the overall outcome of the case.
Applicant cites to matters from outside the record.  We cannot consider new evidence on
appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  See ISCR Case No. 12-00703 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 27, 2014).
Applicant’s citation to record evidence is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-13948 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 26, 2014).
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
  
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan                
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed; Jeffrey D. Billett                  
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
4
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
