 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 13-00532 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 19, 2009. On 
September 20, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline B. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
  
 Applicant received the SOR on November 11, 2013; answered it on November 
12, 2013; and requested a decision on the record without a hearing. Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on March 11, 2014. On the same 
day, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who 
 
 2
was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on April 8, 2014, and he 
responded on April 10, 2014. Department Counsel did not object to the materials 
submitted by Applicant in response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on April 
29, 2014.  
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Afghanistan. The request and supporting documents are included in the FORM. I 
have taken administrative notice as requested. The facts administratively noticed are 
set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor since 
October 2008. He received an interim clearance in January 2009.  
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan. He completed high school in Afghanistan, 
graduating in December 1973. In 1974, he attended the American Center School in 
Kabul, Afghanistan, to learn English, and that experience ignited his interest in coming 
to the United States. He still remembers his teacher’s name. (Response to FORM.)  
 
Applicant married a native of Afghanistan in March 1980. To escape from the 
Soviet occupation, he and his family left Afghanistan in May 1980 and went to Germany 
as refugees. They came to the United States in 1982. (Item 6 at 1.) Applicant became a 
U.S. citizen in May 1989, and his wife became a U.S. citizen in August 1989. (Item 5, 
PSI at 1.) They have two adult children, who are citizens and residents of the United 
States.  
 
 Applicant has eight brothers. One is deceased, two are citizens and residents of 
the United States, one is a citizen of Afghanistan residing in Germany, one is a citizen 
of Afghanistan residing in the United Kingdom, one is a citizen of Afghanistan residing in 
the Netherlands, and two are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. One of his brothers 
in Afghanistan is a lieutenant colonel in the Afghan Army, working for the Ministry of 
Defense in the Intelligence Directorate, and the other owns a juice and vitamin store 
and a gymnasium. He has telephonic contact with his brothers in Afghanistan, including 
the brother working for the Ministry of Defense, three or four times a year. (Item 2 at 6; 
Item 4; Item 6, listing of relatives and associates.) 
 
 Applicant has six sisters. All are housewives and citizens of Afghanistan. One 
lives in the Netherlands, one lives in Canada, and four live in Afghanistan. He has 
 
 3
telephonic contact with his sisters in Afghanistan once or twice a year. (Item 4; Item 6, 
listing of relatives and associates.) 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of the United States. His 
father, mother, and father-in-law are deceased. (Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant never returned to Afghanistan until he was hired as a linguist for U.S. 
military forces. (Response to FORM.) He has worked with a Marine Corps special 
operations unit in the Helmand Province of Afghanistan for almost five years, without 
taking a long-term vacation to see his family. Applicant’s team leader, a Marine Corps 
captain, submitted a letter on his behalf, stating that Applicant has “contributed 
tremendously” to the successes of his unit. He describes Applicant as highly reliable 
and committed to the unit. He states, “[Applicant’s] trustworthiness and absolute 
reliability are proven and to be trusted without a doubt.” Item 2 at 7.  
 
 I have taken administrative notice that Afghanistan has been an independent 
nation since 1919, and it was a monarchy until a military coup in 1973. Following a 
second military coup in 1978, a Marxist government emerged. In December 1979, the 
Soviet Union invaded and occupied Afghanistan, but they were resisted by the Afghan 
mujahedeen. The Soviet Union withdrew in February 1989 pursuant to an agreement 
signed by Pakistan, Afghanistan, the United States, and the Soviet Union. The 
mujahedeen were not a party to the agreement and refused to abide by it. The result 
was a civil war among several factions, including the Taliban. By the end of 1998, the 
Taliban controlled most of Afghanistan, committed atrocities against minority 
populations, and provided sanctuary to terrorist organizations. U.S. military forces, 
along with forces from a coalition partnership, forced the Taliban out of power by 
November 2001. With the assistance and support of the United States, a new 
democratic government took office in 2004. 
 
 Afghanistan’s central government is improving its ability to provide constitutional, 
stable, effective, and responsive governance. However, local governance is weak, and 
all levels of government are plagued by corruption.  
 
 I also have noted that Afghanistan’s human rights record is generally poor, due to 
the continuing insurgency, the weak government, and ongoing recovery efforts from two 
decades of war. In spite of efforts by the U.S. and the government of Afghanistan, it 
continues to be a violent, unsafe, unstable country. The weak government and internal 
instability have enabled hostile states, non-state actors, terrorists, and insurgents to 
continue operating in Afghanistan, including groups hostile to the United States. 
Insurgents use narcotics trafficking and kidnapping to finance their military and technical 
capabilities. Suicide bombing attacks continue to inflict large numbers of casualties. 
Helmand, Kandahar, Ghazni, and Kunar provinces are the most dangerous provinces 
for Afghan security personnel and International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) 
personnel. “Insider attacks” on ISAF personnel by members of Afghan forces or 
infiltrators into Afghan units are a serious concern, but they have declined since 2012, 
 
 4
as a result of Afghanistan’s increased focus on the vetting and training of security force 
personnel. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 
 5
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s two brothers are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan (SOR ¶ 1.a), one of his two brothers is employed by the Defense Ministry of 
Afghanistan (SOR ¶ 1.b), and his four sisters are citizens and residents of Afghanistan 
(SOR ¶ 1.c). The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information.  
 
 When foreign family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a 
foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 
 
 6
01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts 
with an immediate family member in a foreign country are not casual. ISCR Case No. 
00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
 
  AG ¶¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. It is not necessary for the Government to 
prove affirmatively that a country specifically targets U.S. citizens in order to raise 
Guideline B security concerns. ISCR Case No. 08-09211 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2010). 
Furthermore, factors such as the family members’ obscurity or the failure of foreign 
authorities to contact them in the past do not provide a meaningful measure of whether 
an applicant’s circumstances post a security risk. ISCR Case No. 07-13696 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 9, 2009). 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 There is no evidence that Afghanistan targets the United States for military or 
economic intelligence. However, the presence of Applicant’s siblings in Afghanistan, his 
regular contact with his siblings, his brother’s connection to the Afghan government, and 
the pervasive threat of terrorism in Afghanistan are sufficient to establish the “increased 
risk” under AG ¶ 7(a) and raise a potential conflict of interest under AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 
 7
 Three mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S; 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(a) is not established, for the reasons set out in the above discussion of 
AG ¶ 7(a). However, AG ¶ 8(b) is established. Applicant and his family fled from 
Afghanistan during the Soviet occupation, and he did not return until he began working 
as a linguist for the U.S. military. Present day Afghanistan bears little resemblance to 
the Afghanistan he left in 1980. He and his spouse have lived in the United States for 
about 32 years, and they have been citizens for almost 25 years. His children, two 
brothers, and mother-in-law are citizens and residents of the United States. He has held 
an interim security clearance and served with a Marine Corps unit in one of the most 
dangerous provinces in Afghanistan for almost five years. According to his Marine 
Corps supervisor, he “contributed tremendously” to the successes of his unit, and has 
established a reputation for “trustworthiness and absolute reliability.”  
 
Generally, an applicant’s prior history of complying with security procedures and 
regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative value for the purposes of 
refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the security concerns raised by that applicant’s more 
immediate disqualifying circumstances. However, where an applicant has established 
by credible, independent evidence that his or her compliance with security procedures 
and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which 
the applicant made a significant contribution to the national security, such 
circumstances give credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he or she will recognize, 
resist, and report a foreign power or terrorist’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. In 
this case, Applicant has a track record of complying with security regulations and 
procedures in high-risk circumstances in which he made significant contributions to 
national security. See ISCR Case No. 07-06030 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 19, 2008); ISCR 
Case No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr 9. 2008). Thus, I am confident that Applicant 
would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States.  
 
 AG ¶ 8(c) is not established. Applicant’s contacts with his siblings are infrequent, 
but he has not overcome the presumption that they are not casual. 
 
 8
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult who has lived more than half his life in the United 
States. He has cultural and familial connections to Afghanistan, but his loyalty is 
unquestionably to the United States. He has demonstrated his trustworthiness and 
reliability under austere and dangerous circumstances. Because Applicant requested a 
determination on the record without a hearing, I have had no opportunity to evaluate his 
credibility and sincerity based on his demeanor. See ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 
(App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). However, his Marine Corps team leader in Afghanistan has 
assessed his trustworthiness and reliability based on daily contact and personal 
observation, and I find the team leader’s assessment persuasive. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude that 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
 
 9
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
