 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 13-01051   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
May 22, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated approximately $23,000 of delinquent debts since 2012. 
He resolved only $1,070 of that debt. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On March 5, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86). 
On October 23, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the  Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 18, 2013, and requested that his 
case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 3.) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on February 7, 
2014. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six Items, 
was provided to Applicant on said date, and he was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on February 18, 2014, and timely returned the receipt to the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA). He did not provide additional information in response to the 
FORM within the 30-day period. DOHA assigned the case to me on May 15, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the six allegations contained in the 
SOR, and provided information and explanations. (Item 3.)  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He has worked for various Federal contractors since 
1998. He has held a security clearance since approximately 1998 in connection with his 
employment. Applicant was married in 1998 and divorced in 1999. He married his 
second wife in 2003. He has one stepchild, age 18. (Item 4.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) dated March 16, 2013, and September 26, 
2013, the SOR alleged six delinquent debts totaling $23,470 and dating back to 2012. 
(Items 5 and 6.) Applicant attributed his delinquencies to his wife’s depression and her 
failure to pay the bills in a timely manner due to her illness. (Item 4.) The status of each 
debt is as follows: 
 
 1. The $4,000 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is owed on a delinquent mortgage with 
a total loan balance of $280,000. This debt is for the primary mortgage on Applicant’s 
home. It has been delinquent since October 2012. He purchased his home in 2007, “at 
the height of the housing market” and estimated the home’s value has declined to 
“nearly half of the purchase price.” In 2013 Applicant contacted this lender and tried to 
negotiate a loan modification. He presented communications from this lender that stated 
“We are not currently trying to modify your loan.” Applicant failed to present evidence he 
is currently acting responsibly toward the resolution of this debt. This debt is unresolved. 
(Item 3; Item 6.) 
 
 2. The $3,000 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is owed on a delinquent mortgage with 
a total loan balance of $44,000. This debt is for the second mortgage on Applicant’s 
residence. It has been delinquent since August 2012. Applicant applied to refinance this 
mortgage with two different companies in 2007. However, he failed to introduce 
evidence that he successfully refinanced this debt or that he was otherwise responsibly 
addressing this debt. This debt is unresolved. (Item 3; Item 6.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
 3. Applicant is indebted on a delinquent account for a voluntarily repossessed 
vehicle in the amount of approximately $15,000, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. This debt has 
been delinquent since 2012. In Item 3 Applicant indicated, “I contacted [lender] about 
our account and have agreed on a settlement in the amount of $3,600 with payment 
agreements set up monthly in the amount of $100 to be paid at the end of each month.” 
He attached a document from the lender documenting the agreement. However, 
Applicant failed to present documentation to show he has successfully made payments 
under this agreement. This debt is not resolved. (Item 3; Item 6.) 
 
 4. The $1,000 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d was owed on Applicant’s current 
vehicle. He presented copies of two money orders paid to this creditor. He also 
submitted a copy of a letter from this creditor indicating Applicant had no past-due 
balance. This debt is resolved. (Item 3.) 
 
 5. The $400 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is owed on a medical debt. Applicant 
provided a letter that showed he contacted this creditor and set up an agreement to 
make a payment of $244.25 by November 29, 2013, and $244.25 by December 13, 
2013. Applicant failed to provide documentation that he made the payments as 
scheduled. This debt is unresolved. (Item 3.) 
 
 6. The $70 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f was owed to a medical collection agency. 
Applicant presented a letter from this creditor that stated, “the above referenced account 
has been closed as paid in full.” This debt is resolved. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant resolved $1,070 of the $23,470 SOR-listed debts. He provided no 
explanation for how he incurred the delinquencies or why he did not address his debts 
sooner than 2013. He failed to submit a budget or income statement. He submitted no 
evidence concerning the quality of his professional performance, the level of 
responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect to handling sensitive 
information and observation of security procedures. He provided no character 
references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
 
 
4 
 
 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Since 2012 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or 
unwilling to satisfy until sometime in 2013 when he resolved about 5% of them. The 
evidence raises both security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began accumulating in 2012, the bulk of which 
continue to date. Because he failed to seriously address two of the debts until 2013, and 
did not offer evidence he made payments on the other four delinquent accounts, he did 
not demonstrate that such problems are unlikely to continue or recur. His reliability and 
trustworthiness in managing delinquent debts remain a concern. The evidence does not 
support the application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant presented evidence that his financial problems were due to 
circumstances beyond his control, including his wife’s depression and the economic 
forces that caused the value of his home to significantly decline. However, he failed to 
provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he 
attempted to resolve the debts while they were accumulating, despite full-time 
employment. AG ¶ 20(b) has limited application.  
 
 Applicant failed to provide evidence that he participated in financial counseling or 
that he had a plan to fully resolve his debts. However, he addressed the SOR-listed 
debts in ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f, both of which are now resolved. AG ¶ 20(c) has no application 
to the SOR-listed debts in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, and 1.e, as there are not clear indications 
that those problems are under control. Applicant’s payment of two debts also indicates a 
good-faith effort to resolve those debts. Hence, AG ¶ 20(d) has application to the SOR-
listed debts in ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant had a reasonable basis to dispute any 
delinquent debt and successfully resolved it through the dispute process. AG ¶ 20(e) 
has no application.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 42-year-old 
employee of a defense contractor. In August 2013 he completed a SF-86 in which he 
disclosed delinquent debts. In October 2013 the Government issued a SOR informing 
him that delinquent financial obligations were jeopardizing his security clearance and 
employment. In November 2013 he answered the SOR, and indicated that he was 
 
 
7 
 
 
attempting to refinance his delinquent mortgages. In February 2014, the Government 
sent him the FORM, arguing that his security clearance should be denied, and 
specifically noting that he failed to submit proof that he made payments on his debt 
repayment plan or present copies of a refinanced loan. The FORM gave him 30 days to 
respond with further information. He failed to do so. Although Applicant paid off two 
smaller debts, he failed to establish a track record of responsibly managing or resolving 
the four remaining debts totaling over $22,400. 
  
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
