At the hearing, the Government withdrew the allegations under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
        )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00372
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
On February 27, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  The action was taken1
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 8, 2014. A notice of
hearing was issued on April 17, 2014, scheduling the hearing for May 16, 2014.
Government Exhibits (GX) 1-14 were admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified. He did not offer any exhibits for the record. The transcript (Tr.) was
2
received on May 23, 2014. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted one allegation for a debt, with
explanation. He denied the two allegations for falsification under Guideline E (Personal
Conduct).  
Applicant is a 70-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
college in 1972. He served in the United States Marine Corps from September 1966
until November 1969. Applicant is divorced, and he has three adult children.  Applicant
has been with his employer since 2012. (GX 1) However, he has worked in the defense
contracting field for many years. He held a security clearance in the military. 
The SOR alleges an indebtedness for a past-due mortgage account in the
amount of $65,000. In addition, the SOR alleges two falsifications on Applicant’s August
2013 security clearance application (SF 86).
In 2006, Applicant, his daughter, son-in-law, and a friend purchased and
invested in a waterfront property. The property was unimproved, but it was designed for
home building and was zoned residential. The purchase price of the property was
$750,000. (GX 10) Applicant’s share was 25%. However, the downturn in the real
estate market interfered with the profitability and interest in the property. Applicant’s
share of the mortgage was about $5,000 a month. The other three partners dropped
out of the deal, and Applicant alone was left with the mortgage loan. (Tr. 12) At the time
of the purchase, Applicant earned approximately $60,000 a year. (Tr. 32) 
Applicant’s daughter, who was a real estate agent, advised him about the
waterfront property, and she believed it would be a good investment with a quick
turnaround for a profitable sale. He did not do any independent research on the
property. 
In approximately 2009, Applicant contracted a disease that attacked his
autoimmune system and left him ill. He required chemotherapy treatments and could
not work. (Tr. 11) At that time, he had his own business. His inability to work resulted in
delinquent debts. Applicant used his savings to pay bills that he could. However,
eventually he could not maintain the mortgage payment on the waterfront property. In
2010, Applicant attempted a short sale. He stopped making payments on the mortgage
loan, but the bank did not agree to a short sale. He knows the property sold after
foreclosure. (Tr. 45) Applicant has not made any contact with the mortgage lender to
discover whether he owes a deficiency balance. (Tr. 62) He does not believe that he
has the responsibility to take any action after so many years.
Applicant could not recall many details about his various properties and
investments. (Tr. 59)  He stated that he forgot about one property that he owns which is
valued at $60,000. (GX 14)
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
3
In August 2013, Applicant completed a security clearance application. He
disclosed his health problems that interfered with his ability to work. He also noted a
foreclosure on a property. In response to Section 28, Applicant commented that he shut
down his business due to an illness and could not fulfill some of his financial
obligations. He also described the waterfront investment property and the forfeiture of
the property. Applicant explained that he had no intention of deceiving the Government.
Applicant earns approximately $115,000 annually. (Tr. 35) He pays alimony to
his ex-wife, which amounts to about $24,000 a year. He has a 401(k) which is valued at
$74,000.  After expenses and debt payments, he has a net remainder of about $623.
(GX 2) Applicant does not handle his own financial affairs. (Tr. 65) His ex-wife pays all
the bills and handles his checkbook. His pay is deposited to his ex-wife. Applicant uses
a bank card to obtain cash for his expenses.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
5
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches
of trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
Applicant incurred a delinquent debt on a past-due mortgage payment. His credit
report confirms his debt. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying
conditions in ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following
are potentially relevant:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
6
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
 
Applicant does not take responsibility for the mortgage default. Granted, he lost
his other three partners and he became ill and could not work for a period of time.
However, when he learned about the situation, he defaulted and never looked back. He
did not act responsibly. He has not received financial counseling. With steady
employment since 2012, Applicant has made no effort to contact the mortgage lender.
He walked away from his obligation, with no attempt to rectify the situation.  Applicant
does not handle his own financial affairs today. He leaves it all to his ex-wife.  AG ¶¶
20(a), (b), (c) and (d) do not apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 70 years old. He served in the military and has worked in the defense
contracting field for many years. Applicant suffered from an illness that left him unable
to work for several years. He was forced to close his business.  
7
Applicant decided to invest in a waterfront property in 2006. He did this on the
advice of his daughter. He did not investigate or research the property. Due to the
economic downturn, the property did not result in a profitable investment. Granted, he
lost his other partners and was left with the mortgage account. However, despite the
events beyond his control, he did not act responsibly. He walked away from his
obligation. He did not honor a good-faith obligation. Despite several years of a steady
income, Applicant has not attempted to resolve this financial issue. He does not handle
any of his financial matters. I have doubts about his judgment, reliability, and
commitment to address his financial issues.  
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: WITHDRAWN
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
