1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
        )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00111
Applicant for Security Clearance  )
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
On February 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG) implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 10, 2014. A notice of
hearing was issued on April 17, 2014, scheduling the hearing for May 15, 2014. Hearing
EX I, Informational Letter and Enclosure (DOD Directive 5220.6), was entered into the
record. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-4 were admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant
Exhibits (AX) A-H, which were admitted into the record without objection. The transcript
(Tr.) was received on May 23, 2014. Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony,
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the indebtedness for his judgment
and delinquent accounts, but denied the factual allegations for past-due mortgage
accounts, with explanation.  
Applicant is a 40-year-old contract systems engineer/manager, who is an
employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from high school in 1992. Applicant is
married, and has three children. Applicant has been with his employer since May 1998.
(GX 1) He has held a security clearance since 1998. 
The SOR alleges a indebtedness on judgments, collection accounts, and past-
due mortgages. The Government acknowledged that the debt in SOR 1.i has been
paid.
Applicant and his wife had been steadily employed for many years. They had a
combined income of approximately $140,000. They had no financial difficulties. Each
had owned a property, and during the course of their marriage, they decided to sell
those and buy a larger home. (Tr. 15)
In approximately 2007, Applicant’s wife became gravely ill.  A diagnosis of a
brain disease was made. She had surgery to remove the malformation, which
aggravated earlier injuries from a car accident. She then received a cervical disk fusion.
She could no longer work. (Tr.15)
Applicant incurred huge medical bills at the time he became the primary income
earner. He managed to maintain his family, but had to obtain a home equity loan. He
attempted to sell their home. He also contacted the mortgage company seeking
financial assistance, but was denied any assistance. (Tr. 17) At this time, the real estate
market took a downward turn. Applicant was offered some short sales, but the bank
refused to accept them. Applicant and his family had no choice but to leave their home.
He could not obtain another loan for the property. The home went to foreclosure and
the bank bought the house at the sale. A deficiency judgment against Applicant for
$125,000 remained. (SOR 1.a) Applicant pays the judgment from his paycheck each
month in the amount of $900. (AX A) A duplicate account is listed in SOR 1.f.
The home equity loan (judgment of $54,000) is in repayment status. (SOR 1.b)
Applicant submitted documentation that he has been making payments since 2013. (AX
B) The home equity loan is duplicated in SOR allegation 1.h.
The SOR allegation 1.c for a cable provider in the amount of $481 is in a
repayment plan. (AX C) Applicant has one more payment to resolve the account in full.
(Tr. 28)
Applicant is paying his collection credit card account that totaled $803. SOR 1.d
A monthly payment of $50 is directly deducted from his pay. (AX D)
3
Applicant explained that an unknown medical account in the amount of $58 is
not resolved. SOR 1.e He has attempted to find the account owner, but he has not
been successful. The credit report does not note a full account number. (GX 3)
Applicant produced documentation for allegation SOR 1.g ($71) a medical
account that has been paid. (AX E)
Applicant provided documentation that he paid the account in SOR 1.i before the
hearing.
Applicant earns approximately $93,000 annually. After expenses and debt
payments, he has a net remainder of about $1,300. He has been working with a credit
company to correct his credit reports that do not reflect correct information. He has
received financial counseling. 
Applicant was candid and forthright. He testified that he has not ignored his
creditors. He has been working to resolve the financial situation since 2008. His wife
was never able to resume outside work. He has been working and maintaining his
family throughout the years. He has worked hard at his employment and received many
promotions. He cares for his children. He sought all viable means when the unfortunate
circumstances occurred in 2007. His bank would not work with him or accept short
sales.  Applicant has addressed all his debts and presents as a very organized, efficient
person, who does not shirk from responsibility. 
Applicant’s supervisor testified that he has known Applicant for about 16 years.
Applicant is reliable and a team player. Applicant is conscientious in his work and has
shown he is a trustworthy, knowledgeable individual in dealing with sensitive matters.
(Tr. 50) Applicant is an excellent manager and has a strong character that has helped
him through his family crisis. He is a family man who has accepted the various
challenges that he has faced in the past few years. (Tr. 51)
Applicant submitted a letter of reference from a colleague who has known him
for two years. His colleague has a high opinion of Applicant, stating Applicant displays
great integrity, reliability, work ethic and character. (AX H) Applicant performs his duties
to the highest expectations.
 Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;
(b) indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or
establish a realistic plan to pay the debt;
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement,
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud,
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches
of trust;
(e) consistent spending beyond one's means, which may be indicated by
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis;
(f) financial problems that are linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling
problems, or other issues of security concern;
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same;
(h) unexplained affluence, as shown by a lifestyle or standard of living,
increase in net worth, or money transfers that cannot be explained by
subject's known legal sources of income; and
6
(i) compulsive or addictive gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful
attempt to stop gambling, "chasing losses" (i.e. increasing the bets or
returning another day in an effort to get even), concealment of gambling
losses, borrowing money to fund gambling or pay gambling debts, family
conflict or other problems caused by gambling.
Applicant incurred delinquent debts and judgments. His admissions confirm his
debts. Consequently, the evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions in ¶¶
19(a) and 19(c). 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following
are potentially relevant:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
 
Applicant’s wife’s illness and extensive surgeries have combined to cause
financial difficulties over the years since 2007. She could no longer maintain her outside
employment. These were events beyond his control. Applicant became the sole
provider for his family. Before 2007, he had no financial difficulties. He acted
responsibly in dealing with his home mortgage account and his home equity loan. He
did not receive any help from his bank. He incurred many medical expenses that were
beyond his insurance coverage. He maintained his employment and cared for his wife
and children. He has consistently paid his bills and obligations. He has made good-faith
efforts to repay overdue bills. He provided documentation to substantiate that all
accounts are resolved or in repayment status. He received financial counseling. With
steady employment, Applicant has his financial issues under control. He has acted
7
quite responsibly given all the circumstances beyond his control. AG ¶¶ 20(b), (d) and
(c)  apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 40 years old who has worked in the defense contracting field since 1998.
He has held a security clearance without incident. He has excellent recommendations
from his peers and employer. 
Applicant cared for his wife and family during the past years.  He did not shirk
from responsibility. He maintained his employment, even receiving promotions, and
dealt with his financial crisis. I have no doubts about his ability and commitment to
address his financial issues. He is highly organized and steadfast. Applicant has met
his burden of proof to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR  APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
