 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-00271 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant established his eligibility for access to classified information. He 
mitigated the criminal and personal conduct security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD), in accordance with DOD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline 
E (Personal Conduct). Applicant promptly answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
to establish his eligibility for access to classified information (Answer).  
 
On April 11, 2014, I was assigned Applicant’s case. After coordinating with the 
parties, I scheduled the hearing for May 12, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
Applicant testified and the Government offered exhibits (Gx.) 1 – 10, which were 
 
2 
 
 
admitted into evidence without objection. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on 
May 20, 2014, and the record closed on May 27, 2014.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 29, has been employed as a merchant seaman since 2009, and has 
been working for his current employer since about August 2013. He has never been 
married, but has a young child from a prior relationship who he financially supports. He 
graduated high school in 2003 and then attended college, but did not receive a degree. 
He spends about six to eight months of the year working and living on ships out at sea. 
When not out at sea, he lives with his mother and spends his time caring for his son and 
playing music. He is seeking a security clearance for the first time to work as a defense 
contractor. He has been entrusted with classified information over the past fourteen 
months, and reports no issues in handling and safeguarding such information. (Tr. at 
47-49, 63, 75-78; Gx. 1)  
 
 In March 2006, Applicant was involved in a fistfight with a childhood friend. 
During the fight, Applicant’s friend suffered a small cut on his wrist. No weapons were 
involved in the fight. Applicant was arrested and charged with malicious wounding, a 
felony. Less than two weeks later the charge was nolle prossed. (Tr. at 32-34, 49-50; 
Answer; Gx. 4)  
 
 In July 2008, Applicant was giving a ride to a recent acquaintance when he was 
pulled over by the police for a traffic violation. The police then conducted a search of the 
car, as well as Applicant and his passenger. The police uncovered drugs on the 
passenger. Applicant and the passenger were arrested. Applicant was charged with two 
felony drug offenses. Applicant testified that he was unaware that his passenger had 
drugs on his person or was involved with drugs. He stopped associating with the 
individual after the arrest. He further testified that he has never been involved with 
illegal drugs. Both charges were nolle prossed. (Tr. at 34-35, 51-57; Answer; Gx. 5 – 8)  
 
 In May 2009, Applicant and a few friends were fishing when they were briefly 
detained by the police. Applicant provided his identification and answered the police 
officer’s questions. While he was being questioned, one of the police officers 
purportedly saw an open beer can in Applicant’s car. The police officer reached in and 
unlocked the car through an open car window. The police then conducted a search of 
the car. Applicant became upset and vehemently objected to the search of his car 
without his permission. He was cited for obstruction of justice, a misdemeanor. The 
search of Applicant’s car did not uncover any drugs or other fruits of a crime. Applicant 
appeared in court, without counsel, and was convicted of the misdemeanor charge. He 
was sentenced to six months in jail (all but four days suspended) and two years of 
unsupervised probation. He successfully completed all terms of his sentence. He has 
                                                          
1 Applicant requested to hold the record open until May 26, 2014, to submit post-hearing matters. I 
granted his request and, in recognition of the federal holiday, sua sponte extended the original deadline 
by one day. No documents were received prior to the close of the record.  
 
3 
 
 
not been arrested, charged, or involved in any other incident involving law enforcement 
since this incident. (Tr. at 35-36, 57-62; Answer; Gx. 9)  
 
 In August 2013, Applicant was hired by his current employer. He was given 24 
hours before shipping out to complete and submit a security clearance application 
(SCA). Applicant, who was filling out a SCA for the first time, went through the process 
of setting up an account electronically and completed the application. He reviewed the 
questions and filled out the SCA at approximately 0200. In responding to questions 
about his criminal history, Applicant mistakenly omitted his prior arrests and 
misdemeanor conviction. Applicant testified that he had filled out numerous employment 
applications in the past and such applications only required information about arrests 
resulting in felony convictions. He mistakenly assumed the questions on the SCA also 
only required information about felony convictions. He now realizes that, 
notwithstanding the pressures of starting a new job and the 24-hour deadline, he should 
have taken his time and more carefully reviewed the questions.  
 
Applicant voluntary sat down for a background interview about a month after 
submitting his SCA. During the interview, the investigator reviewed with Applicant all the 
SCA questions, to include those regarding potential criminal history. The investigator 
explained to Applicant the extent of the matters that needed to be disclosed, to include 
any felony arrests and misdemeanor convictions. Applicant then disclosed and fully 
discussed with the investigator his 2006 and 2008 arrests, as well as his 2009 
misdemeanor conviction. (Tr. at 28-32, 36-47; Answer; Gx. 1 – 3) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
 
4 
 
 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.2  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information.3 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The security concern regarding criminal conduct is addressed at AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal record raises the above concern and establishes the 
following disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
AG ¶ 31(c): allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted. 
 
                                                          
2 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”) 
 
3 See ISCR Case No. 11-13626 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2013) (security clearance determinations require 
administrative judges to make predictive judgments).  
 
5 
 
 
 An applicant may mitigate the criminal conduct concern by establishing one or 
more of the mitigating conditions listed under the guideline. I have considered all the 
mitigating conditions and only the following were potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 32(c): evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but 
not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has not been arrested, charged with, or implicated in any criminal 
matter since his misdemeanor conviction in 2009. In the past five years, he has been 
steadily employed. He does not associate with others potentially involved in criminal 
activity. He financially supports and, when not deployed to sea, cares for and is helping 
to raise his son. He is now a responsible, hard-working adult, who no longer places 
himself in situations that may raise questions about his judgment or reliability. 
Furthermore, he has a demonstrated track record of safeguarding and properly handling 
classified information. AG ¶¶32(a) and 32(d) apply. 
 
 Applicant also established that he did not commit the drug offenses for which he 
was arrested in 2008. The drugs were not found in an area of the car where he had 
exclusive control over or could easily gain access to, such as, a glove compartment. 
Instead, the drugs were found by the police on the passenger, a recent acquaintance. 
Applicant credibly testified that he was unaware the passenger was involved with illegal 
drugs and, after the arrest, stopped associating with the individual.4 AG ¶ 32(c) applies.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct security concern is explained at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
                                                          
4 Although far from dispositive on this issue, the authorities’ subsequent decision to drop the drug charges 
tends to support Applicant’s testimony that he was not involved with illegal drug activity.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his SCA by omitting his 
2006 and 2008 felony arrest and 2009 misdemeanor conviction. Applicant denies the 
allegations. If said allegations were established by substantial evidence, such conduct 
would raise the disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 16(a).5 
 
 It is axiomatic that the security clearance process depends upon the honesty of 
all applicants and begins with the answers provided in the SCA. However, the omission 
of material, adverse information standing alone is not enough to establish that an 
individual intentionally falsified his or her SCA. An omission is not deliberate if the 
person genuinely forgot the information requested, inadvertently overlooked or 
misunderstood the question, or sincerely thought the information did not need to be 
reported. An administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.6 
 
 Applicant did not intentionally omit the information about his criminal history in 
response to the relevant questions on the SCA. Although he is a high school graduate 
with some college-level education and the questions at issue were not overly complex, 
he is far from a sophisticated applicant who would be familiar with the questions or 
matters required to be disclosed on a security clearance application. His previous 
experience with job applications, which only required disclosure of felony convictions, 
colored his perception of what information needed to be disclosed about his criminal 
record. Additionally, Applicant was tired and under the stress of a tight 24-hour 
deadline, at the end of which he would ship out to sea for several months. These 
internal and external factors conspired together to lead Applicant to mistakenly conclude 
that he was not required to disclose his prior arrests and misdemeanor conviction.  
 
 Applicant did not understand the extent of the information required to be 
disclosed regarding his criminal record until he met with the background investigator, 
which was about a month after he submitted the SCA. After the investigator sat 
Applicant down and explained to him the questions in detail, he revealed the adverse 
information and fully cooperated with the interview. Applicant’s candor and openness at 
the interview is inconsistent with the conduct of an individual who is deliberately trying to 
hide or minimize his criminal record. Furthermore, I had an opportunity to observe 
Applicant’s demeanor as he testified and found him credible.7 Accordingly, I find that 
Applicant did not deliberately falsify his SCA.8  
                                                          
5 Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . or similar form used to . . . determine security clearance eligibility. 
 
6 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-15935 (Appl. Bd. 
Oct. 15, 2003). 
 
7 Applicant’s hearing was held in a conference room and he was seated no more than an arms-length 
away, which allowed me to closely observe his demeanor while he testified.  
 
8 In reaching this conclusion, I recognize that a judge is not required to accept an applicant’s assertions, 
especially if such assertions are contradicted by record evidence, implausible, or internally inconsistent. 
In the present case, Applicant’s testimony was credible, plausible, and consistent throughout.  
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).9 Applicant is a young adult who has matured greatly 
over the past five years. During that time, he has established a career, works tirelessly, 
and, when not working, lives with his mother and cares for his young child. He no longer 
engages in conduct, such as the fistfight in 2006, or puts himself in situations, such as 
the outburst that led to his 2009 misdemeanor conviction, which could raise questions 
about his judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. Additionally, he has handled classified 
information without issue for over a year. Applicant met his heavy burden of mitigating 
the security concerns at issue. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:         For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
9 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
