 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
      )  ADP Case No. 14-00183 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carolyn E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the record evidence, I conclude that Applicant failed to 
mitigate trustworthiness concerns raised under the guidelines for financial 
considerations and personal conduct. His request for access to sensitive information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 13, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) citing concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct) of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).1 In his 
Answer to the SOR, signed March 29, 2014, Applicant admitted seven of the nine debts 
listed in the SOR, and also admitted the two allegations regarding falsification of his 
                                                 
1 Adjudication of the case is controlled by Executive Order 10865, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6 
(Directive), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines, which supersede the guidelines listed in 
Enclosure 2 to the Directive. They apply to all adjudications or public trust position determinations in 
which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
public trust application. He requested a decision based on the written record, in lieu of a 
hearing before an administrative judge of the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA).  
 
Department Counsel for DOHA prepared a presentation of the Government’s 
case in a file of relevant material (FORM) dated April 17, 2014. It contained the 
Government’s argument and documents (Items 1-7) to support the preliminary decision 
to deny Applicant's request for access to a sensitive position. Applicant received the 
FORM on May 7, 2014, and was given 30 days from the date he received it to file a 
response. He timely submitted a response and ten documents. (Items 9–18) 
Department Counsel did not object to Applicant's submission. (Item 8) The case was 
assigned to me on May 20, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 47 years old, unmarried, and does not have children. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 1989. Starting in 1998, he worked full-time as an analyst at a 
telecommunications company, until he was laid off in 2007. He was unemployed for 11 
months in 2007-2008. He worked full-time as a support agent from 2008 to 2010. He 
was unemployed for six months in 2010-2011. He served as a general manager at an 
antiques shop for six months in 2011-2012, and was then unemployed for six months. 
During his periods of unemployment, he was supported by savings and a trust fund set 
up by his parents.2 He worked as a customer service representative for one year, from 
2012 to 2013. He holds the same position in his current job, which he began in August 
2013. Applicant also operates a business selling items online. It is registered in his 
home state. He worked at the business an estimated 40 hours per week when he was 
unemployed. He said he did not list the self-employment on his public trust application 
because he does not receive substantial income from it. (Items 4, 5) 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 An agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interviewed Applicant 
in October 2013 as part of his investigation. During Applicant's interview, he explained 
that he had problems meeting his expenses because he had periods of unemployment 
or underemployment, and his expenses were more than he earned. However, he 
believed he was capable of meeting his financial obligations at the time. (Item 5)  
 
 The nine debts in the SOR include two Internal Revenue Service (IRS) tax liens 
totaling $52,449, and seven smaller delinquent debts ranging from $119 to $1,108. 
                                                 
2 During his investigation, Applicant stated he has borrowed approximately $15,000 from his trust fund, 
and he is not required to repay the borrowed funds. (Item 5) 
 
 
3 
Each of the nine debts appears in Applicant's credit reports dated September 2013 and 
April 2014 provided by the Government. The SOR alleges the following debts. (Items 1, 
6, 7) 
 
UNRESOLVED. Federal Tax Liens: $27,976, filed 2008 (allegation 1.b); $24,473, 
filed 2009 (allegation 1.a): When Applicant was laid off in 2007, he was paid $50,000 
in severance pay, a bonus, and stock. Taxes were not deducted. He believes he owed 
approximately 50 percent tax on the income from the severance package. In 2008, 
when he filed his 2007 return, he could not afford the taxes due. He did not realize at 
the time that he could discuss his situation with the IRS, and did not contact the 
agency. (Item 5) 
 
 At his investigative interview in October 2013, Applicant informed the agent of 
his federal tax delinquency. He stated that he retained a company to help him resolve 
the liens, and paid the company $3,000, but the company did not resolve the lien. He 
did not provide the name of the company, the dates he worked with it, or 
documentation supporting his claim. In August 2012, Applicant contacted the IRS. In 
December 2012, he offered to pay $5,000. At his interview, he stated he had not 
received a response from the IRS. (Item 5) 
 
 Applicant believes the IRS has filed only one tax lien, which relates to tax year 
2007. However, both his 2013 and 2014 credit reports show two tax liens, filed on 
different dates (September 2008 and December 2009), with two different case 
numbers. He noted in his response that he has disputed the $27,976 lien with two 
credit reporting agencies and has filed a dispute through his local court. Applicant has 
not provided evidence that these two liens are duplicates. (Items 6, 7, 9) 
 
PAYMENT PLANS. Applicant provided evidence in his response (Item 9) that he 
recently initiated payment plans for five debts, as follows. 
 
• Allegation 1.c – $1,108: Applicant has a payment plan for $160 monthly from 
April to July 2014. He provided a letter from the collection agency showing one 
payment was to be processed on April 26, 2014. (Item 10) 
 
• Allegation 1.d – $692: Applicant provided documentation from the creditor 
showing a payment plan of $138.42, to be deducted monthly from Applicant's 
bank account between April and August 2014. The creditor provided letters 
showing the April and May payments were about to be withdrawn from 
Applicant's account. (Item 11) 
 
• Allegation 1.e - $653: Applicant provided documentation from the creditor 
showing $53.92 was deducted from his account on March 31, 2014, and two 
payments of $100 were to be deducted on April 25 and May 9, 2014.3 (Item 13) 
                                                 
3 Applicant's response (Item 9) confused the payment plans for the debts at allegations 1.e and 1.f. 
According to his documentation, he will be paying $5.00 monthly on the debt of $508 at allegation 1.f 
 
 
4 
• Allegation 1.f - $508: Applicant established a payment plan for monthly 
deductions of $5 from his bank account between April and August 2014. He 
provided creditor letters showing the payments made in April and May 2014. 
(Item 12) 
 
• Allegation 1.g - $212: Applicant made an initial payment of $11.59 in March 
2014. The payment plan requires $50 per month from April through July, 2014. 
He provided documentation showing payments in April and May 2014. (Item 14) 
 
PAID. Insurance debt, $155 (allegation 1.h) - Applicant provided documentation 
showing payments of $77.67 in April and May 2014 on this insurance debt. (Item 15) 
 
UNRESOLVED. Unknown debt, $119 (allegation 1.i) – Applicant stated in his 
response that he has made arrangements to pay this debt in three monthly installments 
of $41.26 from May to July 2014. He provided no documentation to support the 
payment plan. (Item 9) 
 
 In his response, Applicant stated he has set up payment plans for two other 
debts not listed in the SOR. He also provided documentation showing he consulted a 
credit counseling service in May 2014. The counseling appears to have been 
informational, including an estimate of Applicant's monthly income and expenses. The 
financial summary showed Applicant earns $1,746 net monthly income. After 
expenses, Applicant had a negative monthly remainder of $137. The budget did not 
include Applicant's payment plans for allegations 1.c through 1.g. The documentation 
did not indicate Applicant had established a debt management plan with the counseling 
service. (Items 9, 16) 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 When Applicant completed his pubic trust application in September 2013, the 
financial section asked whether he had failed to file or pay federal, state, or other taxes 
within the previous seven years (2006-2013); Applicant answered “No.” During his 
interview the following month, he told the agent that he did not disclose the federal tax 
liens because he was not thinking of his past taxes at the time, and because he was 
working with the IRS on an offer in compromise. (Item 5) In his Answer, he stated, 
 
I thought I had clarified with [name], the investigator, why I answered this 
question the way I did. I admitted that I had not paid the Tax due to 
working out a payment plan via the Office & Compromise Form with the 
IRS. [Name] was supposed to note this in his report. (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant also answered “No” when the public trust application asked if, within 
the previous seven years, any of his debts were turned over to a collection agency or 
                                                                                                                                                            
(see Item 12) and $100 per month on the debt of $653 at allegation 1.e (see Item 13), and not vice 
versa. 
 
 
5 
were delinquent more than 120 days. He stated to the OPM agent that he answered 
“No” because he thought his debts were paid, and he did not realize he had to list 
them. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the falsification allegations, but 
with explanation. (Item 5) Regarding his failure to disclose his delinquent debts, he 
stated in his Answer, 
 
I thought I had clarified with [name], the investigator, why I answered this 
question the way I did. I had explained to him that I had made 
arrangements with the various collection agencies and Am [sic] currently 
in the process of paying off these debts; which I thought was noted on the 
report. (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant's file contains no character references or performance evaluations. 
However, he submitted several documents showing praise from customers and from 
his current employer for his work performance. (Answer) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each decision regarding a public trust position must be a fair, commonsense 
determination based on all available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).4 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” 
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines. The presence or absence of a disqualifying or 
mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed when a case can be measured 
against them because they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of 
access to sensitive information. In this case, the pleadings and the information 
presented by the parties require consideration of the adjudicative factors addressed 
under Guidelines F and E.  
 
 A trustworthiness decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to sensitive information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the decision to deny or 
revoke access to sensitive information for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, 
it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. 
Because no one has a “right” to a sensitive position, an applicant bears a heavy burden 
of persuasion.6 A person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
                                                 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
6 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the national interest as her 
or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national security” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of 
the Government.7 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the concerns pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information.8 An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The concern under Guideline F is broader than the possibility that an applicant 
might knowingly compromise sensitive information in order to obtain money. It 
encompasses concerns about an individual’s reliability, judgment, and other qualities 
essential to protecting sensitive information. One who is financially irresponsible might 
also be irresponsible, negligent, or unconcerned in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.9  
 
 Applicant has failed to establish a record of meeting his financial obligations. He 
remains approximately $52,000 in debt to the federal government for unpaid income 
taxes. Until recently, he had seven delinquent debts, with no plan in place to pay them. 
The record supports application of the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 The financial considerations guideline also contains factors that can mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 20, 
especially the following:  
 
                                                 
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
8 The same guidelines apply to trustworthiness determinations as classified information. 
 
9 ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
7 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are both numerous and recent. The IRS tax liens, his largest 
debts, are unpaid. Applicant's lack of substantial efforts to meet his obligations, until 
the SOR was issued, casts doubt on his trustworthiness and reliability. AG ¶ 20(a) 
cannot be applied. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) applies where an individual experiences events over which he had 
no control, and which affected his finances. Here, Applicant receives some mitigation 
because he has been unemployed or underemployed several times between 2007 and 
2012. However, for full mitigation, an applicant must act responsibly in the face of 
these circumstances. Applicant did not make substantial efforts to deal with his tax 
liens until 2012, four years after the first lien was filed. His payment plans have all been 
established within the past two months. Applicant did not act responsibly, and receives 
only partial mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
 Applicant consulted a credit counseling agency in May 2014. The budget he 
developed with the counselor shows he has a negative monthly remainder, and the 
budget did not include the monthly payments he has set up for five SOR debts. His 
documentation does not show he has retained the agency or established a debt 
management plan. Applicant receives limited mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
 Applicant receives some mitigation for recently establishing payment plans, and 
making payments over the past two months. However, he has not brought his finances 
 
 
8 
under control. His tax liens are not resolved, nor is there any payment plan in place for 
it. His recent payments, made after receiving the SOR, are insufficient to establish a 
track record of meeting his obligations. Evidence of past failure to meet financial 
obligations is not mitigated by payment of debts motivated primarily by the pressure of 
qualifying for a public trust position. Applicant stated he disputed the second tax lien 
with the credit reporting agencies and his local court. However, he did not provide any 
evidence of these actions, or documentation to support his claim that the second lien is 
a duplicate. AG ¶ 20(d) applies in part, and AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleges that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose facts 
related to his financial status, implicating the following under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
In his 2013 public trust application, Applicant answered “No” in response to 
questions asking if he had failed to pay federal taxes, or had any debts that were in 
collection status or 120 days or more delinquent. In his Answer, he admitted to the 
allegations that he deliberately failed to disclose his financial delinquencies. However, 
his explanations indicate that Applicant did not admit to deliberately intending to falsify. 
 
As to his failure to disclose taxes, Applicant stated during his interview that he 
was not thinking of the taxes, but also that he was working with the IRS. These two 
contradictory statements cannot both be true—either he was not thinking about the 
taxes, or he was thinking of them and of his offer in compromise. In addition, his 
explanations regarding his delinquent debts during his interview and in his Answer 
contradict each other. During the interview, he stated he thought his debts were paid, 
but in his Answer, he stated he had told the agent that he was working on payment 
plans. Applicant's contradictory explanations are not credible. I conclude that he 
deliberately failed to disclose his true financial status during his investigation. AG ¶ 
16(a) applies. 
 
 
9 
Among the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17, the following are relevant: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Applicant’s failure to be candid with the Government during his investigation is 
not minor. It is also recent, as he completed his public trust application only eight 
months ago. His actions reflect poorly on his reliability and judgment. In addition, there 
is no evidence that Applicant made efforts to change or correct the answers on his 
application at any time during the adjudication process. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and (c) cannot be 
applied.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant’s history includes positive factors, such as his education and work 
performance. In addition, he made some efforts to work with the IRS in 2012, and he 
recently set up payments plans. However, the negative factors are more substantial. 
He has not followed through with the IRS to resolve his most substantial debt, the 
unpaid income taxes. His payment plans are so recent that I cannot determine if he will 
follow through. Moreover, his negative monthly remainder will likely prevent him from 
 
 
10 
being able to make the payments. Finally, Applicant's trustworthiness is undermined 
because he did not disclose his significant debts on his public trust application, and his 
explanations were not credible. Doubts remain about Applicant's reliability and 
judgment.  
 
 Overall, the evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns raised by the financial considerations guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b   Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to allow Applicant access to sensitive 
information. Applicant’s request for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
