 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04696 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s history of erratic compliance with the treatment protocol for his diagnosed 
bipolar disorder resulted in impairment of his judgment and in dysfunctional behavior 
requiring psychiatric hospitalization. A credentialed psychologist opined in October 2012 
that Applicant will, in all likelihood, remain prone to periods of erratic behavior. While 
Applicant has been a valuable contributor to his defense contractor employer, psychological 
conditions security concerns persist. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 9, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under Guideline I 
(Psychological Conditions) and explaining why it could not find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to continue Applicant’s security clearance eligibility. The DOD took 
action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 2 
 
On November 30, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and requested 
a hearing before the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On February 8, 
2012, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing and consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. I 
scheduled a hearing for March 1, 2013. 
 
I held the hearing as scheduled. Eleven Government exhibits (GEs 1-11) and one 
Applicant exhibit (AE A) were admitted into evidence without objection.
1
 Applicant also 
testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on March 8, 2013. At the Government’s 
request, I agreed to take administrative notice of the section of the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4
th
 Ed., Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR), pertaining to 
bipolar disorders. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
The SOR alleged under Guideline I that Applicant was psychiatrically hospitalized 
for erratic behavior and diagnosed with bipolar disorder in 2000 (SOR 1.a); that Applicant 
failed to comply with his psychiatric medication, leading to  erratic, paranoid, or aggressive 
behavior, and to mental health hospitalizations in 2003 (SOR 1.b) and twice in late 2009 
(SOR 1.c and 1.d); that Applicant’s mental health condition required psychiatric 
hospitalization twice in 2012 (SOR 1.e and 1.f); and that a licensed, credentialed 
psychologist, who evaluated Applicant for the DOD in October 2012, concluded that 
Applicant was likely to remain prone to periods of dysfunctional and erratic behavior with 
the potential of compromising his ability to fulfill his security responsibilities (SOR 1.g). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the psychiatric hospitalizations and bipolar 
diagnosis. He also admitted that he did not take his medication prescribed in 2003, with 
adverse impact on his mental health. He denied that he stopped taking his prescribed 
psychiatric medication in 2009, and he attributed his erratic behavior and two 
hospitalizations in 2012 to the “bad interaction” of a steroid medication taken for a medical 
problem.  
 
After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old senior systems engineer with a master’s degree in 
physics. He has worked for his present employer, a defense contractor, since September 
2004. He has prior U.S. military service, from December 1984 to August 1986 at the 
enlisted rank. A member of the inactive reserve from August 1986 to May 1990 while 
pursuing his college degree, Applicant enlisted as an officer in the same military branch in 
May 1990. (GEs 1, 5.) He held a secret-level security clearance while in the U.S. military. 
                                                 
1 
Applicant’s exhibit consisted of a personal statement, counselor assessments, laboratory results, a character 
reference from his spouse, and work performance evaluations. They were offered by Applicant as one exhibit. 
 
 3 
Applicant was married to his first wife from December 1988 to May 2005. They had three 
sons, who are now ages 22, 21, and 18, and a daughter now age 15. (GE 1.) 
 
In May 2000, Applicant was psychiatrically hospitalized for a few days after an angry 
outburst to the executive officer on ship. He was diagnosed with bipolar I disorder. (GEs 8, 
11; Tr. 39-43.) Applicant disagreed with the diagnosis and thought he was being harassed, 
so he chose not to take his prescribed psychiatric medications. (AE A; Tr. 34, 44-45.) On 
September 27, 2001, Applicant was granted a medical retirement from the military due to 
developing mental health issues. (GE 5.) In November 2001, he began working as a senior 
engineer with a defense contractor. (GE 1.) He was not under any active treatment for his 
bipolar illness between 2001 and 2003. (Tr. 45-46.) 
 
In January 2003, Applicant had a manic episode. He had three of his children with 
him when he stopped off at a mall and locked his keys in the van. While waiting for his 
spouse to arrive with a spare set of keys, he became suspicious of his and his children’s 
safety without reasonable basis. He sheltered himself and his children in an unlocked 
vehicle nearby. After his wife took their children from him,
2
 Applicant began opening parked 
cars to activate their alarms and elicit the aid of mall security. The police brought Applicant 
to a local emergency room, where he was referred to the Veterans Administration (VA) 
hospital. On February 1, 2003, Applicant was put on a psychiatric hold and admitted for 
mental health treatment at the VA facility. Applicant disregarded the hold and left the 
facility. He took a bus to a hotel where he reserved a room and made dinner reservations 
for himself and his wife, from whom he was apparently estranged. She arrived with his 
brother and a friend, and together, they brought him back to the VA. Applicant, who had 
reportedly engaged in impulsive behavior for about a month, was diagnosed with bipolar 
disorder, manic episode, and prescribed Depakote and Risperdal (risperidone). Applicant’s 
72-hour hold was extended to a 14-day hold because he had no shelter and had “maxed 
out” his credit cards. His mania symptoms persisted in the hospital, and a temporary 
commitment was ordered. On February 19, 2003, Lithium and Klonopin medications were 
added to his psychotropic regimen. On March 11, 2003, Applicant was discharged in stable 
condition to temporary housing, and with instructions to follow up with bipolar support 
groups and his physician. Lithium, Depakote, Risperdal, and Klonopin medications were 
prescribed on discharge.
3
 Applicant’s thought processes were organized, and he 
expressed a willingness to honor a restraining order obtained by his first wife against him. 
(GE 6; Tr. 46-49.) 
 
Applicant found shelter with a cousin, and his then spouse and their children moved 
to another state. At a VA outpatient clinic two weeks after his discharge, Applicant was 
reportedly compliant with his medications. He exhibited no delusions, no grandiose or 
paranoid themes, and was medically cleared to work. Over the next month, he was weaned 
                                                 
2 
Applicant testified that when his first wife arrived, she “sort of freaked out.” Applicant denies any recall of 
having put his children in a car that did not belong to him. (Tr. 47.) He also has no recollection of trying to open 
cars to activate their alarms. (Tr. 48.) 
 
3 
Applicant testified that his treating psychiatrist told him that the goal was to become medication free. (Tr. 52.) 
Available VA records (GE 6.) indicate that Applicant was maintained on Lithium. They do not show that he was 
in any way advised to stop taking his Lithium. 
 
 4 
off the Risperdal. Applicant continued to follow up with supportive psychotherapy sessions 
every two to three weeks with his VA psychiatrist. He remained on Depakote and Lithium 
medications with adjustment in dosages. He had no manic or psychotic episodes, despite 
family stress over contact and visitation with his children. In the fall of 2003, his VA 
psychiatrist advocated for visitation rights for Applicant because he had been compliant 
with his treatment, including his mood stabilizer medications. Applicant’s compliance was 
documented by checking for therapeutic blood levels on a regular basis. During a routine 
clinic visit in mid-November 2003, Applicant reported some dissatisfaction with his job and 
complained about having to take his psychiatric medications, but there were no acute 
manifestations of his bipolar condition. (GE 6.) 
 
In January 2004, Applicant underwent a background investigation for a security 
clearance. A VA psychiatrist opined that Applicant had been stable on medications without 
any symptoms of his bipolar disorder for one year, despite ongoing struggles with his 
estranged wife over visitation and contact with their children. She assessed Applicant’s 
prognosis as excellent provided continued treatment, including Depakote and Lithium 
medications. (GE 6.) 
 
In February 2004, Applicant was laid off from his job when his contract ended. (GE 
1.)  VA staff clinicians continued to advocate for Applicant to have visitation rights with his 
children because of his compliance with his treatment regimen with no signs of mania. In 
mid-September 2004, Applicant moved across the United States to state X for his present 
job. Applicant was advised to follow up with the VA clinic in his new area. (GE 6.) 
 
On January 25, 2005, Applicant had a medical intake at a VA facility in state X to 
establish care and obtain prescription medications (Lithium and divalproex). He denied any 
episodes of mania, anger outbursts, restlessness, impulsivity, increased spending, or 
sleeplessness. Applicant continued to receive medical care and medication management 
from the VA, but no psychological counseling. (GE 6.) 
 
In September 2005, Applicant moved to state Y, where he bought a home. In 
February 2007, Applicant married his second wife. He became stepfather to her two 
children. (GE 1; Tr. 50.) Three years later, Applicant and his second wife divorced. (Tr. 50-
51.) 
  
On February 12, 2008, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to continue his security clearance 
eligibility. In response to section 21 concerning any mental health counseling or 
hospitalization in the last seven years, Applicant indicated that he was treated at a VA 
medical center from January to March 2003. (GE 1.) 
 
Starting in January 2009, Applicant began reducing his intake of Lithium without first 
consulting with his primary care physician or VA clinicians. (GE 6; Tr. 52.) Applicant 
decided to wean himself off his medication, reportedly because a psychiatrist had told him 
in 2003 that the goal was for him to eventually be free of psychiatric medication. (Tr. 53.) 
On May 5, 2009, Applicant was contacted by an authorized investigator for the Office of 
 
 5 
Personnel Management (OPM) about any current medical treatment. He admitted 
previously undisclosed treatment, consisting of Lithium medication managed by a local VA 
clinic since 2004 for bipolar disorder. Applicant indicated he was in compliance with his 
treatment. (GE 2.)  
 
Applicant had a particularly stressful year in 2009. His sister died suddenly early in 
the year, and he changed positions with his employer, which meant a lengthy three-hour 
roundtrip commute. (Tr. 53.) Applicant’s ingestion of reduced levels of Lithium (twice 
instead of three times a day) led to a deterioration of his mental health (paranoia and 
delusional behavior in the evenings) by October 2009. On October 20, 2009, at the request 
of his primary care physician, Applicant was evaluated by VA outpatient psychiatry for 
urgent medication management. Applicant presented with an even affect and easygoing 
disposition, despite his noncompliance with his Lithium regimen. Applicant indicated he 
was under stress because of his lengthy commute to work, long hours at work, and legal 
problems with his ex-wife, who was seeking an increase in alimony and child support. 
Applicant was continued on his Lithium dosage and risperidone was added. (GE 6.) 
 
 Applicant returned to the VA the following day for an outpatient mental health 
assessment. He denied racing thoughts, impulsive behavior, paranoia or delusions, or 
mood swings. He presented as organized, stable and at baseline, with no irritability noted. 
His judgment and insight were assessed as good. Lab testing was ordered to obtain a 
Lithium level. He was not interested in individual counseling, but indicated that he would 
utilize it if needed in the future. Applicant was continued on Lithium and, as needed, 
risperidone. (GE 6.) 
 
On November 4, 2009, Applicant’s then wife called the local police complaining of 
his bizarre behavior over the previous six weeks. He was not sleeping or eating, had been 
spending money excessively, and was paranoid and aggressive at times. Applicant was 
assessed in a local emergency room as being irritable with tangential thoughts. He was 
referred to a nearby psychiatric hospital in state Y, where he was voluntarily admitted for 
management of his bizarre behavior in the context of known bipolar I disorder. Applicant 
admitted he was not taking the full dosage of prescribed Lithium, but he denied any change 
in his mood or in his sleeping and eating habits. Applicant was assessed as having an 
episode of hypomania related to noncompliance with his Lithium therapy and lack of 
regular psychiatric follow up. Over the next few days, Applicant was intermittently angry, 
paranoid, and demanding, although he attended groups and was generally compliant with 
his medications. His Lithium dosage was gradually increased until November 13, 2009, 
when he was discharged. At discharge, he exhibited no evidence of a thought disorder, 
and his judgment was assessed as fair to good. Applicant recognized the need to take 
Lithium, although he would not acknowledge that he had been psychiatrically ill. Applicant 
was referred for psychiatric follow up to the VA clinic with a principal diagnosis of bipolar 
disease, most recent episode manic with mild psychotic features. (GE 7; Tr. 61.) 
 
In mid-November 2009, Applicant went out drinking at a strip club. The next day, he 
threatened his wife during an argument. She reported to VA clinicians that Applicant had 
“maxed out” one of their credit cards (GE 6.), which Applicant denies doing. (Tr. 56.) Later 
 
 6 
in the month, she informed the VA that she decided to separate from Applicant 
permanently. She did not know of his whereabouts, and he was likely without his 
psychiatric medications since they were in the home. (GE 6.) 
 
On November 30, 2009, the police were called to a hotel in state X on staff reports 
of bizarre behavior by Applicant (disoriented and claiming he was an FBI agent “testing” 
their security). (Tr. 54-55.) Applicant was admitted to a hospital’s emergency department 
for exhibited confusion and agitation. He became combative with staff, and hospital 
security was utilized for staff safety. Laboratory testing showed his Lithium level was sub-
therapeutic (below 0.1). Applicant was started on Zyprexa. At a mental health evaluation on 
December 1, 2009, Applicant claimed he was taking his Lithium as prescribed, but he 
exhibited loose associations and laughed to himself. Applicant appeared grandiosely 
paranoid, and his judgment and insight were poor. Applicant was eventually discharged 
from the hospital on December 9, 2009, and advised to stay on his medications as 
prescribed. (GE 8; Tr. 62.) Applicant missed work for several days because of his 
hospitalization, and he was given a warning from human resources. (GE 6.) 
 
Applicant’s second wife obtained a restraining order against him, and a six-month 
physical separation was ordered. On December 16, 2009, Applicant had an initial 
outpatient psychotherapy session with a psychiatric clinical nurse specialist (PCNS) at the 
VA. Applicant admitted that multiple stressors (child support, issues at work) caused him to 
stop taking his psychiatric medications. He presented as somewhat hypomanic, talkative, 
overly bright, somewhat expansive, but not delusional or paranoid. He recognized that he 
had a bipolar illness for which he needed to take prescribed Lithium. He was encouraged 
to take prescribed risperidone for the next few weeks to stabilize his mood. Applicant was 
to be monitored closely for any decompensation in his mental health, and he was referred 
for outpatient counseling with a VA licensed clinical social worker (LICSW). (GE 6.)  
 
Applicant’s frustrations increased over the next few days. He drove to an airport 
twice to pick up his son only to discover that the flights were cancelled. He received parking 
tickets both times. When his son was finally in route, Applicant decided to rent a car to 
drive to the airport because his vehicle was having mechanical problems. He charged the 
rental to his employer-sponsored credit card because money was tight. After his son called 
to indicate he was being driven by a friend, Applicant drove the rental car to see his family 
in state Y. He “forgot” he was driving a rental car, while his own vehicle was towed to a 
dealership. Applicant had not taken any Lithium because it was in his car. He was “really 
worked up” by the time he went to the dealership on December 22, 2009, to retrieve his 
vehicle. Whether due to anger or hypomania, he became upset when the car dealer put his 
call on hold. At the dealership, he crashed his vehicle into two cars in the lot. (Tr. 63-66.) 
Arrested for criminal mischief, Applicant was jailed pending bail. He continued to be without 
his medications (Tr. 68-69.), and agitated, he tried to escape. (GEs 6, 11.) Applicant now 
denies he tried to escape from jail. (Tr. 67.)  
 
At a January 13, 2010, outpatient psychotherapy session with the VA PCNS, 
Applicant claimed he was doing well, although he then revealed the recent incident at the 
dealership and expressed concern that he could possibly lose his job over it. In a “very 
 
 7 
stressful” meeting at work, Applicant had been confronted about his behavior, including his 
unauthorized charges on the corporate credit card when he was out of funds. To the VA 
PCNS, Applicant appeared to minimize the extent of the damage to the vehicles at the 
dealership. He had difficulty recalling dates and sequence of events. He was talkative, 
pressured, tangential, redirectable only after prompting, and exhibited some delusions or 
paranoia about airplanes crashing. Nonetheless, the VA concluded that inpatient treatment 
was not necessary because Applicant was more stable after being on Lithium for the past 
week. Applicant agreed to take medications (Lithium and risperidone) as prescribed, to get 
labs drawn as needed, to receive outpatient psychotherapy every two weeks, and, if 
needed, to seek treatment at a nearby VA hospital. Applicant’s lithium level was low. He 
was advised to abstain from alcohol as much as possible. Applicant had been stable in the 
past for almost five years on his mental health medications. It was felt that Applicant could 
regain that level of stability provided he complied with his treatment (psychiatric 
medications and appointments) for diagnosed bipolar disorder and remained sober. (GE 
6.) 
 
By his next psychotherapy session two weeks later, Applicant was approaching his 
baseline of functioning. He showed good insight into his illness, although he had chosen 
not to take his risperidone on some Sunday nights because it made him groggy. Applicant 
exhibited good judgment in repaying his employer and creditors for the funds spent during 
his manic episode. His treatment plan was to return to the VA in one month, or sooner if 
needed. (GE 6.) 
 
Due to time and attendance issues, and work performance problems, Applicant was 
referred by his employer to a licensed mental health counselor affiliated with its Employee 
Assistance Plan (EAP). Applicant had eight sessions of individual counseling from January 
14, 2010 to March 29, 2010. He reported a history of prescription medications and 
treatment for an undisclosed condition through the VA. Because he was on medication, the 
EAP and VA recommended that he abstain from alcohol as part of his treatment plan. (GE 
10.) 
 
In February 2010, DOHA asked Applicant about any consultations with mental 
health providers because his primary care physician at the VA had indicated that he was 
not actively involved in his care. Applicant disclosed his outpatient counseling with the VA 
PCNS. About his recent arrest for criminal mischief, Applicant indicated the situation was 
“simply an accident that would require the filing of insurance claims to pay for damages.” 
When he contacted the dealership to retrieve his vehicle, he got the “run-around” for about 
a half hour. He became “overwhelmed by the situation” because of his bipolar condition 
and lack of medication, and “accidentally hit vehicle” owned by the dealership. Applicant 
related that court hearings were pending, but he was allowed to return to work on January 
11, 2010. (GE 3.) 
 
As of late February 2010, Applicant’s treating PCNS at the VA noted that Applicant’s 
compliance with his psychiatric medication had improved, although Applicant was not 
taking his risperidone daily because of its effects (made him too groggy). Applicant denied 
any racing thoughts or anxiety. Work was not as stressful for him. Applicant was to return 
 
 8 
in one month for VA psychotherapy and, at the recommendation of his EAP counselor, to 
begin social work therapy at the VA. At his initial intake with the LICSW on March 10, 2010, 
alcohol was identified as a potential problem in that Applicant indicated that he was 
drinking one alcoholic beverage a night and two or three on the weekends, although he 
reportedly had been abstinent for the previous week. (GE 6.) 
 
Applicant continued to receive outpatient psychotherapy and medication 
management at the VA on a monthly basis. He reported taking his Lithium daily and his 
risperidone “most days.” He was motivated for treatment and showed good insight into his 
mental illness. As of his April 2010 session, he was somewhat depressed because of his 
separation from his second wife and the garnishment of his pay by his first wife for spousal 
and child support. As of June 2010, Applicant had less stress in that his second wife 
agreed to sell the home that they had shared before their separation, so that he could 
move closer to his job. Of concern to this VA outpatient psychotherapist, Applicant had a 
sub-therapeutic Lithium level. Applicant admitted to the VA that he had missed doses of 
Lithium. As of August 2010, Applicant’s Lithium level was down from 0.4 to 0.2.
4
 (GE 6.) 
 
By September 30, 2010, Applicant was living closer to work and pursuing a short-
sale of his house. He was at his Lithium baseline and showed good judgment. He was 
taking a medication for a medical condition, and permitted to adjust his dosage of Lithium 
to help with fatigue provided he was taking his prescribed dose each day. During a primary 
care visit that fall, concerns were noted about that other medication. He was told not to 
take the drug for medical flare-ups because of a possible interaction with his mental health 
medication. (GE 6.) 
 
At a December 2, 2010 outpatient psychotherapy session with the VA PCNS, 
Applicant reported work was going well. He admitted to some stress over difficulty selling 
his house, but no mood swings, anxiety, or manic symptoms. Despite a sub-therapeutic 
Lithium level (0.34), Applicant was maintained on the same dosage of Lithium. At his next 
VA psychotherapy session in late January 2011, Applicant reported one day where he felt 
stressed, which he relieved with a full dose of risperidone. Applicant reported he had an 
offer on the house, and he and his spouse were getting divorced. Lithium-level monitoring 
showed him to be at the low end of therapeutic. (GE 6.) 
 
On February 26, 2011, Applicant informed DOHA that he was still taking Lithium. 
(GE 4.) On March 7, 2011, his VA therapist (the PCNS) opined Applicant had a condition 
that could impair his judgment, reliability, or ability to properly safeguard classified, national 
security information. His prognosis was good as long as he continued to take his 
medication. On March 9, 2011, the VA PCNS and the VA LICSW co-signed a letter 
confirming Applicant’s attendance at the VA outpatient clinic for treatment of bipolar 
disorder with a long history of being stable and doing well on his medication. They opined 
that if Applicant was to come off his medication, “his behavior can and will become 
unpredictable.” (GE 6.) 
 
                                                 
4 
According to the VA, Applicant functioned well when his Lithium level was 0.5 or higher. (GE 6.) 
 
 9 
In May 2011, Applicant met his current spouse. (AE A.) In June 2012, while in the 
midst of moving their household, Applicant displayed paranoia and expressed 
unreasonable concerns to his spouse about their safety. Applicant asserts that he was 
compliant with his bipolar medications, and that the episode was brought on by a bad 
interaction of his Lithium medication and a steroid medication taken for a medical 
condition. At his spouse’s suggestion, he admitted himself for inpatient psychiatric 
treatment for eight to ten days. His Lithium level was low. Following this hospitalization, 
Applicant was out of work for three weeks. Shortly after his return to work, Applicant 
became depressed over the loss of his mentor at work. In late July or early August 2012, 
he was admitted to a VA hospital for ten days for treatment of his first mixed bipolar 
episode (mania and depression). Three days after his discharge, he returned to work.
5
  
(GE 11; AE A.) His steroid medication was discontinued (AE A; Tr. 74.), although because 
of his bipolar disturbances, his Lithium dose was increased from 900 mg. per day to1200 
mg. per day. (Tr. 76-77.) As of March 1, 2013, Applicant was still on this dose of Lithium. 
(Tr. 81.) 
 
 From August 17, 2012 to mid-February 2013, Applicant had counseling with an 
EAP-affiliated LICSW. Applicant was compliant with the LICSW’s treatment 
recommendations. (AE A.) The EAP clinician advised Applicant to continue with their 
sessions as well as his VA counseling, and to take his pharmacological medications as 
prescribed. (Tr. 75.)  
 
On October 2, 2012, Applicant underwent a psychological evaluation by a licensed 
clinical psychologist for the DOD. Applicant remained “somewhat tense” throughout the 
evaluation. His speech was “somewhat rapid and mildly pressured.” He remained “friendly, 
appropriate, cooperative, and focused throughout the evaluation.” He reported low stress. 
He was living with his fiancée (now spouse) and her two children, and he was reportedly 
exercising regularly. The psychologist assessed Applicant’s bipolar condition as chronic 
and likely to continue throughout his working life: 
 
[Applicant’s] bipolar condition will, in all likelihood, continue throughout his 
working life, although it is not unusual for the severity of manic and 
hypomanic episodes to subside somewhat with the reduction in energy 
accompanying the aging process. His times of dysfunctionality and erratic 
behavior appear to come on quite rapidly, although had he more insight and 
awareness of his own mental-emotional state it is possible that he would be 
able to identify the precursors to episodes, rather than, as has usually been 
the case, his instability first being detected by others. On the positive side, he 
does not have the history of substance abuse so common in those with his 
condition; on the negative, there is no firm reason to believe that his pattern 
of irregular taking of prescribed bipolar medication has changed. He will in all 
likelihood remain prone to periods of dysfunctionality and erratic behavior 
                                                 
5
The file contains no outpatient psychotherapy notes of sessions at the VA after January 31, 2011. So, 
although the PCNS confirmed that Applicant was in psychotherapy as of February 22, 2013, it is unclear 
whether clinicians attribute his episodes to the interaction of his Lithium with his steroid medication, to stress, 
to another cause not apparent in the record, or to a combination of factors. 
 
 10 
possibly compromis[ing] the responsibility with which he is entrusted. (GE 
11.) 
 
 Available laboratory test results show Applicant’s Lithium level was slightly below 
therapeutic as of early October 2012, although it was a therapeutic .88 in January 2013. 
Applicant still attends the VA outpatient clinic for treatment of his bipolar disorder. His 
treatment plan is to continue taking psychopharmacological medication (mainly Lithium) 
and receiving supportive counseling. As of February 22, 2013, his VA therapist opined that 
when Applicant is stable, on medication, and invested in his treatment, he is capable of 
functioning at a normal level. Yet, the nature of bipolar disorder makes it difficult to predict 
Applicant’s future compliance with his treatment plan. (AE A.) 
 
Applicant understands that his bipolar illness is life-long and requires daily 
medication to control it. He intends to comply with treatment recommendations, which 
involve taking the dosages of pharmacological medications prescribed for him, having 
routine blood workups to check medication levels, and routine psychotherapy. Every couple 
of weeks, he has counseling at the VA, and every three or four weeks, he sees the EAP 
clinician. (AE A; Tr. 35, 72-73, 76.) Applicant’s spouse is supportive of him. She makes 
sure that he takes his nightly dose. (AE A; Tr. 78.)  
 
Applicant’s annual work performance evaluations from 2008 through 2012 show that 
he has a record of valuable technical, organizational, and leadership contributions. He 
exceeded the requirements of his position in 2008 and met them in subsequent years. For 
2011, he was described as a “valued and versatile individual” at the company. In 2012, his 
key strengths were work ethic, task management, leadership ability, and presentation skills. 
Applicant worked many extra hours to complete tasks on time and with high quality. He 
performed best on a small team, where his maturity and professionalism improved 
productivity. Supervisory personnel believed he would benefit from a mentor who could 
advise him on career advancement. (AE A.) Applicant denies any violations of security 
regulations or procedures at work or in the military (Tr. 37.), and no evidence was 
presented to the contrary. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
 
 11 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline I—Psychological Conditions 
 
 The security concern for psychological conditions is set out in AG ¶ 27: 
 
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair judgment, 
reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is not required 
for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified medical health 
professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist) employed by, or 
acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government, should be consulted 
when evaluating potentially disqualifying and mitigating information under this 
guideline. No negative inference concerning the standards in this Guideline 
may be raised solely on the basis of seeking mental health counseling. 
 
 Applicant required inpatient psychiatric treatment in May 2000, after an incident 
involving the ship’s executive officer. He was diagnosed with bipolar disorder and 
prescribed a mood stabilizer. A diagnosis of bipolar disorder is not per se disqualifying, and 
no negative inferences are raised solely on the basis of counseling or medication 
 
 12 
management for the condition. However, Guideline I concerns are raised when the mental 
health condition is not adequately managed and results in behavior that casts doubt on 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. Applicant refused to acknowledge his mental illness 
in 2000, and he did not take his medication. After a manic episode in a mall parking lot in 
January 2003, Applicant was psychiatrically hospitalized for six weeks. He was mentally 
stable for a sustained period thereafter while in treatment with the VA, consisting primarily 
of monitoring prescribed Lithium. Around January 2009, Applicant decided, on his own, to 
reduce his daily intake of Lithium. He began taking only two doses rather than three, at a 
time when his home and work life were especially stressful. By October 2009, he was 
exhibiting delusional and paranoid behavior at home. At the request of his primary care 
physician, Applicant was evaluated by VA outpatient psychiatry for urgent medication 
management on October 20, 2009. He was placed on risperidone as well as Lithium. He 
chose to take minimal doses of risperidone because he did not like its effect on him, and 
he declined individual psychotherapy. 
 
 In early November 2009, Applicant was admitted to a psychiatric hospital for 
hypomania related to noncompliance with his Lithium therapy and lack of regular 
psychiatric counseling. At discharge on November 13, 2009, his judgment was assessed 
as fair to good, but he continued his bizarre behavior (e.g., threatened his second wife, 
spent excessively on credit). On November 30, 2009, after he impersonated an FBI agent 
claiming he was testing hotel security, he was admitted to a hospital exhibiting mania, 
confusion, and agitation. Laboratory testing showed Applicant’s Lithium level to be sub-
therapeutic. At discharge from the hospital on December 9, 2009, Applicant was 
encouraged to take his medications. 
 
 Applicant presented as somewhat hypomanic at an initial intake for outpatient 
psychotherapy at the VA on December 16, 2009, and he was urged to take risperidone as 
well as Lithium. Within the next week, Applicant crashed his vehicle into two cars at a 
dealership after he got upset when the dealer placed his call on hold. He attempted to 
escape from jail where he had been confined on a criminal mischief charge for damaging 
the cars at the dealership. After he returned to work, Applicant expressed unreasonable 
concerns about planes crashing during a session at the VA on January 13, 2010. 
 
 Applicant showed improved compliance with his Lithium medication while in 
outpatient psychotherapy with the VA, although he missed some dosages. As of August 
2010, his Lithium level was low. He also did not take his full dosage of risperidone because 
it made him feel groggy. Although prescribed “as needed,” VA clinicians continued to 
recommend that he take the full dosage for beneficial effect. Applicant drank alcohol 
despite being advised to avoid alcohol as much as possible.  
 
 After being relatively stable for 2.5 years, Applicant was twice hospitalized for mental 
health issues in the summer of 2012. In June 2012 Applicant displayed paranoia, 
expressing concerns to his spouse for their safety. After his first inpatient stay of eight to 
ten days, he had a hypomanic and depressive episode in late July or early August 2012. 
No medical records were made available for either admission, and there is no confirmation 
from his therapist at the VA that the bipolar episode was attributable in whole or in part to a 
 
 13 
bad interaction of steroid medication with his Lithium. At the same time, there is no 
evidence that he took less Lithium than prescribed.  
 
 Under Guideline I, Applicant’s erratic and, at times, bizarre behavior during 
hypomanic episodes implicates disqualifying condition AG ¶ 28(a), “behavior that casts 
doubt on an individual’s judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness that is not covered under 
any other guideline, including but not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, 
dysfunctional, violent, paranoid, or bizarre behavior.” AG ¶ 28(b), “an opinion by a duly 
qualified mental health professional that the individual has a condition not covered under 
any other guideline that may impair judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness,” applies. A 
licensed clinical psychologist, who evaluated Applicant at the DOD’s request in October 
2012, opined that Applicant has a chronic bipolar condition, and that he is likely to remain 
prone to periods of dysfunctional and erratic behavior that could possibly compromise the 
responsibility to which he is entrusted. 
 
 AG ¶ 28(c), “the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a 
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g., failure to take prescribed 
medication,” is also established. Applicant has a history of not fully complying with the 
treatment for his bipolar illness, even assuming he is currently following his treatment plan. 
He did not accept the diagnosis of bipolar disorder or the need for treatment in 2000. It led 
to the manic episode in January 2003. Once he began taking Lithium, his mental health 
stabilized, although he declined recommendations for psychiatric counseling. He also 
drank alcohol against clinical advice. Around January 2009, he stopped taking his full dose 
of daily Lithium. His decision to reduce his intake of Lithium was medically contraindicated 
in 2009, whatever he had been told in 2003 about the course of his illness long term. 
Applicant also chose not to take risperidone on many Sundays because it made him feel 
groggy. By October 2009, his mental health had deteriorated to require an emergency 
consultation at the VA for medication management. Applicant’s hypomania in October 
2009 and in early November 2009 was attributed by mental health clinicians to his 
noncompliance with his Lithium and the lack of regular psychiatric follow up. After Applicant 
was discharged from his psychiatric hospitalization on November 13, 2009, he did not 
immediately follow up on the referral to outpatient treatment at the VA. His failure to pursue 
recommended treatment had negative consequences for his mental stability, as evidenced 
by his drinking at a strip club in mid-November 2009, spending excessively on credit, and in 
late November 2009 impersonating an FBI agent. 
 
 Applicant’s history of erratic compliance with his treatment for his diagnosed mental 
illness precludes reasonable application of mitigating condition AG ¶ 29(a), “the identified 
condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the individual has demonstrated 
ongoing and consistent compliance with the treatment plan.” Also, it is difficult to fully apply 
AG ¶ 29(b), “the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment program for a 
condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is currently receiving counseling 
or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified mental health professional.” 
Applicant’s 2012 psychiatric hospitalizations were voluntary, but he also has a history of 
involuntary mental health admissions. He was confused, agitated, and exhibiting loose 
associations when brought to the hospital by the police after he was observed 
 
 14 
impersonating an FBI officer claiming to test a hotel’s security in late November 2009. AG ¶ 
29(b) also requires a favorable prognosis. Applicant’s VA therapist considers him capable 
of functioning at a normal level, if he is stable, on medication, and invested in his 
treatment, but the PCNA also opined that the nature of bipolar disorder is such that it is 
difficult to predict how Applicant will do in the future. Moreover, a qualified clinical 
psychologist assessed Applicant’s condition as chronic, with “no firm reason to believe that 
his pattern of irregular taking of prescribed bipolar medication has changed.” Applicant 
maintains that he has been compliant of late with his psychiatric medication. Even so, it 
failed to prevent the manic episode in June 2012 or the bipolar (depression and manic) 
behavior in late July or early August 2012. Available evidence is insufficient to attribute the 
recent exacerbations of his illness, in whole or in part, to pharmacological interaction of 
steroid medication rather than to the nature of his bipolar illness, which, by history, has 
been of rapid onset and in response to stress. 
 
 AG ¶ 29(c), “recent opinion by a duly qualified mental health professional employed 
by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government that an individual’s previous 
condition is under control or in remission, and has a low probability of recurrence or 
exacerbation,” is not established. A duly-qualified clinical psychologist, who evaluated 
Applicant for the DOD, opined that Applicant lacks sufficient insight and awareness of his 
own mental-emotional state to be able to identify the precursors to his bipolar episodes. He 
concluded that Applicant will in all likelihood remain prone to periods of dysfunctional and 
erratic behavior. 
 
 Neither AG ¶ 29(d), “the past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g., 
one caused by death, illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been resolved, and the 
individual no longer shows indications of emotional instability,” nor AG ¶ 29(e), “there is no 
indication of a current problem,” is implicated in light of the chronic nature of Applicant’s 
mental illness, even if he is currently functioning well. The psychological concerns are not 
fully mitigated under Guideline I. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a).
6
 Applicant’s valuable contributions to his employer since 2008 weigh in his favor 
under the whole-person assessment. During extended periods of mental stability, Applicant 
showed himself to be a good leader, well-organized, and capable of handling his job and 
                                                 
6
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 15 
security responsibilities. At the same time, he has a chronic condition that requires ongoing 
pharmacological intervention with clinical monitoring. He exercised extremely poor 
judgment when he chose not to take doses of prescribed psychiatric medication without 
first consulting mental health professionals or his primary care physician. The negative 
consequences of his noncompliance with his treatment included bizarre and even 
potentially dangerous behavior. None of the episodes occurred at work, although they 
affected his job in lost time. While in the throes of a manic episode in December 2009, he 
used his employer-sponsored credit card to rent a vehicle for personal use without 
authorization. 
 
Whether due to his hypomanic state at the time, to self-denial of his mental illness, 
or to reluctance to admit to behavior raising serious security concerns, Applicant denies 
any recall of trying to activate car alarms in the mall parking lot in 2003. He claims his first 
wife “freaked out” when she arrived with the keys for his vehicle. He denies that he spent 
excessively on credit during his second marriage or that he tried to escape from jail after 
his arrest for criminal mischief. Applicant attributes his latest bipolar episodes in the 
summer of 2012 solely to the “bad interaction” of a steroid medication to his Lithium. The 
record evidence does not indicate that Applicant was taking less medication than was 
prescribed, and voluntary treatment is viewed favorably. Yet, mental instability severe 
enough to require a psychiatric admission certainly raises concerns about whether his 
mental illness is being properly controlled or managed. Applicant’s commitment to adhere 
to his treatment plan going forward is not enough to overcome the Guideline I security 
concerns, especially when a duly-qualified mental health professional is not confident 
about Applicant’s ability to recognize the precursors to a bipolar episode or to take his 
medications on a regular basis. The DOHA Appeal Board has long held that the federal 
government need not wait until an applicant actually mishandles or fails to safeguard 
classified information before it can deny or revoke access to such information. The 
absence of security violations does not bar or preclude an adverse security clearance 
decision. See e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-09918 (App. Bd. Oct. 28, 2009.)  Based on all the 
circumstances, I cannot conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue Applicant’s security clearance at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline I:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:  For Applicant
7
 
                                                 
7 
In the absence of evidence showing that Applicant resisted treatment, or that behavior by Applicant caused 
 
 16 
Subparagraph 1.g:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                             
or contributed to the exacerbations of his bipolar disorder in the summer of 2012, SOR 1.e and 1.f are 
resolved in his favor. Nonetheless, this does not preclude me from considering these episodes in determining 
whether his bipolar condition is sufficiently stable to conclude that hypomanic, paranoid, delusional, or bizarre 
behavior is not likely to recur. 
