                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-03537
 )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
April 5, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on October 21, 2011.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  On October 12, 2012, the
Department  of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline G for Applicant.  The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry” (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of
Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
  Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on November 20, 2012, in which he
elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
Applicant on December 11, 2012.  Applicant received the FORM on January 2, 2013.
Applicant was instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation
within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant failed to submit a reply to the FORM. This case was
assigned to the undersigned on February 22, 2013.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 57 years old and divorced.  He has a high school diploma and
military training.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Calibration Technician
and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.  
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses intoxicants.
Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth under this guideline.
(Applicant’s Answer to SOR).  He served in the United States Navy from December
1982 to February 1988 and received an Honorable Discharge.  
He began consuming alcohol at the young age of fifteen.  He explained that
alcohol was readily available while growing up.  He drank about one beer a week from
the age of 15 to 18, and became intoxicated about once a month.  From 23 to 26, he
consumed three to four beers a month and did not recall becoming intoxicated during
that time.  From the age of 28 to 42, from 1983 to 1997, Applicant does not recall
consuming alcohol because at that time he was bicycling competitively.  In 1997, he
began drinking a 12 pack of beer three times a week.  This drinking continued until
2008.  Since 2008, he consumes a 12 pack of beer over the weekends.  
Applicant indicated that he likes the taste of beer and consumes it at home or
with friends at their homes.  He feels intoxicated after having had three or four beers in
two hours without a meal.  On those occasions, he is careless, has slurred speech and
a loss of control.  Applicant’s excessive drinking has resulted in his arrest on five
separate occasions for Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol (DUI) in a ten-year period.
On each occasion, the charges were reduced to Reckless Driving in exchange for his
guilty plea to the offenses.  Applicant explained that his DUI’s were triggered by
stressful incidents in life, such as end of relationships, or death of a friend or his sister. 
Applicant was first arrested for DUI on June 2, 1999.  On July 27, 1999, he was
found guilty of reckless driving and was sentenced to 90 days in jail, that was
suspended, and fined $500.00.  (Government Exhibits 6 and 8.)  
His second arrest for DUI was on November 1, 2001.  On December 18, 2002,
he was found guilty of Reckless Driving and was sentenced to 12 months in jail that was
suspended, fined $912.00, given 12 months probation (supervised), and ordered to
complete an alcohol evaluation.  (Government Exhibits 6 and 8.)
On January 9. 2003, Applicant completed a court ordered alcohol evaluation and
was diagnosed as Alcohol Dependent.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  He was then ordered
to seek counseling through an out-patient treatment facility where he attended
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings as well as peer sessions.  Following this, he
received alcohol abuse counseling from January 2003 until January 2004.  While
undergoing treatment, Applicant was arrested a third time for DUI, on August 29, 2003.
3
On November 17, 2003, he was found guilty of Reckless Driving and was fined $575.00.
(Government Exhibits 6 and 8.)
On September 14, 2005, Applicant’s security clearance application was denied
by DoD, in part based upon his failure to mitigate concerns involving alcohol
consumption.  (Government Exhibits 9 and 10.)  
Applicant was arrested a fourth time on December 9, 2009, for (1) DUI; (2)
Fleeing or Attempting to Elude a Police Officer; (3) Reckless Driving; and (4) Failure to
Maintain Lane, all misdemeanors.  On February 1, 2010, he was found guilty of
Reckless Driving and Failure to Maintain Lane and sentenced to 30 days in jail,
suspended, and fined $949.00 and $585.00 for the respective offenses.  (Government
Exhibit 8.)    
During an interview on December 21, 2011, with the Office of Personnel
Management investigator, Applicant admitted that he drinks approximately 12 beers
each weekend.  (Government Exhibits 6 and 8). Applicant stated that he no longer
drinks and drives as he believes he has too much to lose and is afraid that he may hurt
someone.  (Government Exhibit 6.)    
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive set forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)
21.  The Concern.  Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
22.(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent;
22.(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment,
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent;
22.(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program; and
4
22.(f) relapse after a diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion
of an alcohol rehabilitation program.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the administrative judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The administrative
judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
5
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in alcohol abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or
mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has engaged in Alcohol Abuse (Guideline G).  The totality of this evidence indicates
poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection
with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the evidence, Applicant has not
introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to
overcome the Government's case under Guideline G of the SOR.  
The evidence shows that Applicant has a long history of alcohol abuse.  From
1999, to as recent as 2009, he has been arrested for DUI on five occasions.  In 2003,
he was diagnosed as Alcohol Dependent and required by court order to attend an
alcohol abuse counseling program.  Despite his diagnosis, he continued to consume
alcohol, and in fact, was arrested for DUI while attending his alcohol treatment program.
In 2005, DoD denied his security clearance in part based on his level of alcohol
consumption, yet he was arrested for DUI two more times after this denial.  Although his
most recent arrest for DUI occurred in 2009, almost three years ago, he continues to
abuse alcohol.  As recent as December 21, 2001, he admitted that he still consumes 12
beers each weekend.  He has not taken his disease seriously and continues be a
significant security risk to the to the Government since he cannot be trusted with the
national secrets.  Based upon his past record of alcohol abuse, Applicant is not eligible
for access to classified information at this time.  
Under Guideline G, Disqualifying Conditions 22.(a) alcohol-related incidents
away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse
abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 22.(c) habitual or
6
binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether
the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 22.(e) evaluation
of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical social worker who is a
staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program; and 22.(f) relapse after a
diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an alcohol rehabilitation
program apply.  There is no evidence in the record that any of the mitigating conditions
apply.  Accordingly, I find against Applicant under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption.
 
 I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Applicant has submitted no evidence in
mitigation.  He is a troubled drinker who has not come to realize the seriousness of his
condition and its ramifications.  Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the
conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of poor judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor,
an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified information.  
Applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and he clearly does not
meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I find
against Applicant under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption).     
On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a  security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.g.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.h.: Against Applicant.
7
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
