                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10–05390
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Garcia, Department Counsel
For Applicant: A. Bates Butler III, Attorney At Law
April 5, 2013
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
dated August 27, 2009.  (Government Exhibit 7.)  On a date uncertain, the Department
of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guidelines J, H, and E for Applicant.  Applicant signed the receipt for the SOR on April
30, 2012.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry” (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program”
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
  Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on June 1, 2012, and requested a
hearing before an administrative judge.  On August 16, 2012, through counsel,
Applicant submitted an Amended Answer to the SOR and elected to have the case
determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on November 26, 2012.
Applicant received the FORM on December 7, 2012.  Applicant was instructed to submit
information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant
2
submitted a response to the FORM on January 28, 2013.  This case was assigned to
the undersigned on February 8, 2013.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
and exhibits, (no hearing) eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 36 years old and has a Masters in Business Degree.  He is
employed by a defense contractor as an Information Technology Security Specialist and
is applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
Applicant admitted allegations 1(a), 1(b), 1(e), 1(f), 2(a), 2(b), 3(a), 3(b), 3(c) and
3(f) of the SOR.  He admits in part and denied in part allegations 1(c), 1(d), and 3(d) set
forth in the SOR, and provided a clarification to his answers to 3(e) and 3(h).  (See
Applicant’s Answer and Amended Answer to the SOR.)  He has been employed with the
same defense contractor for almost twelve years.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).  The Government alleges that Applicant
is ineligible for clearance because he engaged in Criminal Conduct.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that Applicant
is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
Applicant admitted that from 1994 to 2009 he illegally used marijuana.
(Applicant’s Exhibit 7.)  From 2000 to 2009, Applicant was the leader of a band that
traveled frequently throughout the United States.  Marijuana was readily available in this
environment and Applicant used it on a regular basis.  Since 2001, Applicant has been
arrested on six separate occasions and charged with Unlawful Possession of Drug
Paraphernalia, Driving Under the Influence and Unlawful Possession of Marijuana.    
In July 2001, he was arrested and charged with Possession of Marijuana and
Possession of Drug Paraphernalia.  The charges were dismissed.
Two years later, in December 2003, he was arrested and charged with Unlawful
Possession, Sale or Transfer of Marijuana.  A police report of the incident indicates that
a search of Applicant’s vehicle revealed a multicolored glass pipe containing suspected
marijuana residue and the remains of a burnt marijuana cigarette.  The charges were
dismissed.  (Government Exhibit 14.)
Three years later, he was arrested in May 2006, and charged with (1) Driving
While Under the Influence, Drugs, Vapor-Releasing Substances, or any Combination,
(2) Driving with an Illegal Drug or its Metabolite, (3) Possession of an Open Container of
Spirituous Liquor While in a Motor Vehicle on a Roadway, (4) Possession of Marijuana,
(5) Possession or Use of Drug Paraphernalia, and (6) Reckless Driving.  He pled guilty
to Reckless Driving, was fined and ordered to attend alcohol counseling.  (Government
Exhibits 8, 9 and 13).
3
Two months later, he was arrested in July 2006, and charged with (1) Driving
Under the Influence and (2) Possession of Drug Paraphernalia.  Count 1 was not filed
by the prosecutor and Count 2 was dismissed.  (Government Exhibits 8 and 12.)
The following year in August 2007, he was arrested for (1) Driving with
Suspended License/Revoked, (2) Fail to Produce Evidence of Financial Responsibility
and (3) Violation of Promise to Appear.  The charges were dismissed.  (Government
Exhibits 8, 11, and 13.)
Two years later, in June 2009, Applicant was charged with (1) Driving Under the
Influence, Drugs, Vapor-Releasing Substances, or any Combination and (2) Driving with
an illegal Drug or its Metabolite.  The charges were dismissed without prejudice.
(Government Exhibits 8 and 10.)
Following his last arrest in 2009, he stated that he realized that he could no
longer lead a life of risky behavior.  He stopped performing in his band and began to
focus solely on trying to get his life in order.  He has been focusing on his family, and
coaching his son’s soccer and flag football teams and working with him in wrestling.  He
states that he has not used marijuana since 2009.  He indicates that he has made some
significant lifestyle changes since 2009 demonstrating his intent not to abuse drugs in
the future.   He avoids social situations in the presence of illegal activity.  He states that
he no longer has a desire to use drugs and now understands its risk to his employment
and its legal ramifications.  (See Applicant’s Response to the FORM.)  
Paragraph 3 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that Applicant
is ineligible for a security clearance because he has engaged in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or an unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations.  
As part of his security background investigation, Applicant admitted to falsifying
his security clearance application, two subject interviews, and his response to subject
interview interrogatories.  When he completed his notarized Interrogatory response
dated November 18, 2010, he stated that his drug use was limited to his time in college.
This was a false statement.  In fact, he had used marijuana as recently as June 2009.
During an interview on January 6, 2010, with an authorized investigator for the
U.S. Department of Defense, Applicant stated that he had not used marijuana or any
other illegal substances since 1999.  This was a false statement.  In fact, he had used
marijuana to at least June 2009.  (Government Exhibit 8.)
During an interview on December 9, 2009, with an authorized investigator for the
U.S. Department of Defense, Applicant stated that he had not used marijuana or any
other illegal substances since 1999.  This was a false statement.  In fact, he had used
marijuana to at least June 2009.  (Government Exhibit 8.)
During an interview on November 10, 2009, with an authorized investigator for
the U.S. Department of Defense, Applicant stated that he did not drink alcohol prior to
4
his July 2006 arrest and that he passed his breathalyzer and field sobriety tests.  This
was a false statement.  In fact, he consumed alcohol prior to the arrest.  He also tested
positive for a marijuana metabolite in his urine, and he failed the field sobriety tests.
Government Exhibit 8.)
Applicant completed a security clearance application dated August 27, 2009.
(Government Exhibit 7.)  Question 22(e) asked him if he had ever been charged with
any offenses related to alcohol or drugs.  Applicant answered, “Yes,” and listed his DUI
arrests in July 2009, July 2006 and May 2006.  He failed to disclose his July 2001 arrest
for Possession of Marijuana and Possession of Drug Paraphernalia and his December
2003 arrest for Unlawful Possession, Sale, or Transfer of Marijuana.
Question 23(a) of the same questionnaire asked Applicant if in the last seven
years has he illegally used any controlled substance.  He answered, “No.”  (Government
Exhibit 7.)  This was a false statement. In fact, he had used marijuana to at least June
2009.
Question 24(b) of the same questionnaire asked Applicant if in the last seven
years he had been ordered, advised, or asked to seek counseling or treatment as a
result of his use of alcohol.  Applicant answered “No.”  (Government Exhibit 7.)  This
was a false response.  In fact, he was ordered to attend alcohol counseling in 2006
following his arrest in May 2006.  
Applicant admits being dishonest and displaying a lack of candor in submitting
his interrogatories, security clearance application, as well as a signed statement under
oath.  He explained that he was in fear of losing his job if he told the truth.  He said that
he stopped using marijuana after college because he was afraid of the employment
consequences and the impact to his hard earned reputation as a good employee if he
told the truth.  He was ashamed and fearful of admitting that he had used marijuana
periodically until June 2009.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  After talking with colleagues he
felt that if he stuck to his original statements he would be better off than coming forward
with the truth.  In 2010, during a discussion with some military friends, he told them
about his falsifications.  They informed him that he should have been forthright and
honest.  (See Applicant’s Response to the FORM.)    
Applicant’s performance development summaries for 2010, 2011 and 2012
reflect that his work product consistently “exceeds expectations.”  In one of his
evaluations he was also described as having significant technical experience and skills.
He has developed a solid foundation in understanding his job requirements and has
provided a high level of service.  (Applicant’s Exhibit 2.)
Applicant is considered to be a valued employee as evidenced by various
Achievement awards and a job promotion effective April 28, 2012, in recognition of his
professional growth, development and contributions to the company.  (Applicant’s
Exhibits 6, 7, and 8.)
5
Letters of recommendation submitted on behalf of Applicant from his employer,
pastor, and various coaching associates, attest to his diligent work ethic, at work and in
his community activities with youth sports and church.  He is considered to be a
respected man of a responsible nature and overall trustworthiness.  (Applicant’s Exhibit
9.)  
Applicant recently completed his Masters in Business and provided a copy of his
class schedule and his high grade point average of 3.86.  (Applicant’s Exhibit 5.)
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive set forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
30.  The Concern.  Criminal activity creates a doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple offenses; and
31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
32.(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and
32.(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement.
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
24.  The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
6
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse;
25.(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
 26.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgement; and 
26.(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, (2) changing or avoiding the
environment where drugs were used, and (3) an appropriate period of abstinence. 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
16.(a) a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities; and
16.(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning relevant
facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority or other
official government representative.
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
7
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the administrative judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The administrative
judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
8
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in criminal conduct, drug abuse, and dishonesty that
demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or
mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has engaged in criminal conduct (Guideline J), drug involvement (Guideline H), and
dishonesty (Guideline E).  The totality of this evidence indicates poor judgment,
unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of Applicant.  Because of the scope and
nature of Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security
clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the evidence, Applicant has not introduced
persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome
the Government's case under Guideline E of the SOR.  
The evidence shows that Applicant used marijuana from 1994 to at least 2009,
and was arrested six times on related charges.  He states that he has not used
marijuana since 2009 and there is no evidence in the record to show otherwise.  For
three-and-a-half-years he had not used any illegal drug and he claims that he has no
intentions of ever using illegal drugs again.  Applicant is commended for his favorable
lifestyle changes and is encouraged to continue with his drug free lifestyle.  Under
Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug abuse, 25.(b)
testing positive for illegal drug use, 25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation,
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug
paraphernalia apply.  Mitigating Condition 26.(a), the behavior happened so long ago,
was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgement, and 26.(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such
as; (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, (2) changing or avoiding
the environment where drugs were used, and (3) an appropriate period of abstinence
also apply.  Accordingly, I find for Applicant under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. 
In regard to the Applicant’s history of criminal conduct, it too stopped in 2009.  He
has not been arrested or charged with any violation of law since then.  Under Guideline
J, Criminal Conduct, Disqualifying Conditions 31.(a) a serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses, and 31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether
9
the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted apply.  Mitigating
Conditions 32.(a) so much time has elapsed since his criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, and 32.(d)
there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of
time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement also apply.
Accordingly, I find for Applicant under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct.
 
Most troubling in this case is the fact that Applicant was untruthful concerning his
history of illegal drug use on various Government documents that include his
interrogatories and security clearance application.  He deliberately concealed material
information from the Government because he was ashamed and in fear of losing his
job.  There is no excuse for this misconduct.  The Government relies on the
representations of its defense contractors and must be able to trust them in every
instance.  Applicant made no prompt, good-faith effort to correct his mistakes.  Applicant
cannot at this time be deemed sufficiently trustworthy.  In fact, he has demonstrated
unreliability and untrustworthiness.  Under the particular facts of this case, his poor
personal conduct is considered a significant security risk, which prohibits a favorable
determination in this case.  Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Disqualifying
Conditions 16.(a) a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits ro
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities, and 16.(c) deliberately providing false or misleading information
convening relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority or other  official government representative apply.  None of the
mitigating conditions are applicable.  
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Applicant is an educated man who has
made some very poor choices in his life.  Although he has recently been working hard to
turn his life around, for many years he has shown extreme immaturity and unreliability.
His long history of misconduct shows indicators of poor judgment and unreliability that
preclude him from security clearance eligibility at this time.  There is absolutely no
excuse for this illegal conduct.
  
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under
all of the guidelines viewed as a whole supports a whole-person assessment of poor
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may
not properly safeguard classified information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualification
for access to classified information, it must determined that the applicant is and has
been sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect the
10
Government’s national interest. Overall, based upon the seriousness of the conduct
outlined here, this applicant has demonstrated that he is not trustworthy, and he does
not meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.  Accordingly, I
find for Applicant under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline H (Drug
Involvement), but against him under Guideline E (Personal Conduct.)     
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 3 of the SOR.  Paragraphs 1 and 2 are found for
Applicant.
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: For Applicant.
Paragraph 2: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.a.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  2.b.: For Applicant.
    
Paragraph 3: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.a.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.b.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.c.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.d.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.e.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.f.: Against Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.h.: Against Applicant.
   
11
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
