 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-08744 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his positive drug 
test for marijuana. He claims the positive result was caused by his passive inhalation of 
second-hand marijuana smoke. He did not submit any evidence to corroborate his story. 
His use of marijuana while possessing a security clearance and failure to take 
responsibility for his illegal drug use raise doubts about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 25, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with 
DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement). 
Applicant answered the SOR, waived his right to a hearing, and requested a decision on 
the written record. 
 
 On February 3, 2013, Department Counsel’s file of relevant material (FORM) was 
sent to Applicant. The FORM contains the Government’s proposed findings of facts, 
argument, and eight documentary exhibits. Applicant did not object to Government 
 
2 
 
 
Exhibits (Gx.) 1 through 8, and they are hereby admitted. Applicant’s responded to the 
FORM (Response) and submitted a letter from his employer, dated March 12, 2013, 
which was marked and admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. 
Applicant’s case was assigned to me on April 23, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old, single, with no children. He served in the U.S. military 
from 1997 to 2001, and received an honorable discharge. He first received a security 
clearance in about 1996, and maintained it while in the military. He earned an 
associate’s degree in 2003. (Gx. 5) 
 
Applicant has been working for his current employer since November 2010. He 
passed a pre-employment drug screen prior to starting his job and submitted a security 
clearance application shortly thereafter. He was granted a security clearance in 
December 2010. (Gx. 5; Gx. 7; Ax. A.) 
 
 In February 2011, Applicant failed a random drug test that was administered by 
his employer. The drug test indicated Applicant had used marijuana. Applicant was 
suspended from his work for two and half weeks, and was referred to his company’s 
employee assistance program (EAP) for assessment and treatment. His follow-up drug 
tests have been negative for the presence of illicit drugs and his EAP counselor 
indicated no additional treatment was required. He signed a “last chance agreement” 
with his employer. (Ax. A; Gx. 6) He did not submit a copy of this agreement. 
 
 Applicant denies he ever used illicit drugs, to include marijuana. He claims that 
the positive drug test result was caused by his passive inhalation of marijuana, which 
was being regularly used by his sister and her boyfriend who he had been living with 
since 2009. (Gx. 5 at 10; Gx. 6; Gx. 7) He claims that the night before the drug test he 
was “in a small and confined room with second hand [marijuana] smoke for over two 
hours.” (Gx. 6, Subject Interview at 1) He moved out of his sister’s house in about June 
2011. (Gx. 6) He did not submit any evidence to support his claim that his passive 
inhalation of second-hand smoke caused the positive drug test.1  
 
In his Response, Applicant states that “this was a onetime occurrence that will 
not be repeated at any time.” However, he continues to maintain that his positive drug 
test was caused by his innocent, passive inhalation of second-hand marijuana smoke 
that was being used by his sister and her boyfriend. (Response; Answer) 
 
                                                          
1 But see, Gx. 8 (summary of scientific journals discounting the possibility of passive inhalation of 
second-hand marijuana smoke causing a positive drug test).  
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. Furthermore, “[o]nce a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant 
or maintenance of a security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 
4, 2009) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 
499 U.S. 905 (1991)). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern regarding illegal drug involvement is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The drug involvement guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern under AG ¶ 25. The following warrant discussion: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant’s positive drug test establishes by substantial evidence that he used 
marijuana while possessing a security clearance. Applicant did not submit any evidence 
to corroborate his story that the positive drug test result was caused by his passive 
inhalation of second-hand marijuana smoke. He did not even submit a statement from 
his sister to corroborate his version of events. He also did not submit any evidence to 
suggest that the drug test was flawed or incorrect. In light of the lack of credible 
evidence contradicting the drug test result and drawing all reasonable inferences from 
said drug test result, I find that AG ¶¶ 25 (a), (b), and (g) apply.2 
 
 I also find that none of the mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 26 apply. 
Although Applicant’s drug use occurred two years ago and he completed drug treatment 
through the EAP, his refusal to accept responsibility for his illicit drug use leaves me to 
question the effectiveness of such treatment and leads me to conclude that there is a 
likelihood of recurrence of illegal drug use. Consequently, Applicant’s past drug use 
continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).3 I considered Applicant’s military service and his 
                                                          
2 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b allege Applicant’s failed drug test and, thus, ¶ 1.a is decided for Applicant.   
 
3 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
 
5 
 
 
handling of classified information without issue while in the military and as a federal 
contractor. He also signed a last chance letter with his employer and his recent drug 
screens have been negative for the presence of illegal drugs. However, these favorable 
whole-person factors do not mitigate the significant security concerns raised by his past 
drug use and refusal to accept responsibility for his conduct. Applicant was 31 years old 
when he decided to use marijuana. He used marijuana after starting employment as a 
federal contractor, undergoing a pre-employment drug test, and submitting a security 
clearance application, all of which should have put him on notice that illegal drug 
involvement was prohibited. Furthermore, he was quite aware of the requirement of 
those granted access to classified information to not use illegal drugs from his years of 
holding a security clearance while in the military, but he decided to use anyway. Even if 
his farfetched story were true, i.e., that his positive drug test was due to him passively 
inhaling marijuana smoke in a small, confined room for over two hours while his sister 
and her boyfriend used marijuana, his decision to remain in such a drug-infested 
environment calls into question his judgment.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the 
drug involvement concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about 
Applicant’s continued eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:          For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:          Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
