 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11–06977
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his use of illegal drugs
and alcohol. His request for a security clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On November 15, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (eQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed background investigation, which
included his response to adjudicators’ interrogatories on July 6, 2012, Department of
Defense (DOD) adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest for Applicant to have access to classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included seven documents (Items 1 - 7) proffered3
in support of the Government’s case.
2
On November 14, 2012, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed in the Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG) at Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) and Guideline H (Drug Involvement).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On
March 1, 2013, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in3
support of the SOR. After receiving the FORM, Applicant had 30 days to file a response
to the FORM. The record closed after Applicant failed to submit any additional
information within the time allowed. The case was assigned to me on April 23, 2013.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline H, the Government alleged that Applicant used marijuana “on at
least a daily basis” between August 2001 and June 2010, and that he used marijuana
with varying frequency between November 2011 and February 2012 (SOR 1.a); that he
used cocaine five times between September 2003 and July 2008 (SOR 1.b); that he
used psilocybin mushrooms five times between 2003 and 2009 (SOR 1.c); and that he
may continue occasional recreational drug use if he does not receive a security
clearance (SOR 1.d). Under Guideline G, the Government alleged that Applicant has, at
times, consumed alcohol to excess and to the point of intoxication, since 2000 (SOR
2.a); and that on April 6, 2008, he was charged with driving under the influence (DUI)
(SOR 2.b). (FORM, Item 1)
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations (FORM, Item 4). In addition to the
facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 29 years old and employed as an electrical engineer by a defense
contractor since August 2010. He completed undergraduate and graduate programs
between August 2003 through May 2010, receiving bachelor’s and master’s degrees in
electrical engineering. (Form, Item 5)
Applicant began using marijuana in August 2001. He used it at least daily until
June 2010. In his eQIP, he estimated he used marijuana “thousands of times” during
that period. Applicant resumed using marijuana, albeit less frequently, in November
2010, but stopped again after he was interviewed for his clearance in December 2010
because he was concerned it may keep him from getting a clearance. In November
2011, he resumed using marijuana when it was presented to him in a social setting, and
because he had not heard anything further about his clearance. In response to
adjudicators’ interrogatories in July 2012, Applicant stated that his abstinence from
future drug use depended on whether or not he received a security clearance. On
November 29, 2010, Applicant was denied an interim security clearance based on
information about his drug use. (FORM, Items 5 - 7)
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
3
In his eQIP, and in his December 2010 interview, Applicant disclosed his use of
other drugs between 2003 and 2009, and that he was arrested for DUI in April 2008.
The only drug he has used since 2009 is marijuana. As to his DUI, Applicant’s driver’s
license was suspended for six months and he was ordered to complete a 12-month
alcohol counseling class. 
Applicant began drinking alcohol in about August 2000, when he was 16 years
old. He drank between three and ten drinks three or four times weekly until about April
2009. Since then, Applicant still has at least four drinks twice weekly and goes out
drinking at least every other weekend. He usually becomes intoxicated when he drinks.
He had consumed more than ten drinks when he was arrested for DUI. (FORM, Items 5
and 6)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).9
4
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Department Counsel meets its burden, it6
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
the applicant to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to8
such information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust
and confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
nation’s interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access to classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Applicant has used illegal drugs, including marijuana, cocaine, and
hallucinogenic mushrooms, since 2001. Since 2009, he has used only marijuana, most
recently in February 2012. He indicated in July 2012 that he would likely continue to use
illegal drugs if he does not receive a security clearance. His conduct raises the security
concern expressed at AG ¶ 24, as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g.,
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
5
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see above definition)); and AG ¶ 25(h)
(expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly
commit to discontinue drug use). 
Applicant did not present any information that would require consideration of the
mitigating factors listed at AG ¶ 26. He failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by
his drug involvement.
Alcohol Consumption
Applicant has abused alcohol since he was 16 years old. Despite being charged
with DUI after consuming more than 10 drinks in August 2008, and attending a court-
ordered alcohol counseling class for 12 months, he still drinks frequently and to excess.
His conduct raises a security concern, articulated at AG ¶ 21 as follows:
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving
while under  the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent); and AG ¶ 22(c) (habitual or binge consumption of alcohol
to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent).
In response to the Government’s information, Applicant did not present any
information that would require consideration of the mitigating factors listed at AG ¶ 23.
He failed to mitigate the security concerns raised by his alcohol consumption.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines G and H. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 29 years
old, has two electrical engineering degrees, and has worked for a defense contractor
since 2010. These are solid accomplishments. However, this record also shows that
Applicant has an ongoing substance abuse problem that sustains reasonable doubts
about his ability or willingness to safeguard classified information. Because protection of
the national interest is the primary concern in these matters, those doubts must be
resolved against the Applicant.
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
It is not clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access
to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
