                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                          
        ------------------------------------     )         ISCR  Case No.  11-07958       
                                                                  )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns regarding his finances. Eligibility for
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case
On November 1, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why the DOD could not make the preliminary
affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and DOD
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. This action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended, DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the Department of Defense on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 3, 2012, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on January 9, 2013, and was scheduled for hearing on
February 28, 2013. The hearing was convened on that date. At hearing, the
Government's case consisted of seven exhibits (GEs 1-7). Applicant relied on one
witness (himself) and no exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 7, 2012. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly (a) petitioned for Chapter 7 bankruptcy
relief in August 2001 (debts discharged in December 2001) and (b) accumulated 11
delinquent debts totaling more than $25,000. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations. He
denied the debts covered by subparagraphs 1.h and 1.j. He claimed he could not find 1.i
in his credit report and disputes the debt covered by subparagraph 1.j for reasons that
the deductible should have been paid by his insurance company. He claimed the
mothers of his children were responsible for his insurance co-pays and never paid them.
He explained that the bank covered by subparagraph 1.i is defunct and cannot be
reached to explore debt resolution.  And he claimed to be current with his car and home
payments, and he recently purchased 40 acres of land outright at a tax lien auction as
an investment.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old electronic technician for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The SOR allegations admitted by Applicant are incorporated
and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married his first spouse in July 1986 and divorced her in June 1991.
(GE 1; Tr. 38)  He has two adult children from this marriage. (GE 1; Tr. 37-38) Applicant
married his second wife in May 1999 and divorced her in July 2001. (GE 1) He has no
children from this marriage.  Applicant earned a high school diploma in June 1985 and
claims no college credits.  He enlisted in the Army in March 1986 and served four years
of active duty. (GE 1)
Finances
Applicant has struggled with his finances over the past 20 years. In 1995, his car
(a 1987 Ford Mustang) was repossessed, and a judgment was taken against him for the
deficiency in the amount of $6,804. (GEs 5 and 6) Biweekly garnishment of his wages
ensued. (GE 6) In a signed, sworn statement given to an investigating agent from the
Defense Security Service (DSS) in December 2000, he detailed his existing financial
condition. (GE 7) His listed debts included child support arrearage and several collection
accounts.
3
Six months following his DSS interviews (GEs 5 and 6), Applicant petitioned for
Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief.  (GE 5) Schedules filed with his August 2001 petition are
not in evidence and cannot be estimated. Applicant received his bankruptcy discharge
in December 2001. (GE 5) He attributed his bankruptcy to assorted financial problems
associated with his divorce from his first wife, imposed child support obligations, and
low-paying jobs. (GEs 6-7; Tr. 65-66) Applicant’s explanations are credible enough and
are accepted.
Between 2004 and 2005, Applicant accrued a number of medical bills associated
with emergency medical services not covered by his workman’s compensation carrier.
(GE 2) His first wife did not cover the deductibles required by their medical insurance
carrier, and the hospital reported the unpaid deductibles as delinquencies with the credit
reporting agencies. (GEs 2-4) 
In May 2004, Applicant purchased a vehicle for around $25,445 and financed it
with a car loan. (GE 2) When the car payments became too burdensome for him, he
voluntarily returned the vehicle in 2006 to avert repossession. (GE 2; Tr. 30-31, 45-47)
Currently, he still owes a deficiency on his car loan in the reported amount of $23,365.
(GE 2; Tr. 32) Whether this amount represents a deficiency balance after crediting
proceeds from the sale of the vehicle is not clear. (Tr. 32) 
Applicant admitted all of the listed medically-related debts. (Tr. 33-34, 50- 51)  He
has made no documented progress in the repayment of any of his listed debts since
discussing them with an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
in April 2011. (GE 2)  He estimates to have around $1,000 in medical bills that he hopes
to discharge in June 2013 after he sells some property. (Tr. 44, 50-51) He has not
pursued financial counseling or developed a budget. (Tr. 53) 
Applicant and his fiancé have net income between them of approximately $3,800
a month ($2,400 his and $1,400 hers) and monthly expenses of $2,290. (GE 2; Tr. 55-
61) He has debt payments of $442 a month and a net monthly remainder that varies
between $1,300 and $1,500 a month. (GE 2; Tr. 62-63) In months when he incurs
extraordinary property expenses, his remainder is less. He attributes memory lapses to
his past failures to address his delinquent debts when funds were available.  (Tr. 63)
Applicant has savings of $600, a home he purchased in July 2012, and 40 acres
of land. (Tr.40-41, 63-64, and 68-70)  Purchase prices and value assessments on these
properties were not made available. Applicant has no current child support
responsibilities and no back child support obligations. (Tr. 39-40)
Endorsements
Applicant did not provide character references from any identified sources. Nor
did he provide any performance evaluations or evidence of his contributions to his
employer, family, and community. 
4
Policies
         The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued,
revoked, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs. AG ¶ 2(a) is intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral chances; (7) the
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
       Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication policy
factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
5
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by
known sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate
proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts. 
Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988).  And because all security clearances must be clearly consistent with the
national interest, the burden of persuasion must remain with the Applicant.
Analysis  
Applicant is an electronics technician with a considerable history of financial
problems associated with divorce and low-paying jobs.  Heavily indebted,  he petitioned
for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in August 2001 and received his discharge
sometime in December 2001. Since his bankruptcy discharge, he accumulated
6
numerous delinquent debts, mostly medical-related not covered by his health insurance.
Altogether, Applicant accumulated 11 delinquent debts exceeding $25,000 between
2004 and 2010. His financial problems raise security concerns.  
Financial concerns
To date, Applicant has not addressed his delinquent debts. Two of the listed debts
(creditors 1.h and 1.j) he disputes. One (creditor 1.h) he could not locate on his credit
report. The other (creditor 1.j) involved an insurance deductible that belonged to his ex-
wife and son. Outstanding balances on Applicant’s disputed and unpaid debts
approximate $25,000. Applicant’s past history of accumulations of delinquent debts and
his past inability to resolve his most recent debts, either by payment, successful dispute,
or a combination thereof, warrant  the application of two of the disqualifying conditions
(DC) of the AGs for financial considerations: ¶ DC 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to
inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the principal concern of
a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases.
Extenuating circumstances associated with Applicant’s debts are dated and entail
losses associated with his divorces, low-paying jobs, and medical co-pays not paid for by
his ex-wife and son. MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances,” have some application to Applicant’s
situation. Still, he has had the resources to address his debts and has provided no
documentary proof of any efforts to resolve any of his debts over the past two years.
Financial counseling and follow-up payment initiatives with his creditors could
reasonably be expected of Applicant following his 2011 OPM interview to satisfy the
good-faith and due diligence repayment requirements of MC ¶ 20(c), “the person has
received counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is
being resolved or is under control,” and MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” Based on the
circumstances of this case, Applicant can take little advantage of MC ¶ 20(c) or MC ¶
20(d). 
While an applicant need not have paid or resolved every one of his proven debts
or addressed all of his debts simultaneously, he needs a credible plan to resolve his
financial problems, accompanied by implementing actions. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06488 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant’s actions to date, reflect payoffs of some of his
7
creditors, but no concrete plans to resolve his debts associated with his vehicle
deficiency and his undisputed medical debts.  
                                              
Consideration of Applicant’s background and financial history, his bankruptcy
discharge, and his latest struggles with delinquent debts make it difficult to credit
Applicant with the degree of good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness necessary to
mitigate security concerns about his finances at this time. Applicant’s failure to initiate
any documented corrective efforts to date preclude him from meeting his evidentiary
burden of mitigating the covered debts. 
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is insufficient to demonstrate that
Applicant has mounted sufficient good-faith efforts over the 11-plus years since his
bankruptcy discharge to satisfy his outstanding debts. Since he did not provide any
endorsements or documentation of his work-related evaluations and civic contributions,
whole-person assessment lacks sufficient information to provide any material
countervailing considerations to take into account in making an overall trust assessment
of Applicant’s clearance eligibility. In making a whole-person assessment, careful
consideration was given to the respective burdens of proof established in Egan (supra),
the AGs, and the facts and circumstances of this case in the context of the whole person.
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.g, 1.i, 1.k, and 1.l. Favorable conclusions warrant with
respect to subparagraphs 1.h and 1.j.
       
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F:           AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs  1.a through 1.g, 1i,
           1.k, and 1.l:                      Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.j: For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
