 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 11-05401 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant accumulated over $67,000 in delinquent debt since 2006. He offered 
some evidence of conditions beyond his control that caused this debt. He did not 
demonstrate sufficient arrangements to repay the debt or ability to avoid future financial 
irresponsibility. Resulting trustworthiness concerns were not mitigated. Based upon the 
record evidence, eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 13, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of his public trust position application (SF-
85P). On November 7, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue eligibility for a public trust position for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
eligibility should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. (Answer.) On January 
4, 2013, Department Counsel indicated he was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. 
On January 10, 2013, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On January 24, 2013, DOHA issued a hearing notice, and on 
February 21, 2013, Applicant’s hearing was held. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered six exhibits (GE 1-6) and Applicant offered six exhibits (AE A-F). There were no 
objections, and I admitted GE 1-6 and AE A-F. Applicant and his wife testified. The 
record remained open until March 18, 2013, to give Applicant additional time to submit 
documents. On March 1, 2013, I received the hearing transcript (Tr.). On March 20, 
2013, Department Counsel forwarded to me 20 additional pages of exhibits that he 
received from Applicant, which were marked AE 1-20. All were admitted without 
objection. After reviewing the file, I requested additional clarifying information from 
Applicant that he timely submitted via an email on April 5, 2013. I marked it AE 21 and 
entered it into the record without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s Answer admits responsibility for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.ee. His 
admissions are accepted as factual findings.   
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 18.) He has 
been married to his second wife for 26 years. His wife had two children from a previous 
marriage, and he had one child from his first marriage. He and his current wife have one 
child. He became a registered nurse in May 1998. He is working on a bachelor’s 
degree. He served in the Army from 1976 to 1982. He received a General Discharge. 
(Tr. 35; GE 5.) He is a disabled veteran, and receives payments from the Veteran’s 
Administration for a 20% disability for hearing and arm problems. (Id.) His SF-85P did 
not include any reportable involvement with illegal drugs, excessive alcohol 
consumption, or criminal offenses. (GE 1.)  
 
Applicant began working for his current employer in December 2009.  As a 
registered nurse he performs quality assurance reviews for the National Guard. (Tr. 18-
21.) Prior to this job he worked as a clinician for a temporary agency from March 2009 
to December 2009. From approximately September 2000 until March 2009, he was 
employed by the federal government in a clinical position. (GE 1.) 
 
                                            
1
Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant attributed his financial problems to both his and his wife’s medical 
issues. In 2006, his wife was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS). By 2007, she was 
unable to work as a licensed practical nurse and their family income decreased by 
$3,000 per month. (Tr. 23.) Prior to that loss of income, Applicant’s financial situation 
was stable. (Tr. 24.) Subsequently, they began incurring medical and other bills that 
they could not pay. In 2009, they purchased a home from a builder and moved to 
another location closer to family members. The purchase price of the home was 
between $80,000 and $90,000, financed by the builder. Applicant withdrew  $30,000 to 
$40,000 from his 401(k) for the down payment. He made monthly payments of $1,000 
to the builder. (Tr. 40.) He did not understand the tax consequences of withdrawing 
retirement funds, resulting in taxes being levied for 2008 and 2009. (Tr. 41; AE 10-15.) 
In 2010, he lost the house because the builder did not make payments to the bank, 
resulting in a repossession and foreclosure of the property. (Tr. 47.) Applicant did not 
pursue the recovery of his down payment. (Tr. 49.) He and his wife subsequently moved 
to another state. Applicant’s wife continues to have serious medical problems related to 
MS.  
 
In January 2011 a government investigator interviewed Applicant regarding his 
delinquent debts. He was not familiar with many of the debts and indicated that he 
would inquire about them. He told the investigator that some of his debts accumulated 
as a result of his inattention and living outside of his income. (GE 5.) In April 2012, he 
completed a set of Financial Interrogatories, and submitted documentation that 35 debts 
remained delinquent. He noted on the Interrogatories that he planned “to file bankruptcy 
within 30-60 days.” (GE 4.)  
 
Applicant explained that his medical conditions, diabetes, anxiety, and 
depression also contributed to his financial problems. (Tr. 72.) Shortly before the 
hearing, he had emergency dental surgery because he was losing some teeth as a 
consequence of diabetes. That emergency resulted in a dental bill for which he does not 
have insurance. (Tr. 69.) His wife stated that she is no longer able to help manage their 
finances because of her physical and mental limitations. (Tr. 70-72.)  
 
Applicant’s SOR listed 31 debts totaling $67,620. Of that amount, $45,160 
represented two automobile repossessions, one of which was a 2010 judgment and the 
other a loan that he stopped repaying after making monthly payments of $564 for 72 
months (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.t). (AE E.) Neither debt is resolved. Twenty-one medical 
debts totaled $11,728 (SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.s, 1.u, 1.aa, and 1.bb). None of those are 
resolved, and some of them appear to be co-pays or bills not covered by his medical 
insurance. Six debts total $3,144 and are owed to credit card companies, an insurance 
company, and utility companies (SOR ¶¶1.w, 1.x, 1.z, 1.cc, 1.dd, and 1.ee). None of 
those are resolved. Applicant successfully disputed the $987 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.y. It 
is resolved. (GE 2 at 242.) He has been making monthly payments of $78 on his 
student loan for about two years. The SOR-listed balance on this loan is $7,588 (¶1.v); 
however that is not correct and should be less. He is no longer in default on that loan, 
and may be able to reduce the interest. (Tr. 42, 68; AE B, E.) It is being resolved.  
 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In addition to paying his student loan, Applicant has been making automatic 
monthly payments to the Internal Revenue Service. Since June 2011, he has paid about 
$225 toward his 2008 tax liability for early withdrawal of money from his 401(k). He used 
his 2011 tax refund of $1,753 to further reduce the balance, which he thinks is about 
$1,300. He thought the original amount owed was around $4,000. (Tr. 41; AE 10.) He 
also owes $2,948 for a 2009 tax liability related to the early withdrawal of money from 
his 401(k). (AE 13.) He will begin making payments on that debt after the 2008 tax is 
paid. (AE 21.) According to a February 2013 credit bureau report, Applicant paid a 2010 
medical judgment for $523 in June 2012. (AE E.) He is current on an auto loan. (AE D.)  
 
Applicant’s financial plan has been to address his unpaid taxes first, and then 
begin paying other bills. He did not appreciate the significance or adverse 
consequences that delinquent debts could have on his security clearance status and 
employment. (Tr. 83.) He never considered the possibility that these financial problems 
could indicate a lack of trustworthiness. (Tr. 83.)  
 
Applicant submitted a personal financial statement. His monthly family income is 
approximately $4,498 and includes his disability payment and his wife’s social security 
payment. His monthly expenses are about $3,736, and the monthly remainder is about 
$150.2 (AE 1.) Since January 2013, he has not worked for about three weeks because 
of federal budget issues. (Tr. 60.) 
 
Applicant testified candidly. He did not make excuses for failing to manage his 
debts promptly (Tr. 66.) He acknowledged that in April 2012 he notified the Government 
that he intended to file a Chapter 7 bankruptcy within 30 to 60 days. (Tr. 66; GE 4.) In 
December 2012, he and his wife met with a credit counseling/debt consolidation 
company. During that meeting the counselor worked out a budget. (AE C.) He would 
like to resolve his debts through a repayment plan, but was unaware of the amount of 
fees involved in implementing the company’s program. (Tr. 64.) He said that he never 
reviewed his credit report until he received one through this investigative process. (Tr. 
68.) He and his wife have not used credit cards since 2006 or 2007. After the hearing, 
he spoke with his company’s Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and subsequently 
with a lawyer regarding his debts. (AE 21.)   
 
Applicant submitted his most recent performance evaluation. His supervisor rated 
him with an average score of 1.67, slightly below ‘Level 2: At Expectations’. The 
evaluation noted that the quality and quantity of Applicant’s work had deteriorated. It 
raised concerns regarding his knowledge, planning, and organizational skills. It noted 
his attendance was problematic. (AE 16-20.) 
 
 
                                            
2 Applicant submitted three separate budgets. The first one he established with the counselor at the debt 
consolidation company. (AE C.) The second one he prepared for the hearing. (AE F.) The third one he 
prepared after the hearing. (AE 1.) In addition, he discussed his income and expenses with an 
investigator in January 2011. (GE 5.) None of the budgets are consistent in the recordation of income and 
expenses, and all are inconsistent with information given during his interview.  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the 
AGs. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] 
decision.” 
 
 A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information.  
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “[a]ny determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the trustworthiness concerns relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise trustworthiness 
concerns and may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has been unable or unwilling to satisfy numerous debts since 2006, 
totaling $67,620. The evidence raises trustworthiness concerns under both disqualifying 
conditions, and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.   
 
  The guideline includes five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 that could 
mitigate trustworthiness concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts, in excess of $67,000, arose over the past six years 
and continue to date. Applicant failed to demonstrate that such problems are unlikely to 
continue or recur, or that his reliability and trustworthiness have improved during the 
course of those years. The evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
Applicant presented evidence that a portion of his delinquent debt is attributable 
to his wife’s loss of income in 2006 and their ongoing medical conditions. Those were 
circumstances largely beyond his control. However, he has been continuously 
employed throughout the period in question, and acknowledged during an interview that 
he failed to properly monitor and manage his finances while the debts were 
accumulating. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) has limited application.  
 
Application of AG ¶ 20(c) is not warranted. Applicant did not provide proof that he 
completed or enrolled in financial counseling, or sought financial advice. His three 
budgets are not credible and are incomplete. The evidence does not demonstrate that 
he has taken sufficient steps to establish clear indications that his financial problems are 
being resolved or are under control. 
 
Applicant has been paying his student loan, resulting in a “current” status and 
demonstrating a good-faith effort to resolve it. However, he did not present evidence 
that while his other delinquent debts, totaling about $59,000, were accumulating, he 
made a good-faith effort to contact those creditors and work out a settlement or minimal 
repayment plan. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.v, but none of the 
other debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is fully applicable to one debt. Applicant disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.y ($987), and it was removed from his credit report.  
 
In sum, Applicant has resolved $987 of the SOR-listed debts and is resolving his 
student loan that was listed with a balance of $7,588. Approximately $59,045 remains 
unresolved. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 55 years old. He has experienced several personal and family 
problems that have affected his finances beginning in 2006. However, he is also 
sufficiently mature to understand and comply with his trustworthiness responsibilities, 
which include reliably managing his finances, particularly given the ongoing notices he 
had received about the Government’s concerns.  
 
In April 2010, Applicant completed a SF-85P, in which he disclosed his financial 
problems. In a January 2011 interview with a DOD investigator, he discussed his 
financial problems and delinquent debts were brought to his attention by the 
investigator. During that interview, he acknowledged the reasons for the debts, including 
his lack of attention to them and to his finances in general. In April 2012, he completed 
a set of financial Interrogatories and submitted documentation that 35 debts remained 
delinquent. He wrote a note on the Interrogatories that he intended to file bankruptcy 
within 30 to 60 days. On November 7, 2012, he received the SOR. On December 20, 
2012, he met with a debt consolidation company to review and discuss the resolution of 
his delinquent debts. On February 21, 2013, he attended his hearing. At the conclusion 
of the hearing, the record remained open for three weeks to give him time to submit 
additional documents, some of which he did. However, he did not submit evidence that 
he established a solid plan for resolution of approximately $59,045 of the $67,620 of 
delinquent debts either through the debt consolidation company he previously consulted 
or any other method. His plan to pay tax debts first, along with the student loans, is 
valid. However, it is insufficient to mitigate trustworthiness concerns, particularly in view 
of the amount of debt, the length of time the debts have been delinquent, and his 
knowledge of the Government’s ongoing inquiry.  
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant has had at least three years to manage and resolve his delinquent 
debts and straighten out his finances. It was clear during his testimony and in reviewing 
three budget exhibits that he has limited knowledge of his family income, expenses, and 
the status of debts. He has no financial plan or firm budget to achieve financial stability. 
It appears that the first time he drafted a budget was in December 2012, when he 
consulted the financial counselor in anticipation of his hearing. While some of 
Applicant’s financial inattentiveness may be understandable based on family medical 
issues, the length of that inattentiveness and procrastination raises questions about his 
reliability and judgment.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with sufficient doubts as to Applicant’s 
present eligibility for a public trust position. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.u:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.v:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.x:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.y:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.x to 1.ee:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a public 
trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive ADP information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
