Consisting of the transcript (Tr.), Government exhibits (GE) 1-3, and Applicant exhibits (AE) A-E. AE E was1
timely received post-hearing.
DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20,2
1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on
1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-05211
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is granted.1
On 25 September 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial
Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing before the2
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). DOHA assigned the case to me 12
December 2012 and I convened a hearing 3 January 2013. DOHA received the
transcript 8 January 2013.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted SOR financial allegations. He is a 42-year-old linguist
employed by a U.S. defense contractor since March 2012. He is a native-born Afghani,
who immigrated to the U.S. in July 1988, and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in May
1998. He has not previously held a security clearance.
The SOR alleges, Government exhibits substantiate, and Applicant admits, eight
delinquent accounts totaling over $40,000.
Applicant paid SOR debt 1.a in March 2012, before the SOR was issued
(Answer). He paid SOR debts 1.b and 1.c (different debts to the same creditor) in
November 2012 (Answer; AE D). He settled SOR debt 1.d in November 2012 (Answer).
He paid SOR debt 1.e in December 2013 (AE A, E). In January 2013, the creditor for
SOR debt 1.f requested that Applicant provide certain documentation in support of his
request to settle that debt, which Applicant subsequently provided (AE B, E). He paid
SOR debt 1.g in November 2012 (Answer). He paid SOR debt 1.h in November 2012
(Answer). Applicant reported these delinquent debts, among others, on his April 2012
clearance application (GE 1).
 Applicant’s financial problems were largely business related. He owned a carpet
and flooring company. When the housing market collapsed in 2008, so did the demand
for flooring. Applicant used available means of credit to try to keep the business going,
but was ultimately unsuccessful. He took the linguist position in March 2012 because it
provided more regular income, as well as significant increases in pay when he is
deployed. With the increased income, he was able to pay off several delinquent debts
that he reported on his clearance application—but which were not at issue in the
SOR—as well as satisfy seven of the eight debts alleged in the SOR.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).3
¶ 19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;4
¶ 20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that5
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
¶ 20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and6
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications7
that the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶ 20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.8
3
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.3
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, but
Applicant mitigated the security concerns. Applicant has an extensive history of financial
difficulties that became unmanageable around 2008.  Applicant lost his carpet and4
flooring business because of the housing market collapse in 2008.
The mitigating factors for financial considerations give Applicant substantial aid.
While his financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, Applicant’s employment is
now stable so the circumstances that caused them are less likely to recur.  Further, his5
financial problems were largely due to circumstances beyond his control, and he began
addressing his delinquent debts once he obtained stable employment in March 2012.
He has continued to address his other delinquent debts since then.  While there is no6
evidence that Applicant has had any financial counseling, he has clearly acted to get his
finances under control.  The only debt not completely resolved is the $17,000 debt at7
SOR 1.c, and Applicant is working with the creditor to address that account. Having
addressed his other financial obligations, I am confident this final obligation will also be
addressed. Overall, substantial progress has been made addressing his delinquent
debt.  The Appeal Board has stated that an Applicant need not have paid every debt8
alleged in the SOR, need not pay the SOR debts first, and need not be paying on all
debts simultaneously. Applicant need only establish that there is a credible and realistic
plan to resolve the financial problems, accompanied by significant actions to implement
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 (App. Bd. 21 May 2008).9
4
the plan.  Applicant’s efforts to date constitute such a plan, and his consistent payments9
reflect significant actions. I conclude Guideline F for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-h: For Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
   
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR.
Administrative Judge
