 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-09742 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 19, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 22, 2012, and elected to 
have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s 
written case was submitted in February 2013. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
 
2 
 
Applicant received the FORM on February 25, 2013. As of April 19, 2013, she had not 
responded. The case was assigned to me on April 23, 2013. The Government exhibits 
included in the FORM are admitted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since September 2010. She served in the U.S. military from 2000 
until she was honorably discharged in 2005. She seeks to retain her security clearance, 
which she has held since about 2005. She attended college for a period but did not earn 
a degree. As of March 2011, she had never married and she had no children.1  
 
 Applicant had periods of unemployment after she was discharged from the 
military. She was unable to pay all her bills, and a number of debts became delinquent.2 
 
 The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts. All of the debts appear on at least one 
credit report. Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($4,390), 1.b 
($3,965), 1.d ($4,777), 1.e ($5,029), 1.g ($7,455), and 1.h ($5,926). She denied owing 
the remaining debts.3 
 
 Applicant paid the $1,126 delinquent debt to a collection company that is alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.c. The original debt of about $3,000 was charged off by a bank and 
transferred to the collection company. The collection company sued Applicant. In March 
2011, Applicant agreed to a settlement order in which she would pay the collection 
company $3,358 plus costs, through monthly payments of $728. Applicant made at 
least one payment before the collection company moved the court to reinstate the 
matter because Applicant was late on her payments. Applicant stated that she was 
unable to maintain the settlement payments because her car needed repair and she 
could not afford to pay both. The remainder of the debt was paid through garnishment.4 
 
 Applicant denied owing the $100 delinquent debt to a utility company that is 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f. She stated that she had never heard of the creditor, and it is not 
listed on her current credit report. The debt is reported by Equifax on the March 2011 
combined credit report as being opened in August 2003, with a date of last action of 
August 2007. The debt is also listed on the February 2013 Equifax credit report. The 
name of the creditor is an abbreviated nickname of the city where Applicant lived from 
2003 through 2009.5 
 
                                                          
1 Items 5, 9.  
 
2 Items 5, 6.  
 
3 Items 4, 7, 8.  
 
4 Items 4-8.  
 
5 Items 4, 6-8.  
 
 
3 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. The 
$4,894 delinquent debt to a collection company on behalf of a bank (SOR ¶ 1.i) was 
transferred to a different collection company. Applicant admitted owing the transferred 
debt as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e.6 
 
 Applicant paid the $156 delinquent debt to a collection company that is alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.j. The balance on the debt was $4,101 in September 2010. Applicant made 
four $1,004 payments from September through December 2010. The relatively small 
balance was paid sometime thereafter.7 
 
 Applicant established that she paid $467 in June 2012 and another $467 in July 
2012 toward the $1,335 delinquent loan to a collection company on behalf of an online 
university (SOR ¶ 1.k). She stated that the debt is paid and that her current credit report 
lists the debt as paid. The debt is not listed on the February 2013 Equifax credit report. I 
am satisfied that the debt has been paid.8 
 
 Applicant admitted owing the remaining six debts, which total in excess of 
$31,000. In August 2012, she wrote in response to DOHA interrogatories that upon the 
completion of her wage garnishment, she would contact her creditors “as funds become 
available.” She did not indicate that she received financial counseling.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
6 Items 4, 6-8.  
 
7 Items 4-8.  
 
8 Items 4, 6-8.  
 
9 Items 4, 6-8.  
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant had periods of unemployment after she was discharged from the 
military. Applicant’s unemployment was beyond her control. To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 
20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant paid the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.j, and 1.k. The debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.i is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. She denied owing the $100 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, stating that she had never heard of the company, but the 
name of the creditor is an abbreviated nickname of the city where Applicant lived from 
2003 through 2009. The total amount of the six debts that Applicant admitted owing is 
more than $31,000. She did not establish how those debts would be resolved. 
 
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. Her financial issues are recent 
and ongoing. I am unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to 
cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 
20(a) and 20(c) are not applicable. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. AG ¶ 20(d) is 
applicable to the paid debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.j, and 1.k. It is not applicable to 
any of the other debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to the duplicate debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
 
6 
 
1.i. It is not applicable to any of the other debts. I find that security concerns remain 
despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service. However, the limited 
information in the record has not convinced me that Applicant’s finances are sufficiently 
in order to warrant a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.h:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i-1.k:  For Applicant 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
