1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-08341
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A, Administrative Judge:
On August 15, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline H (Drug Involvement),
and Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 29, 2012, and
postponed for good cause. A notice of hearing was issued on January 18, 2013,
scheduling the hearing for March 5, 2013. Government Exhibits (GX) 1-6 were admitted
into evidence, without objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one
witness, and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-C, which were admitted without
objection. I received the transcript on March 14, 2013.  Based on a review of the
pleadings, testimony, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant met her burden
regarding the security concerns raised. Security clearance is granted.
2
Findings of Fact
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline H (Drug Involvement).
Applicant is a 32-year-old senior military science instructor for a defense
contractor. She graduated from high school, and received her undergraduate degree in
May 2003. She is currently working on a graduate degree. From 1996 until 2001,
Applicant served in the U.S. Marine Corps. Applicant served in the U.S. Army on active
duty from 2003 until 2009. (Tr. 45) Since 2010, she has served in the Army Reserves.
Applicant is married and has two young children. She has worked for her current
employer since February 2011. (GX 1)  She has held a security clearance since 2001.
Drug Involvement
Applicant and her husband attended an out-of-state holiday party in late
November 2011 with college friends whom she had not seen in almost seven years. On
December 3, 2011, Applicant tested positive for THC. She ingested marijuana
unknowingly at the holiday party. She and her husband had a late-night snack of
brownies. They went to bed immediately after. She did not notice any effects as she
was asleep. She was credible in her statement that she has never used marijuana or
any other illegal drug. She has been subject to monthly random drug test while in the
military and by her current employer. She has never tested positive. Applicant was not
given a copy of the December 3, 2011 test result. She has since been tested on a
random basis. She does not knowingly associate with drug users. She submitted
negative test results from March 2012. (GX 2)
Financial
Applicant was deployed to Iraq for twelve months in September 2004. Her
husband, who was in the military also,  was deployed to Afghanistan at about the same
time for twelve months. In late 2005, when they returned to the United States they
purchased their first home. They believed this would be the duty station for at least
three to five years. (Tr. 16)  Approximately one year later, Applicant received orders
unexpectedly to make a permanent change of station (PCS) across country. Applicant’s
home was put under contract and the potential new owner agreed to move in the home
and pay the mortgage while waiting for the house to sell. However, the buyer decided
not to buy the home. Applicant’s home was listed with a realtor for approximately five
months, but it did not sell. After that point, Applicant obtained a renter via a rental
agency.  This happened in 2007 when the real estate market was down. The property
was listed with a realtor and Applicant continued to pay the mortgage after her move.
An offer of short sale was not accepted by the bank. The house went to foreclosure in
November 2010.
Applicant and her husband purchased an affordable home in their new duty
location.  Applicant became pregnant shortly after and decided to resign from the Army.
Her active duty service obligation had been met years earlier. She did not want to be on
The 1099-A is for the mortgage on the second home. This will be included in the bankruptcy petition.      1
The 1099-C is for the mortgage on Applicant’s first home. The debt is now cancelled.      2
3
active duty with possible deployments after just giving birth to a young child.  Applicant
learned that her resignation package was denied because she gave birth and was no
longer pregnant.  She was ordered to be ready to deploy to Iraq in 30 days. Applicant
had several more mandated PCS moves and had her second child. She could no
longer support her family with the deployable high operational tempo of the Army. In
2010, she transferred to the Army Reserves. 
Applicant’s husband was completing his last semester in an undergraduate
program when Applicant decided to take a year away from the military and stay at home
with her children. He stopped attending school and looked for employment.  (Tr. 63)
Applicant’s husband opened a small retail business in 2008. He received some
monetary assistance from his family. However, due to the volatile economic times, the
business faltered and ultimately failed in 2010. They were forced to move from their
home and find employment in another state. They could not sell the home. The
mortgage on the second home went to foreclosure in September 2010.1
The SOR alleges debts in excess of $16,000. Applicant defaulted on two home
mortgages totaling approximately $366,000. Applicant admits the debts and they are
confirmed on her credit reports. (GX 4-5) Applicant received an Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) Form 1099-C, cancellation of debt, as well as a 1099-A, acquisition of
property from the mortgage lender. (GX 2) 2
Applicant’s financial difficulties began in 2010 when their small business failed.
Applicant was forced to stop making payments on all credit cards and mortgages in
2010. The housing market crashed and Applicant could not continue to keep paying the
mortgage on two homes. Until that time, they had paid their bills and the mortgages on
the two homes. (Tr. 22)
Applicant and her husband initiated a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in February 2011.
She qualified for the Chapter 7 bankruptcy proceeding, meeting debt and income
eligibility requirements of the state. The filing has been delayed due to documentation
needed from a tax loss from the husband’s business. His parent’s filed bankruptcy
based on the failed business.  They are filing amended returns. Both federal and state
tax returns have been received and they are proceeding with the Chapter 7 bankruptcy.
All the debts listed in the SOR will be discharged. (AX A) The process should be
completed in six to eight weeks. 
Applicant’s performance evaluations consistently rate her as a superb performer
who continued to excel in positions of higher responsibility. She is recommended for a
promotion to Major. (AX C) Applicant was rated among the top 20 percent of officers in
her battalion in 2006. She learns quickly and executes her duties in an outstanding
manner. 
4
Applicant submitted three letters of recommendation, including one from her
commanding officer. He describes Applicant as solid and trustworthy. Her judgment and
insight have served her well as an ROTC Recruiting Operations Officer. She is self-
motivated, grounded and goal oriented.  Applicant has gained the respect of her peers.
(AX F, AX H) Applicant is consistently described as a smart woman who has a strong
work ethic and dedication to her job and to her fellow employees. She responds to
situations in a dignified manner. She does not have difficulty adapting to situations and
has proven to be highly proficient in overcoming obstacles.  She is a valued member of
the team.
Applicant earned the coveted German Efficiency Badge (Gold), and was
awarded the Combat Action Badge while deployed to Mosul with the Infantry Division.
She has contributed greatly to training quality junior officers. She is the penathlete of an
officer. Applicant is a decorated Captain in the U.S. Army; a combat veteran; an
accomplished athlete; a gifted and talented manager, organizer, leader, and mother of
two children. (AX C)
Applicant and her husband were responsible in their financial affairs. When he
lost his job in August 2012, he could not find full-time employment. Applicant responded
to DOHA interrogatories in 2012. Regarding her financial situation, Applicant’s husband
has been unemployed or underemployed since 2012. He is now building an insurance
agency, and completing his undergraduate degree. (Tr. 25)
Applicant has a budget. (AX C)  Applicant’s  monthly net income is $5,850. After
expenses, her net remainder is small. She has a small savings account and a 401(k)
account. They are current on all daily expenses and their car payment. Applicant has
not acquired any new debts. Thus, she has shown that even in difficult times, she has
the ability to save and pay  bills. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
5
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government must present evidence to establish controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or
proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a3
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  4 5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
6
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence;
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical
social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment
program;
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed
by a duly qualified medical professional;
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and,
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.
Applicant tested positive for her THC (marijuana) on December 3, 2011, while
holding a security clearance. AG¶ 25(a), 25(b) and 25(g) apply. 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
7
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation;
Applicant’s positive test in December 2011 was the result of an unknowing
ingestion of a brownie laced with marijuana at a holiday party.  Applicant has never
knowingly used any illegal drugs. She has been subject to random drug tests during her
military career and in her civilian employment. She has no intention of using any illegal
drugs. She tested negative for test results performed in March 2012.  AG¶ 26(a) and
26(b) apply.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant admitted that she had delinquent debts from 2010 and two home
mortgages that defaulted. Consequently, Financial Considerations Disqualifying
Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),  and FC DC
AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions
raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against her and mitigate security
concerns.  
Applicant and her husband returned to the United States after deployments to
Iraq and Afghanistan in late 2005. They decided to purchase a home because they
were under the belief that they would remain at that duty station for almost five years.
Applicant had to PCS only nine months after purchasing a home. She and her husband
tried to sell the home and also to rent it. They paid on the mortgage for as long as they
could. This sequence of events which started in 2007, included more PCS moves, a
8
failing housing market, unemployment for both Applicant and her husband, and a failed
business. These events were beyond their control and resulted in the defaulting of the
two mortgages and credit card debt. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating
Condition (FCMC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) applies in
part.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
applies. As noted, Applicant is now employed with a defense contractor and is not on
active duty military. She and her husband did everything to avoid a financial disaster.
They tried to sell their homes, relocate, find new employment and start a business.
Applicant is the sole income provider. She is current with daily expenses. There is
evidence that she acted reasonably under the circumstances. She has submitted
documentation to show that she has resolved or is resolving her delinquent debts
through the Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  She receives  credit under this mitigating condition.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant paid her bills and mortgages
until the business collapsed in 2010. She did not incur new debts. She has not yet
completed the financial counseling under the bankruptcy which obviates the
applicability of FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling
for the problem and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control). Applicant does not receive full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).
. Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
9
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 32 years old. She served on active duty in the United States Marine Corps
and the United States Army. She is currently in the Army Reserves. She has  letters of
recommendation from employers and colleagues. She has served in Iraq. Applicant is
married and has two children. She has provided for her family. Her husband also
served in the military and was deployed. He has been unemployed or underemployed.
He is starting an insurance company to provide more income for the family and is
completing his undergraduate degree. 
Applicant documented the series of events that transpired when she and her
husband returned from deployments in late 2005. They were under the belief that
buying a home in 2006 was a wise investment. The Applicant did not believe she would
have to PCS for three to five years. However, the situation changed. She tried
everything to sell her home and to pay the mortgage for as long as she could. She and
her husband purchased a second home when they relocated. Unfortunately, the real
estate market was not good and economic times did not improve. They held on for as
long as they could and paid their bills. Unfortunately, their homes went to foreclosure.
Applicant has a 1099-C to show that she has no debt from the one mortgage. The other
mortgage, if not forgiven, is included in the Chapter 7 bankruptcy. She is fully employed
and her husband is starting an insurance business. She acted as responsibly as she
could under the circumstances.
Applicant tested positive for marijuana in December 2011. She has served in the
military for many years and has never been involved with drugs. She has been
employed and has submitted to drug tests.  She has tested negative on all of them. She
was credible in that she did not knowingly use marijuana in late November 2011. She
presented herself in an organized, coherent fashion at the hearing.  
Applicant submitted sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns raised
in his case.  I have no doubts about her trustworthiness or judgment given the record.
Accordingly, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns.  Clearance is granted. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
10
Subparagraphs 2.a -2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.d-2.e: Against Applicant
 Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
