KEYWORD: Guideline G
DIGEST: Applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the Applicant or proven by Department Counsel. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 11-04520.a1
DATE: 04/12/2013
DATE: April 12, 2013
In Re:
--------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-04520
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
2
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 31, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On February 22, 2013, after the close of the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (1) whether the Judge failed to consider
record evidence; (2) whether the Judge did not properly consider the case under the whole-person
concept; and (3) whether the Judge or the decision process was biased.  For the following reasons,
the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision. 
The Judge found: Applicant is 50 years old, married, and has two children.  He served
honorably in the military for twenty-two years.  Applicant began consuming alcohol at the age of
sixteen.  In the beginning, he consumed only beer.  When he joined the military at age seventeen,
his alcohol consumption increased and he drank on weekends.  When he retired from the miltary,
his drinking decreased.  At that point, he usually consumed alcohol about one weekend per month
and drank four or five beers or a couple of mixed drinks.
In September 2004, Applicant was arrested for DUI.  He pled no contest and received a
suspended sentence for 88 days and four days with a tracking device.  He was required to attend a
DWI driving school and was placed on probation for one year.  He successfully completed his court
sentencing requirements.  After the DUI, Applicant abstained from alcohol use for one year.  He
then resumed drinking.  In October 2010, Applicant was arrested a second time for for DUI.  He was
found guilty and fined $800 plus court fees.  He was required to attend a first offender alcohol
education program that included Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) meetings.  His driving privileges were
revoked for six months and he was placed on three years probation.  He is currently on probation,
and has satisfied all other court ordered sentencing requirements.  Following this arrest, Applicant
stopped drinking again for about a year.  He then resumed his drinking.
Applicant does not feel he has a problem with alcohol.  He believes he is a social drinker
who can control his drinking.  He initially testified that the only two times he consumed alcohol and
drove were the two times he was arrested for DUI.  After further reflection, he testified that since
2004 he would estimate that he drank and drove on an average of twice a month.  He now states that
he only drinks about once a month and has between two to four beers.  Applicant indicated that he
has decided to voluntarily re-enter AA, as he is motivated to completely abstain from alcohol.  
The Judge concluded:  Applicant has a long history of alcohol abuse.  Although he has never
been formally diagnosed as an alcoholic nor has he received treatment for alcohol addiction, he
shows signs of a serious alcohol problem.  Recently, he has decided to address his problem and has
started attending AA meetings for a second time.  More time in sobriety is necessary to prove to the
Government that he can be trusted with the nations secrets.  Under the whole-person concept, the
Applicant is a troubled drinker who has only recently come to realize the seriousness of his
1 In support of his argument that there is no evidence that he has an ongoing alcohol problem, Applicant has
cited an outside source, “Alcohol Consumption and Security Clearances” by William Henderson.  As this reference was
not made part of the record, the Board cannot consider it.
3
condition and its ramifications.  Applicant has failed to overcome the Government’s case opposing
his request for a security clearance.   
Applicant makes numerous references to facts about his case that he claims were not
considered by the Judge.  He states that during the hearing, he testified that “it was not my intent to
drink that day”on the date he was arrested a second time for DUI. Applicant asserts that this was not
considered or even mentioned in the Judge’s findings of fact.  Applicant also states that he was
formally interviewed after his first DUI conviction and was determined to have no signs of alcohol
addiction or abuse and needed no additional treatment beyond that ordered by the court.  He states
that these matters “were not asked about” and were not provided in the Judge’s findings of fact.  He
states that the information is available, “if investigated.”  Applicant also asserts that he has an
intrinsic behavior profile, that he does not associate with his working peers outside the workplace,
and that he does not talk about his personal life.  He asserts that these aspects of his life were not
asked about or addressed by the Judge when considering the whole-person concept.
Many of Applicant’s assertions constitute new matters not contained in the record, which the
Board cannot consider. Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Concerning Applicant’s assertion that he testified that
he did not intend to drink on the day when he did drink and subsequently got stopped for DUI, the
Board is unable to find such a statement on the record.  In this and in the other matters mentioned
on appeal, Applicant fails to overcome the presumption that the Judge considered all the evidence
in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009).  Also, Applicant
appears to argue that there were aspects of his case available to be brought forth and developed on
the record by parties to the hearing other than himself.  The Applicant is responsible for presenting
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant
or proven by Department Counsel.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  Thus, Applicant cannot now complain that
there were facts in his case that he deems pertinent or significant that were not included in the
record, or that were not included in the Judge’s findings of fact.   
Applicant argues that the Judge merely assumed that he showed signs of a serious alcohol
problem, without any medical evidence.1  He also argues that he has acknowledged alcohol abuse,
has demonstrated consistent, responsible use of alcohol, and has shown positive changes in drinking
habits and lifestyle that should be considered mitigating.  He asserts that the Judge erred in her
weighing of the whole-person concept.  Considering Applicant’s appeal arguments in light of the
record as a whole, we conclude that the Judge’s material findings of security concern surrounding
Applicant’s history of alcohol consumption, and her characterization of that history as serious, are
supported by substantial record evidence, or constitute reasonable inferences from the evidence.  We
also conclude that nothing in the record evidence required the Judge, as a matter of law, to consider
the Government’s security concerns mitigated.  
4
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Applicant’s appeal brief essentially argues for an alternate interpretation of the record evidence.  The
gravamen of the Judge’s decision is that Applicant is a troubled drinker who has had two DUIs and
who has only recently come to realize the seriousness of his condition and its ramifications.  This
basic conclusion is reasonably supported by the evidence.
Applicant asserts that the Judge’s assumption that he shows signs of a serious alcohol
problem leads him to believe that there is a “hidden agenda” that has introduced bias into the
decision to revoke his security clearance.  There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial
and unbiased, and a party seeking to overcome that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-02253 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 28, 2008).  Applicant’s vague assertion fails
to overcome that presumption.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan      
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
5
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody            
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
