 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-09546 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guidelines G (Alcohol 
Consumption) and J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 9, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines G and J. 
This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 6, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR. The case was assigned to 
me on February 11, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a notice of hearing on February 15, 2013, and the hearing was held as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
March 19, 2013. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 5. Department Counsel’s list of exhibits was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 
1. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through J. The record was 
held open until March 26, 2013, for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant 
timely submitted an email with an attachment. His post-hearing documents were 
marked as AE K and L. Department Counsel’s letter forwarding the post-hearing 
documents was marked as HE 2. All exhibits were admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 26, 2013.  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old communications security custodian who works for a 
defense contractor. He has worked for his current employer since June 2004. He 
graduated from high school in 1999 and attended college for about one semester in 
2001. He has never been married. He is the custodial parent of a seven-year-old son. 
Applicant has held a security clearance for about three years without any security 
violations.1 
 
 The SOR contains two Guideline G allegations. The first allegation (SOR ¶ 1.a) 
asserted that Applicant was charged with Driving Under the Influence (DUI) in 
September 2004. During this incident, he had a blood alcohol content (BAC) of 0.14%. 
In April 2005, he was found guilty of BAC over .08%, a misdemeanor, and was fined 
$500. The second allegation (SOR ¶ 1.b) asserted he was charged in December 2009 
with (1) Aggravated DUI – Child Under 16 in Vehicle and (2) Endangering the Welfare of 
a Child. During this second incident, his BAC was .18%. In November 2010, he pled 
guilty and was sentenced to jail for 16 days, probation for 5 years, a driver’s license 
revocation for 18 months, and a fine of $1,520. Although the SOR indicated both of 
Applicant’s alcohol-related driving offenses were DUIs, the evidence revealed they were 
Driving While Intoxicated (DWI) offenses. The two Guideline G allegations were cross-
alleged in a single Guideline J allegation (SOR ¶ 2.a). In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations. His admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact.2 
 
 Applicant began drinking alcohol when he was 18 years old. From 2001 to 2004, 
he consumed alcohol every other weekend and became intoxicated about once a 
month. From 2004 to 2006, he consumed alcohol and became intoxicated about once a 
month. From 2006 to 2009, he rarely consumed alcohol. After his son was born in 2006, 
he indicated that he would consume alcohol only on major holidays, such as the 4th of 
July, Labor Day, or Christmas. At that time, he estimated that he consumed alcohol 
about six times a year. When he drank, he usually consumed about three to four 
glasses of whiskey or mixed drinks. He said that he used alcohol as a stress reliever.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6-7, 33-37; GE 1, 2, 3. 
2 SOR; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; AE A. The SOR incorrectly listed the second paragraph 
(Guideline J) as Paragraph 3. I made a correction to the SOR changing that paragraph to Paragraph 2. 
3 Tr. 37-38, 43-47, 69; GE 3.  
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant’s alcohol-related driving offense in 2004 occurred while he 
was working for his current employer, but before he held a security clearance. At that 
time, he was about 23 years old. This offense occurred following his attendance at a 
barbecue over the Labor Day weekend. At the barbecue, he consumed about three 
four-ounce glasses of straight whiskey over a couple of hours. He departed the party by 
himself at about 3:00 a.m. He was stopped by the police at a drunk-driving roadblock. 
He did not believe he was intoxicated at that time and made no attempt to evade the 
roadblock. He was given a field sobriety test and a breathalyzer test. The breathalyzer 
test revealed his BAC was 1.4%. He was charged with (1) Operating Motor Vehicle with 
Blood Alcohol Content of .08% – 1st Offense and (2) DWI – 1st Offense. He pled not 
guilty to those offenses and was found guilty of DWI – 1st Offense. He was sentenced to 
a $500 fine. His driver’s license was suspended until he completed a drinking-and-
driving program. On his own accord, he underwent an alcohol evaluation. During that 
evaluation, he was not given any recommendation to cease or modify his alcohol 
consumption. At that point, he did not believe he had an alcohol problem.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b.  Applicant indicated that he was going through a rough time when his 
second DWI occurred in December 2009. At that time, he had custody of his son, who 
was then three years old, and his son’s mother was threatening to obtain custody of 
him. This DWI occurred on Christmas Eve. He was released from work early that day 
and went to a bar with coworkers from about 11:00 a.m. to about 2 p.m. After leaving 
the bar, he picked up his son from daycare. While driving with his son in the car, he hit a 
curb that caused the wheel to buckle. No one was injured in the accident. His son was 
riding in a child’s car seat, and the car’s airbags did not deploy. He called OnStar for a 
tow truck and OnStar notified the police of the accident. A police officer gave Applicant 
a breathalyzer test. His BAC was .18%. He was arrested and charged with (1) 
Aggravated DWI – Child Under 16 in Vehicle and (2) Endangering the Welfare of a 
Child. As soon as he returned to work following that incident, he notified his facility 
security officer (FSO) of his arrest. Pursuant to a plea agreement, he pled guilty to 
Aggravated DWI, a felony. As part of his sentence, he served eight weekends in jail and 
attended a drinking-and-driving program. He has completed over two years of his five-
year probation sentence. When he reports to the probation officer once a month, he is 
administered an alcohol breath test. He is scheduled to remain on supervised probation 
until November 2015.5 
 
Based on the advice of his lawyer after his Aggravated DWI in 2009, Applicant 
enrolled himself in a chemical dependence program in February 2010. During that 
program, a licensed alcohol and substance abuse counselor diagnosed him with alcohol 
abuse, but she specifically ruled out alcohol dependence. He was given alcohol tests 
during eight sessions and each of those tests had negative results. He successfully 
completed that program in April 2010. His treatment plan included a recommendation 
that he remain abstinent. The counselor evaluated his home environment as “stable.” 
                                                          
4 Tr. 27, 37-42, 44; GE 1, 2, 3, 4; AE A. 
5 Tr. 27-28, 37, 47-73; GE 1, 3, 5; AE A, B, C. 
 
4 
 
He received a discharge prognosis of “good.” He did not attend Alcoholics Anonymous 
(AA) meetings as part of this treatment.6 
 
Following Applicant’s Aggravated DWI in 2009, Child Protective Service (CPS) 
conducted an investigation into his suitability for maintaining custody of his son. CPS 
concluded that he could continue to maintain custody of his son.7 
 
In January 2011, Applicant sought the assistance of a mental health professional 
because he was having difficulty in managing stress. He testified that he did not seek 
that assistance because he was craving alcohol or thought that he would relapse, but 
did so due to the stress of being a single parent. As part of that treatment, he 
participated in multiple substance inventory screens, urinalysis tests, and a 
comprehensive evaluation. All of his urinalysis tests were negative. A chemical 
dependency therapist diagnosed him with: 303.90 Alcohol Dependence in Sustained 
Full Remission. He participated in eight individual counseling sessions that addressed 
relapse prevention; building connections with sober, supportive members of the 
community; and coping skills for dealing with stress and anxiety. He continues to call 
the therapist whenever he feels the need to do so.8 
 
Applicant last consumed alcohol on December 24, 2009, the date of his second 
DWI. He has no cravings for alcohol. He has no intention to use alcohol in the future. He 
considers alcohol to be poison to him. His brother resides with him and his son. He 
does not allow his brother to have alcohol in his apartment. He testified that he no 
longer attends parties or family gatherings where alcohol is served. He helps coach his 
son’s little league team. While alcohol is served at those games, he indicated that it is 
not an issue. He noted that, after his son was born, he stopped playing sports and 
gained weight. At that point, he weighed about 190 pounds. He has begun playing 
sports and exercising again. He now weighs 155 pounds. He described his relationship 
with his son’s mother as “really good at this point.” She lives in another state and pays 
child support. Their son visits her for about a month each summer. Although he is 
eligible to obtain a conditional driver’s license, he has not yet done so. In order to obtain 
such a license, he would need to have an interlock device installed on his vehicle. He 
stated that he is in the process of obtaining such a driver’s license.9 
 
At the hearing, Applicant was candid about his wrongdoing. I found him to be a 
credible witness. He indicated that his DWI offenses showed a lack of judgment. He 
acknowledged that his Aggravated DWI in 2009 was a serious offense. During his 
                                                          
6 Tr. 29-33, 56-62; GE 1, 3; AE A, D. 
7 Tr. 32-33, 70-72.   
8 Tr. 29, 61-70; GE 3; AE E; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. According to the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM–IV-TR), the specifier 
“sustained full remission” is used if none of the criteria for dependence or abuse has been met at any time 
during the previous 12 months or longer. See DSM-IV-TR at 196. 
9 Tr. 31-33, 56-81; GE 3; AE A, J.  
 
5 
 
testimony, he stated a couple of times that he was not making any excuses for his 
misconduct. Except for his two DWI arrests, he has not been arrested for, or charged 
with, any other offenses.10 
 
In his post-hearing submission, Applicant provided a letter from his probation 
officer that was dated March 21, 2013. In the letter, the probation officer stated,  
 
[Applicant] was sentenced to [. . .] five year(s) Probation on 11/30/10 
following a conviction of Aggravated Driving While Intoxicated with Child 
Passenger as a class E Felony on 10/6/10 (original arrest 12/24/09) in 
[county and state]. 
 
[Applicant] reports as directed to Probation and has been completely 
cooperative with the conditions of the Court without incident. He has 
satisfied all special conditions of his Probation sentence including: paying 
a fine/surcharge in full, he successfully completed an alcohol treatment 
outpatient program on 8/9/11, he served eight work weekends [in jail], 
attended all weekends in the Day Reporting Center DWI sentencing 
program and he did attend a Victim Impact Panel. Furthermore, the Court 
granted him permission to reapply for a [State] Post Revocation 
Conditional License due to his compliance. Within the year he may also be 
eligible for an early termination of his Probation sentence.  
 
A condition of all persons on Probation supervision is that they obtain 
and/or maintain gainful employment.11 
 
 Since Applicant’s Aggravated DWI in 2009, he has been promoted three times at 
work. In January 2013, he was promoted from alternate communications security 
custodian to being the primary custodian. In his last performance evaluation, he 
received an overall rating as “high contributor.”12 
 
 Applicant’s immediate manager at work, who served in the military for 24 years, 
submitted a letter for him stating in part: 
 
I am pleased with [Applicant’s] excellent work ethic, attendance and level-
headed approach as he carries out his duties and responsibilities. As a 
single father with all of its added burdens, he displayed an outstanding 
ability to keep these sometimes opposing parts of his life, responsibly in 
balance. 
 
                                                          
10 Tr. 27, 37, 71. 
11 AE L. 
12 Tr. 34; AE F, G.    
 
6 
 
[Applicant] and I have discussed his past issues and in my opinion, the 
young man with that past, in no way bears any resemblance to the 
[individual] I know. [Applicant] is now a mature, responsible father, and 
hard-working Supervisor and COMSEC Custodian.13 
 
 Applicant’s FSO submitted a letter for him stating in part: 
 
[Applicant] has distinguished himself as a trusted employee with high 
integrity and a strong personal commitment that has gained him recognition 
as a high performer and valued employee. He has made a special effort to 
take personal responsibility and keep his supervisor and FSO informed and 
ensure that he did not negatively impact or miss work as we worked 
through his personal matters.  
 
As a former military officer and a security professional who has spent my 
entire adult life supporting our nations sensitive and classified information I 
place the highest priority in protecting those assets. Without reservation I 
am confident that [Applicant] takes his job and associated responsibilities 
of possessing a security clearance as serious and I strongly support him 
retaining his clearance.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
13  AE I. 
14 AE H. 
 
7 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption  
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 In this case, three alcohol consumption disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other  
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or dependence by a licensed clinical social 
worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 
8 
 
 Applicant committed DWI offenses in 2004 and 2009. After 2006, he drank 
alcohol rarely, but when he drank he consumed significant quantities of whiskey. 
Licensed social workers at recognized alcohol treatment programs have diagnosed him 
with alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence in sustained full remission. Substantial 
evidence was presented at the hearing to establish each of the above listed 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 23 sets forth four alcohol consumption mitigation conditions. These are: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);  
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and  
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholic Anonymous or similar organizations 
and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program.  
 
Applicant’s first DWI occurred over eight years ago. His second DWI occurred 
over three years ago. At the hearing, he acknowledged that he made mistakes, 
expressed remorse, and accepted responsibility for his misconduct. He specifically 
stated that he was providing “no excuses” for his wrongdoing.  
 
Applicant’s pattern of alcohol consumption was somewhat unusual. Since 2006, 
he rarely drank alcohol. When he did so, however, he would drink significant quantities 
of straight whiskey. This pattern tends to indicate that he did not have a strong craving 
to consume alcohol, but once he did start consuming it he either did so irresponsibly or 
could not control himself. 
 
After his second DWI, Applicant successfully completed an outpatient alcohol 
treatment program. Following that treatment, he was received a prognosis of “good.” He 
has not attended AA meetings. In 2011, he consulted with a mental health profession to 
deal with stress. He indicated that he would continue to consult with that mental health 
 
9 
 
professional if he felt the need to do so. Since his last DWI, he has avoided parties or 
events in which alcohol is consumed. He has begun exercising again, lost weight, and 
has focused on raising his son. He has developed a healthy lifestyle to avoid alcohol 
consumption. 
 
Applicant last consumed alcohol on December 24, 2009. He now considers 
alcohol as poison to him. He does not intend to consume alcohol in the future. He has 
resolved his alcohol problem. His alcohol-related misconduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 
23(b) and 23(c) apply; while 23(a) and 23(d) partially apply.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
In this case, three criminal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 31 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Applicant committed DWI offenses in 2004 and 2009. His second DWI was a 
felony offense. He is still on probation for that second DWI. His probation is scheduled 
to end in November 2015. AG ¶¶ 31(a), 31(c), and 31(d) apply. 
 
 Two criminal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant’s criminal conduct is limited to two alcohol-related offenses. He has no 
other arrests, charges, or convictions. The analysis under Guideline G, above, applies 
 
10 
 
equally here. In mitigating the alcohol consumption security concerns, he has also 
shown that his criminal conduct is unlikely to recur.  
 
Applicant remains on probation. He is still being supervised by his probation 
officer and is not yet eligible for an unrestricted driver’s license. Nothing in the Directive 
indicates that Applicant’s current probationary status is a per se bar to a favorable 
clearance decision. In this regard, the Appeal Board has clearly stated:  
 
The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole 
person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them 
apply to the particular facts of the case. Rather, their application requires 
the exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a 
whole.”15 
  
Nonetheless, because Applicant’s probation status triggers a specific 
disqualifying condition, it merits significant consideration. See DISCR Case No. 90-115 
at 3 (Oct. 6, 1992) (“In evaluating Applicant’s behavior since the 1988 criminal charges, 
the Judge, as trier of fact, may properly note Applicant can be expected to exhibit good 
behavior while on probation.”) Likewise, probation is an indicator that an offender may 
not yet be reformed or rehabilitated. Similarly, by placing an offender on probation, a 
state has demonstrated that it has doubts about an offender’s reliability or 
trustworthiness. If a state has such doubts, one may ask why the federal government 
should trust such an individual with classified material. While those are all valid factors 
to consider when evaluating a case in which an applicant is on probation, the final 
decision to grant or deny a security clearance must still be an exercise of sound 
discretion in light of the whole record.  
 
Applicant is approaching the halfway point of his probation. He has met all of his 
probation requirements. He has received a favorable letter from his probation officer 
who indicated that he may be eligible for early termination of his probation within the 
year. The key concern in this case is Applicant’s alcohol consumption. The record 
evidence shows that Applicant has changed his behavior. Specifically, he made lifestyle 
changes to avoid consuming alcohol in the future. He made those changes because he 
knew it was the right thing to do and not because he was being supervised while on 
probation. He has reformed and rehabilitated himself and has mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his current probation. In light of the record evidence as a whole, I 
find that AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) apply. 
 
                                                          
15 ISCR 09-01652 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2011) and ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Dec 20, 2006). See also ISCR Case No. 99-0018 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 6, 1999) (“Applicant still was on 
probation. That evidence is not solely dispositive. See, e.g., ISCR Case No 98-0247 (January 20, 1999) 
at page 3 note 5 (there is no per se bar to a favorable security clearance because applicant is still on 
probation). However, the Administrative Judge could not simply ignore Applicant’s probationary status. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 96-0710 (June 20, 1997) at p. 3. Applicant’s probationary status has obvious 
relevance to any analysis of whether Applicant’s efforts at rehabilitation warrant applicant of Criminal 
Conduct Mitigating Condition 5.”). This case was issued under a previous version of the adjudicative 
guidelines. Those guidelines did not contain an explicit disqualifying condition addressing probation.  
 
11 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines J and G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant is a single parent. Although he committed an offense that endangered 
his son, he is by all other accounts a responsible and dedicated father. He is a valued 
and trusted employee. At the hearing, he was candid, sincere, remorseful, and credible. 
He has accepted responsibility for his misconduct and changed his lifestyle so that he 
will not commit further alcohol-related offenses. He has reformed and rehabilitated 
himself. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the Alcohol Consumption and Criminal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:  FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:  FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
12 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
