 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-08337 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’I Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 5, 2010, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On August 3, 2012, the Department of Defense 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing. Applicant requested his case be decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On January 25, 2013, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on January 28, 2013. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
February 6, 2013. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time 
allowed that would have expired on March 8, 2013. I received the case assignment on 
March 28, 2013. Based upon a review of the complete case file, pleadings, and exhibits, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.f through 1.h and admitted 
all other allegations contained in Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e. (Item 2)  
 
Applicant has eight delinquent debts totaling $20,626. Applicant claims he made 
payment arrangements on the $1,067 debt in Subparagraph 1.f to settle it, but he 
provided no documentation to support his claim. He also claims he does not owe the 
$4,899 to an auto dealer because the statute of limitations expired (Subparagraph 1.g). 
Regardless of the statute of limitations in his state of Texas, he has not resolved this 
debt by payment of the financial obligation. All of the delinquent debts are listed on the 
five credit reports in the File. Applicant has not paid the debts listed in Subparagraphs 
1.a through 1.g of the SOR. (Items 4, 5, 7-11) 
 
Applicant asserts he paid and settled the $331 debt owed to a payday lender and 
it was deleted from his credit report (Subparagraph 1.h). He did submit a letter from the 
collector of the debt in this subparagraph. The letter states that the debt was paid or 
settled in full. This debt is resolved. (Items 6-11) 
 
Applicant works for a defense contractor. He is 36 years old. He had a security 
clearance that was revoked on June 16, 2011. Applicant served in the U.S. Army from 
August 1996 to February 2000 when he was discharged with a General Discharge. He 
joined the Army National Guard in August 2002 and served until March 2005, achieving 
the rank of E-4. Applicant married his wife in July 1996 and divorced her in December 
1997. His statement in the file discloses he married again in June 2011. He does not 
state anywhere that he has any children. (Items 4, 5) 
 
A government investigator interviewed Applicant in May 2010. At that time 
Applicant stated he would resolve his delinquent financial accounts. He told the 
investigator he intended to be debt free by December 2010. Applicant has not achieved 
that goal. The earliest debt listed in the credit report dates from 2008. (Item 6 at page 
14)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2008 to the present, Applicant accumulated eight delinquent debts totaling 
$20,626. He has not taken sufficient action to resolve more than one debt. These 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. No mitigating condition has applicability. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (a) requires the financial behavior to have occurred long ago, be 
infrequent, or occur under unusual circumstances not likely to happen again. Based on 
the facts, that mitigating condition is not applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) applies if the conditions causing the financial problems were beyond 
the Applicant’s control, such as unemployment, a business downturn, a medical 
emergency, or death, divorce, or separation, and the Applicant acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. Applicant in this case did not present any evidence to support any of 
these conditions. Therefore, this mitigating condition is not applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 20 (c) requires evidence of financial counseling and/or clear indications that 
the financial difficulty is under control or being resolved. Applicant has not paid seven of 
his delinquent debts in the past four years. This mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (d) applies if Applicant has made a good-faith effort to repay his debts. 
Applicant has presented no evidence establishing that effort. The mitigating condition 
has no applicability. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (e) states Applicant must have a reasonable basis to dispute the debt. 
He must also submit evidence of the basis for the dispute or provide evidence of actions 
to resolve the financial issue. Applicant has not met those requirements, so the 
mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
AG ¶ 20 (f) requires proof of any affluence must be from a legal source of 
income. That condition is irrelevant on the facts of this case and the condition does not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred his debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts. Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts 
during the past four years, despite his promises to address them. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
