 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-08646 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
_______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file and pleadings, I conclude that Applicant 
provided adequate information to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 18, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance for her employment as a 
truck driver with a defense contractor. (Item 5) She was denied an interim security 
clearance on March 31, 2011. (Item 10) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator on May 10, 2011, and verified the accuracy of the interview summary on 
July 8, 2012. (Item 6) On August 31, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for financial 
considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
 
2 
 
 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant received the SOR on September 18, 2012 (Item 3). Applicant 
answered the SOR on October 1, 2012, admitting the five allegations under Guideline F 
with explanation. She elected to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 4) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on January 31, 2013. 
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on February 11, 2013, 
and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. She provided additional information 
in response to the FORM on March 5, 2013. Department Counsel had no objection to 
consideration of the additional information in response to the FORM. (Memorandum, 
dated March 12, 2013) The case was assigned to me on April 8, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 37 years old and has been employed as a truck driver, teaming with 
her second husband since March 2007. She attended college from September 1995 
until December 1998, and earned an associate’s degree. She first married in June 2002 
and divorced in March 2003. She married her second and present husband in January 
2008. They have no children. In response to questions from the security investigator, 
Applicant noted that her monthly pay varies but usually averages about $12,000. Her 
monthly expenses are approximately $7,400. (Item 5, e-QIP, dated March 18, 2011; 
Subject Interview, dated May 10, 2011, at 2)  
 
Credit reports (Item 7, dated April 15, 2011; Item 8, dated June 5, 2012; Item 9, 
dated January 25, 2013) show the following delinquent debt for Applicant: $28,280 for a 
credit card account in collection (SOR 1.a); $4,800 for a credit card account in collection 
(SOR 1.b); $11,957 for a credit card account in collection (SOR 1.c); $8,731 for a credit 
card account in collection (SOR 1.d); and $8,844 for a credit card account in collection 
(SOR 1.e). The total of the SOR delinquent debt is approximately $35,194. In response 
to financial interrogatories, Applicant also noted two additional delinquent debts of 
$2,600 for tax year 2010 income tax, and $1,047 for 2011 property taxes. (Item 6 at 15)1  
 
Applicant told the security investigator that she had financial difficulty starting in 
2007 because the economy was bad and she and her husband did not get enough work 
                                                          
1 These two debts are not alleged as security concerns. The Appeal Board listed five circumstances in 
which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to 
evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider 
whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular 
provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person analysis 
under Directive Section 6.3. Consideration of the two non-SOR delinquent debt in this decision is strictly 
limited to these five circumstances.  
 
 
3 
 
 
from their employer. She had to make decisions on which debts to pay, and she 
decided to make her house payments rather than credit card payments. She 
acknowledged the SOR debts and said her intention was to pay the debts and she was 
working to establish payment plans. Once their truck was paid off in September 2011, 
she would have approximately $3,000 additional each month to use for debt payments. 
Once she resolved her financial problems, she intends to stay current with her bills. 
(Item 6, at 2-3) 
 
In response to financial interrogatories from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA), Applicant stated that she intended to settle and pay her delinquent 
debts. She included in her response information that she settled and paid a $6,200 
judgment on a credit card delinquent debt in June 2012. (SOR 1.d) She also reiterated 
her intent to reach settlement agreements on her other delinquent debts. (Response to 
Interrogatories, dated July 8, 2012 (Item 6))  
 
In response to the SOR, Applicant restated that her plan was to pay each of her 
delinquent debts in turn. Once she paid one of the debts, she would work to settle and 
pay the next debt. She noted that their truck was paid off in October 2011, and she has 
been reducing her indebtedness approximately $1,000 monthly. She has kept her other 
obligations current. She anticipates paying all of her delinquent debts in 24 months. 
(Item 4, Response to SOR, dated October 1, 2012) 
 
In response to the FORM, Applicant provided current information on the status of 
her delinquent debts. She stated that she has attempted to reach a settlement 
agreement with the creditor for the credit card debt at SOR 1.a. She has not been able 
to reach an agreement but is still attempting to reach an agreement. It is the only credit 
card debt she has not paid off.  
 
Applicant called the creditor listed for the debt at SOR 1.b. This creditor is the 
same creditor for the debt at SOR 1.d. The creditor informed Applicant that they do not 
have a debt listed for her in the amount of $4,800. Applicant presented information that 
she settled the $8,371 debt at SOR 1.d with the creditor for $6,200. She presented 
information to show the debt was paid and satisfied on June 19, 2012. (Response to 
FORM, Payment Information and Paid-in-full Letter)  
 
Applicant presented information that she settled the debt at SOR 1.c with the 
collection agency for one-time payment of $4,400. She made the payment and paid the 
debt on February 28, 2013. Her response to the FORM was due in early March 2013 
and she responded to the FORM on March 5, 2013. She had not yet received 
information from the collection agency that the debt was paid in full. She did provide a 
phone number to contact the collection agency for verification of payment. (Response to 
FORM, date March 5, 2013) 
 
The delinquent debt at SOR 1.e is now $14,995. It was purchased by a collection 
agency from the original creditor. Applicant settled the account with the collection 
agency for $7,500, payable in six monthly installments of $1,250. The payments were 
 
4 
 
 
made and the debt was satisfied in December 2012. (Response to FORM, dated 
October 5, 2013, Paid-in-full Letter, dated March 6, 2013) 
  
In her response to the FORM, Applicant included a receipt for payment for the 
2011 property taxes paid on November 26, 2012. Applicant has an agreement with the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for monthly payments of $200 on the taxes owed for tax 
year 2010. Applicant included an IRS account transcript to show payments made and 
reduction of the amount of debt to $1,094.92. Applicant also noted that in the previous 
18 months, she and her husband made over $23,000 in debt payments. (Response to 
FORM dated March 5, 2013, IRS Transcript, dated March 6, 2013)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
5 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations. Applicant’s delinquent debts listed in credit reports and admitted by 
Applicant raise Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The delinquent debts show a history of not meeting financial obligations 
and an inability, not unwillingness, to satisfy debt.  
 
 I considered Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) 
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and FC MC ¶ 20(b) (the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely beyond the person’s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation) and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances). These mitigating conditions apply in part.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems started in 2007 when the economy started to falter 
and Applicant and her husband did not receive enough work for their trucking business 
from their employer. For the last few years, Applicant has received sufficient business 
and has been able to reduce her delinquent debt. While Applicant can experience the 
same lack of business in the future, she has shown that she can manage her funds so 
that her delinquent debt problems are unlikely to recur. The business economy that led 
to her delinquent debts was beyond her control. Applicant has sufficient income to pay 
 
6 
 
 
her past financial obligations, and she presented sufficient information to support 
responsible management of her finances. She acted responsibly towards her finances 
and her financial problems are under control.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control). Applicant presented no information to indicate she sought or received 
credit counseling. However, there are indications that her financial problems are being 
resolved and are under control.  
 
 I considered FC MC ¶ 20(d) (the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to 
repay the overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts). For FC MC ¶ 20(d) to apply, 
there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” to repay, and “evidence” of a 
good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of handling debts is needed. 
Good-faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and 
adherence to duty or obligation. A promise to pay debts in the future is not evidence of a 
good-faith intention to resolve debts. Applicant has to show a "meaningful track record" 
of debt payment, including evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. 
All that is required is a plan to resolve financial problems coupled with significant action 
to implement that plan.  
 
 Applicant has shown a "meaningful track record" of debt payment, including 
evidence of a plan to pay debts and actual debt reduction through payment of some of 
her debts. As early in the security clearance process as her interview with a security 
investigator, Applicant noted her intent to pay the debts one at a time. She reiterated 
this plan in response to interrogatories and then in response to the SOR. Applicant 
followed through with her proposed plan. By the time she responded to the FORM, 
Applicant settled, paid, or resolved all of the delinquent debts listed in the SOR except 
two. Applicant presented information on her attempts to contact the two remaining 
creditors and resolve the debts or negotiate payment plans. She presented information 
to show payment of the property taxes and that she has a plan with the IRS to pay the 
federal tax debt. Applicant in the last 18 months has paid over $23,000 towards her 
delinquent debts.  
 
 Based on this information, Applicant established a meaningful track record for 
paying her delinquent debts. Applicant presented sufficient evidence to show payment 
of three of the SOR debts, and reasonable attempts to contact the creditors to resolve 
the two remaining debts. Applicant lacks documentation for one debt that she paid, but I 
find her statement concerning this debt credible because of the information she 
presented on payment of the remaining debts together with contact information for the 
creditor. In addition, I considered Applicant’s information on payment of her property 
taxes and income taxes as further proof of her good-faith intent to pay her debts. 
Applicant has sufficient income to pay her debts. Based on Applicant’s plan to resolve 
her debts, together with actual debt payments and attempts to contact creditors and 
resolve her remaining debts, I find that Applicant established she has acted responsibly 
 
7 
 
 
towards her debts. Applicant presented sufficient information to mitigate security 
concerns for financial considerations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant established a meaningful 
track record of paying delinquent debts. She has two delinquent debts to pay as soon 
as she can reach an agreement with the creditors. She is working with one of these 
creditors to be sure she owes a debt to them. She presented information on payment of 
debts not listed in the SOR. She provided sufficient credible documentary information to 
show she acted reasonably and responsibly to address her delinquent debts and 
resolve her financial problems. She established a credible plan to resolve and pay all of 
her delinquent debts. Applicant demonstrated responsible management of her finances 
and a consistent record of actions to resolve financial issues. Her responsible 
management of her financial obligations indicates she will be concerned and or act 
responsibly in handling classified information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions and doubts about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. She established her suitability for access to classified information. For 
all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from 
her financial situation. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:- 1.e:  For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
