 
1 
 
 
                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )   ISCR Case No.11-14319  
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David Horn, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns related to foreign influence. His request 
for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 25, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) that detailed security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992) as 
amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations under 
Guideline B. The case was assigned to me on December 13, 2012. DOHA issued a 
 
2 
 
 
Notice of Hearing on January 17, 2013, setting the hearing date for February 5, 2012. 
Applicant requested a continuance after retaining counsel. I granted his request, and the 
hearing was rescheduled for March 4, 2013. At the hearing, I admitted two Government 
exhibits into evidence (GE 1-2). Applicant testified and offered four exhibits, admitted into 
evidence as AE A-D. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 12, 
2013. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 I take administrative notice of facts related to Afghanistan and Pakistan, included 
in U.S. Government documents provided by Department Counsel, and marked as 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. I also take administrative notice of Government documents 
related to Afghanistan, provided by Applicant, and marked as HE II. The facts are 
limited to matters of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute, and are set 
out in the Findings of Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 61 years old, was born in Afghanistan. He left in 1978 to pursue higher 
education. He completed a master’s degree at a German university in 1982, and a 
doctorate at the same school in 1986. He immigrated to the United States in 1989, and 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1998. Applicant has not served in either the U.S. or 
a foreign military. Applicant married in the United States in 1989. His wife, also born in 
Afghanistan, is a naturalized U.S. citizen. Her parents are citizens and residents of the 
United States. Her siblings are U.S. residents, and are all either U.S. citizens or legal 
permanent residents. Applicant and his wife have no children. He has an adult daughter 
from another relationship, who is a German citizen, residing in Germany. In 2009, he 
joined his current employer as a social media analyst, and now works for the contractor 
at a military installation as a cultural advisor. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 33-37, 58) 
 
In 2009, he attended an eight-month program at a U.S. university that focuses on 
improving English language, research, and critical thinking skills to bring security-critical 
languages to federal agencies. He was awarded a certificate in August 2009. His lead 
instructor, who worked intensively with him, submitted a character reference. He 
describes Applicant as a “hard-working scholar and a genuinely sincere, honest, open 
and trustworthy gentleman.” Of all those whom he had taught, he ranked Applicant as 
among the most committed to the United States and the federal service and the “least 
likely to harm the interests of the United States.” (GE 1; AE C; Tr.31-32) 
 
Applicant’s parents are deceased, as well as five of his ten siblings. One brother, 
one half-brother, and two sisters are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. Applicant's 
 
3 
 
 
65-year-old brother lives in Afghanistan.1 He has little schooling, has never been 
employed, and his sons support him. He has no connection with the government, and is 
unaware that Applicant is applying for a security clearance. When Applicant contacts his 
brother, he usually speaks with his brother’s son. Applicant's nephew has no government 
connections, and is unaware that Applicant is seeking a security clearance. He was a 
student in Afghanistan, but has now moved to Greece. Applicant is in touch with him 
about once per month, primarily through email. Applicant has not been in touch with his 
brother in the past nine months. Applicant sent him about $50 or $60 per month for the 
past five or six years, but stopped about six months ago when he could no longer afford 
it. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 29, 37-41, 44-45, 50-51) 
 
Applicant's half-brother is a citizen-resident of Afghanistan. He is 83 years old and 
ill. He retired from a government position as a clerk approximately 30 years ago. At his 
2011 security interview, Applicant said he is in touch with his half-brother about once per 
year. At the hearing, he said he has differing amounts of contact with his different 
siblings, and had only spoken to his half-brother three times in the past 30 years. (GE 1, 
2; Tr. 37-41, 43-46, 49) 
 
Applicant's two sisters are 54 and 60 years old, and are homemakers. Applicant 
testified that he has infrequent contact with one of his sisters and only spoke to her a few 
times during the past 30 years. He used to speak with the other sister more often, about 
every two to three months. However, he has only been in touch with her once during the 
past nine months. Applicant also is in touch with this sister’s son once or twice per month 
by email or telephone. His nephew teaches at an Afghan university. He has no 
connections with the Afghan government, and is unaware Applicant is applying for a 
security clearance. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 29, 37-41, 43-49, 51-52) 
 
Applicant has another brother and a nephew who are citizens of Afghanistan. His 
brother did not graduate from high school, but he worked intermittently as a clerk for the 
Afghan interior department. He is 70 years old and retired. Applicant's brother and his 
son moved to Pakistan about 10 years ago because they believed it to be safer. During 
his 2011 security interview, Applicant described these family members as refugees. As 
of 2011, Applicant was in contact with his brother and nephew by telephone or email 
about once per month, but at the hearing, Applicant testified he has not been in touch 
with his brother for the past nine months. Applicant sent his brother $50 or $60 per 
month, until about six months ago. Neither his brother nor his nephew knows that 
Applicant is applying for a security clearance. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 29, 37-41, 47, 60)  
 
None of Applicant's relatives living in Afghanistan or Pakistan have visited him in 
the United States. None of them is aware that he is applying for a security clearance. He 
is willing to end his financial gifts to his brothers if it presents a security concern. 
Applicant has the most frequent contact with his brother who lives in the Netherlands. As 
of 2011, they were in touch weekly by telephone or email. This brother is not alleged in 
the SOR. Applicant has not been to Afghanistan since he left to attend school in 
                                                          
1 At the hearing, Applicant was unsure of his siblings’ ages. I have used the estimated birth dates he 
provided in his security clearance application. (GE 1; Tr. 53) 
 
4 
 
 
Germany in 1978. He has no plan to return. He does not own property in Afghanistan.2 
Applicant has owned a home in the United States since 1999 or 2000. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 29, 
37-46) 
 
 Applicant and his wife live in state A, and Applicant travels to state B to work at a 
U.S. military site. While working in state B, Applicant roomed with a friend who had 
studied with him. The roommate submitted a character reference describing Applicant's 
impressive knowledge of several languages. He also worked with Applicant as a social 
media analyst at the military site. Applicant's friend noted that, after four years of 
studying and working together, he learned that Applicant is trustworthy, and a good 
father and husband. He was able to personally observe Applicant's “strong commitment 
to his profession and to our country.” He described Applicant as a “man of great integrity” 
who provides “important language and cultural skills in support of the U.S. mission in 
Afghanistan.” Another coworker at the military site provided a character reference, and 
noted that Applicant's deep cultural knowledge and subject matter expertise are assets 
to the government in the war on terror. (AE A, D) 
 
Applicant's senior advisor at the military site described Applicant's stalwart 
character and trustworthiness, and noted that he is “totally committed to our nation’s 
security” and irreplaceable in the war against terrorism. In working to discredit online 
terrorist organizations, the senior advisor “came to rely on [Applicant], who embodies our 
core values, and who fights cyber terrorism to advance and protect our: 1. strategic 
interests; 2. way of life; and 3. to save our committed allies in Afghanistan and Pakistan 
from being over taken by extremists.” He noted that he and Applicant have worked 
together against the Taliban, al-Qaida, and other terrorist networks. (AE B) 
 
Administrative Notice3 
 
The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (Afghanistan) 
 
Afghanistan is an Islamic Republic of 28 million people with a democratically 
elected president. It has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the 
Soviet Union in 1979. An overwhelming number of Afghans opposed the communist 
regime. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union withdrew from the 
country, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, and religious militias. By the 
end of 1998, the Taliban had risen to power and controlled 90 percent of the country, 
imposing aggressive and repressive policies, engaging in human rights violations, and 
providing sanctuary to Osama bin Laden.  
 
                                                          
2 When Applicant's father passed away (date unknown), his house passed to his children, including 
Applicant. However, while Applicant was studying in Germany in the 1980s, his siblings sold the house. 
(Tr. 41) 
 
3 The information for administrative notice appears in the U.S. government documents included in 
Hearing Exhibits I and II. 
 
 
5 
 
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. Afghanistan’s first 
democratic election took place in October 2004, and the new government took power. 
Despite that election, terrorists including al-Qaida and the Taliban, continue to assert 
power and intimidation within the country. The risk of terrorist activities remains high. 
Terrorist organizations target United States and Afghan interests by suicide operations, 
bombings, assaults, and hostage taking. The country’s human rights record is poor and 
violence is rampant. According to the U.S. Department of State (DOS), insurgents 
continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. 
Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from 
violence.  
 
The United States is transitioning primary security responsibility to Afghan 
National Security Forces. According to the DOS, the United States and others in the 
international community in 2011 provided resources and expertise to Afghanistan in a 
variety of areas, including humanitarian relief and assistance, capacity-building, security 
needs, counter-narcotic programs, and infrastructure projects. The United States is 
committed to supporting the Afghan president’s agenda for democracy, reintegration, 
economic development, and improving relations with Afghan regional partners. The 
United States plans to remain politically, diplomatically, and economically engaged in 
Afghanistan as a strategic partner for the long term. 
 
The Islamist Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan) 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic in South Asia. It held successful 
elections in February 2008 and has a coalition government. However, terrorist networks 
operate within Pakistan. Members of the Taliban are known to be in the Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) region, in Balochistan Province, and in the Khyber 
Pakhtunkhwa in the FATA region. The FATA region is a sanctuary to al-Qaida and other 
extremist groups. The Haqqani Network also operates with impunity in Pakistan. On 
September 7, 2012, the United States formally declared the Haqqani Network a foreign 
terrorist organization.  
 
The DOS defines terrorist safe havens as “ungoverned, under-governed, or ill-
governed physical areas where terrorists are able to organize, plan, raise funds, 
communicate, recruit, train, transit, and operate in relative security because of 
inadequate governance capacity, political will, or both.”4 The DOS concludes that, 
despite efforts by Pakistani security forces, groups including Afghan and Pakistani 
militants and al-Qaida terrorists have safe haven in Pakistan, and train and operate 
there to plan attacks against the United States and its allies in Afghanistan. In 2011, 
U.S. special forces personnel found and killed al-Qaida leader Osama bin Laden in 
Pakistan.  
 
                                                          
4 U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2011, Chapter 5, Terrorist Safe Havens. (HE I) 
 
6 
 
 
The Pakistani government has a poor human rights record. Reported violations 
include extrajudicial killings, torture and disappearances by security forces, lack of 
judicial independence, arbitrary arrest, honor crimes, wide-spread corruption, 
disappearance and imprisonment of political opponents, and trafficking in persons. The 
May 2012 Human Rights Report by the DOS notes that Pakistani domestic intelligence 
services monitored political activists, suspected terrorists, and the media. Credible 
reports indicate that authorities routinely used wiretaps, and intercepted and opened 
mail without requisite court approval. 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair and commonsense determination 
based on examination of all available relevant and material information, and 
consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.5 Decisions must 
also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept.  The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition does not determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline B. 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that each applicant possesses 
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the 
national interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access in favor of the Government.8 
                                                          
5 Directive. 6.3. 
 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, especially the following: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Family ties with a resident or citizen of a foreign country per se do not disqualify 
an applicant from obtaining a security clearance; such ties are only disqualifying if they 
create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation or a potential conflict of interest. 
Applicant has foreign family members with whom he maintains contact. In addition, the 
countries in question must be considered.9 Terrorists, including al-Qaida and the 
Taliban, operate against United States and Afghan interests within Afghanistan. Both 
Afghanistan and Pakistan have poor human rights records and are affected by terrorism 
and violence. Applicant's family ties in these countries create a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b) apply. 
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 04-07766 at 3 (App. Bd., Sep 26, 2006) (the nature of the foreign government 
involved must be evaluated in foreign influence cases). 
 
8 
 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
Although Afghanistan and Pakistan represent a heightened risk of exploitation, 
Applicant has not lived in Afghanistan for 35 years. His parents and five of his siblings 
are deceased. However, Applicant has three brothers, two sisters, and three nephews 
in foreign countries, with whom he maintained contact. Applicant described his contact 
with one brother as five or six times per year, but Applicant actually was in touch with 
this brother’s son, rather than his brother, and that nephew has now moved to Greece. 
Although Applicant’s half-brother was a government clerk, he retired 30 years ago, and 
Applicant has only spoken to him three times in the past 30 years. He has also only 
spoken to one of his sisters a few times in the past 30 years, and to the other about four 
or five times per year. Applicant’s remaining brother was a clerk for the Afghan 
government. He and his son became refugees because of the violence in Afghanistan 
and moved to Pakistan about ten years ago. Applicant has not spoken to any of his 
foreign relatives in the past nine months. During the past six months, he has not sent 
even the minimal amount of money he had been sending to two of his brothers. None of 
them has come to the United States to visit him. None of them knows he works for a 
contractor or is applying for a security clearance. Given the status of his foreign 
relationships, it is unlikely Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose 
between foreign and U.S. interests. AG ¶ 8(a) applies. 
 
Applicant’s contact with foreign family members is at most a few times per year, 
and at the least only three times in 30 years. His closest relationship is with his brother 
who is a citizen and resident of the Netherlands. Applicant left Afghanistan at the age of 
17. He has no intention of returning in the future. He has not returned to Afghanistan to 
see his family, and they have not visited him in the United States. He has no bank 
accounts, property, or any other financial interests in Afghanistan that could be used to 
manipulate or pressure him. Applicant's foreign contacts are outweighed by his ties to 
the United States, where he has established his life over the past 24 years. He has 
been a U.S. citizen for 15 years. His wife and in-laws are U.S. citizens and residents. 
He owns his own home. He has served the U.S. Government through his work with a 
federal contractor. I conclude Applicant would choose the United States, were a conflict 
of interest to arise. Mitigating conditions AG ¶ 8(b) applies. 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guidelines. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
Guideline B cases do not focus on an applicant's loyalty to the United States, and 
here, Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is not in question. However, Applicant’s 
foreign contacts represented a security concern because of the potential for coercion or 
conflicts of interest. Applicant's interactions with most of his family members were 
infrequent – a few times per year – and more recently, he has not been in touch with 
them for about nine months. Applicant has no property or financial interests in 
Afghanistan or Pakistan. He has not been in Afghanistan in 35 years. 
 
Applicant's ties to these countries are outweighed by his strong ties to the United 
States, including his wife, a U.S. citizen; his in-laws, who are U.S. citizens and 
residents, or legal permanent residents; his employment; and his U.S. real estate 
assets. Most significantly, Applicant’s co-workers and advisor confirm that he is 
trustworthy, has performed with integrity, is committed to U.S. security, and since 2009, 
has worked diligently to assist the U.S. Government in neutralizing terrorist networks.  
 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the cited security 
concerns. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has satisfied the doubts raised 
under the guideline for foreign influence.  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a  – 1.e   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
