The Government submitted ten items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-12580
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela Benson Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On August 31, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing security concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested an administrative
determination in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant
Material (FORM), dated February 1, 2013.  Applicant received the FORM on February1
11, 2013. He submitted additional information that I marked as AX A and entered into
the record. I received the case assignment on April 8, 2013. Based on a review of the
2
case file, I find Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised. Security clearance is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations under Guideline F, ¶
1.a through ¶ 1d.  (Item 4)  
Applicant is 36 years old. He is an independent contractor working as a driver for
a large company. He graduated from high school and received an undergraduate
degree in 2004. He is married and has no children. (Item 5) Applicant has been
employed with his current employer since March 2007. He had hourly positions and
some unemployment prior to 2007. He completed a  security clearance application on
March 18, 2011. (Item 5)
 The SOR lists 4 delinquent debts that total approximately $57,787. The credit
report at Item 7 confirms them.  Applicant listed the delinquent accounts on his security
clearance application and in his answers to DOHA interrogatories. Applicant noted that
the accounts listed on the SOR were credit accounts that were opened to pay expenses
to “keep a roof over their heads.” They became delinquent about 2008 when he did not
have much work due to the economic downturn. Applicant chose which bills to pay. He
paid his mortgage, but did not pay the credit card accounts.  He explains that his plan
was to pay the delinquent credit card debt one credit card at a time. His intent was to
pay his truck loan and then to address the delinquent debts. He noted that he would
have an additional $3,000 per month to pay toward the debts. Applicant initially did not
provide any documentation that any of the debts have been paid or resolved when he
answered the SOR in August 2012. He noted that he has two additional non SOR
delinquent debts for 2010 income tax for $2,600, and 2011 property tax for $1,047.
Applicant accepted full responsibility for his delinquent debts, attributing them to
the economic downturn in his employment. He stated that he tried hard to keep up with
the bills but the everyday cost of living; including: house, car, insurance, utilities, gas
and food, were difficult to pay and still support his wife and four children. He explained
that he was instructed not to pay his credit card accounts in order to qualify for the
affordable home plan.  (Item 4)  He has every intention of paying his delinquent debts
by 2013. He also intends to avoid new debt.  He understands that he needs a better
credit history to obtain a security clearance. He states that he has already provided
proof that he paid a debt to one company (Midland) in June 2012, and has now started
on the SOR debts. He notes that there is nothing in his background to show that he is a
risk to national security.
Applicant timely responded to the FORM and provided documentation that he
reached a settlement agreement with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) as of March 6,
2013, and is paying $200 a month on his 2010 tax debt. The balance is $1,686. The
property tax amount for 2011 ($1,449.36) has been paid in full. Applicant also paid his
2012 property taxes for $939.17, and he provided a receipt. (Answer to FORM, dated
March 5, 2013)
3
Also, Applicant reached a settlement for some of the debts on the SOR. He
settled the Cavalry collection account that totaled $14,955 for $7,500. Applicant paid
the settlement amount in six installments of $1,250. The account was satisfied in
December 2012.  (SOR 1.a) Applicant settled the AAC account that was $12,134 for
$4,400. He made a lump sum payment on February 28, 2013. He does not yet have the
documentation, but is waiting for a letter. (SOR 1.c) The Chase collection account for
$8,731 was purchased by Midland was settled for $6,200 on June 19, 2012. (SOR 1.d)
During the last 18 months Applicant has paid approximately $23,000 to resolve
delinquent debt. He is completing his promise to pay his debts to past creditors.  (AX A)
He has no new debt. His credit reports confirm various accounts that he “pays as
agreed.” 
Applicant has a monthly gross income of approximately $8,000-$10,000. After
listing total monthly expenses of $7,840, he has a net monthly remainder of
approximately $1,430. He noted that he and his wife are saving money now that he is
gainfully employed. Applicant is current on all daily household expenses and his $1,300
monthly mortgage.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government must present evidence to establish controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
4
proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
5
Applicant has delinquent debts totaling approximately $60,000. His admissions
and credit reports confirm these debts. Beginning in 2008, Applicant had insufficient
work and funds to make all of his monthly account payments. As a result, some
accounts started to become delinquent, and were placed for collection. Consequently,
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the
case against him and mitigate security concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
since 2008 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” However, he
promised to pay his bills as best he could. He was advised to pay his mortgage and not
to pay the credit cards. He prioritized and made a plan to settle the delinquent accounts
as he could. He has resolved some of his debts and he is gainfully employed, so it is
unlikely that his financial difficulties will continue. He established a monthly track record
of payments to his some of his SOR creditors and to the IRS. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FCMC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment) applies in part.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
applies. Applicant was an hourly wage earner and had some unemployment before his
present position. Applicant’s current work was affected by the economic downturn in
2008. He could not maintain a mortgage and pay the credit card accounts. He began a
process of settlement with creditors. He presented sufficient information to prove that
the delinquencies were beyond his control. This mitigating condition applies.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant produced  evidence that he has
addressed three of the four SOR debts through negotiation, or consistent and regular
payments. He did not present evidence that he received financial counseling which
obviates the applicability of FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem). However, “and/or there are clear indications that the
problem is being resolved or is under control” applies. find that  there are clear
indications that his financial problem are being resolved and are under control.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
6
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 36 years old.  He has worked for his current employer since 2007.  He had
no financial difficulties prior to the economic downturn. He had hourly wage jobs and
some unemployment in the years before his current work. He was advised to pay his
mortgage when he started to have difficulties paying his bills. He was told by the home
modification loan officer to not pay the credit accounts. He followed that advice. He is
current with his mortgage and has paid his truck in full. He settled his tax issues. He
settled three of his four SOR debts. He was candid in reporting the tax and property
debts in his answer to the interrogatories. He knew he would pay his debts and had a
plan. He began by paying the truck so that he could maintain his employment.  He paid
his taxes. He is in the process of settling the final SOR debt. He has a meaningful  track
record of paying his debts. Within the last 18 months has  paid approximately
$23,083.53 to resolve his delinquent debts.  He has one delinquent debt that is still
unresolved. He produced sufficient documentation or evidence that he has resolved
multiple SOR debts. He has not completed financial counseling. 
Applicant stated that he takes full responsibility for his delinquent debts. He
understands that there is no right or entitlement to a security clearance. He is serious
about his credit history and knows the importance of it. He has shown that he can pay
his bills and maintain his current household expenses. He has no new debts. His credit
reports confirm many accounts over the years that he has paid as agreed.  Finally, he
stated that he is a person of integrity and would not in any way fail to protect a national
trust.
Applicant submitted sufficient information and evidence to mitigate the security
concerns raised in his case. Clearance is granted. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a- 1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
