 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 11–13290
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s drug use is not recent and not likely to recur. The security concerns
raised by his use of illegal drugs are mitigated. His request for a security clearance is
granted.
Statement of the Case
On August 11, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (eQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed background investigation,
Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access to classified
information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six documents (Items 1 - 6) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
 Directive. 6.3.4
2
On October 17, 2012, the DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed at Guideline H (Drug
Involvement).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without2
a hearing. On January 3, 2013, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material
(FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on January 16, 2013,3
and was notified that he had 30 days to file a response to the FORM. The record closed
after Applicant failed to submit any additional information within the time allowed. The
case was assigned to me on April 23, 2013.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline H, the Government alleged that Applicant used marijuana about
twice monthly between January 2008 and July 2011, and that he used cocaine twice
between April and June 2011 (SOR 1.a). Applicant admitted these allegations, claiming
that he has not used drugs since July 2011. (FORM, Item 4) In addition to the facts
established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 21 years old and has been offered employment with a defense
contractor conditioned on his acquisition of a security clearance. After completing an
unrelated summer internship in August 2011, Applicant was unemployed when he
submitted his eQIP. Since he graduated from college in May 2011, he has been living
with his mother. Applicant’s summer internship was located near his mother’s home and
his prospective employment is located in another state. Neither is near where he
attended college. (FORM, Items 5 and 6)
In his eQIP, Applicant disclosed that he used marijuana about twice each month
while he was in college. Between April and June 2011, he also used cocaine twice. He
never bought or sold the drugs he used, as they were provided by others in social
settings. Applicant has not used illegal drugs since June 2011. In his September 2011
subject interview, and in his notarized response to the SOR, he stated he no longer
uses illegal drugs and does not intend to use drugs again. (FORM, Items 1 and 4 - 6) 
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
3
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOHA based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Department Counsel meets its burden, it6
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
the applicant to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to8
such information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust
and confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses
the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the
nation’s interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest”
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for
access to classified information in favor of the Government.9
4
Analysis
Drug Involvement
Applicant used marijuana twice monthly between 2008 and July 2011. He also
used cocaine twice between April and June 2011. This information raises a security
concern articulated at AG ¶ 24, as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g.,
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and
hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶ 25(a) (any drug abuse (see above definition)).
By contrast, Applicant has not used drugs for almost two years, and he no longer
lives, and he will not be working, near the college town where his drug use occurred.
His professional circumstances have changed, in that, his pending employment
depends on his continued good conduct.
This information supports application of the following AG ¶ 26 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (2)
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an
appropriate period of abstinence.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline H. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available information
suggests Applicant’s involvement with illegal drugs can be ascribed to youthful
5
indiscretion and experimentation. His circumstances have changed and there has been
a sufficient period of abstinence from which to conclude Applicant is not likely to again
use drugs. A fair and commonsense assessment of this record shows the Government’s
security concerns are mitigated.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
