 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-15263 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns, but he has not mitigated 
personal conduct concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 10, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign 
influence) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 1, 2012. He did not state whether he 
wanted a hearing before an administrative judge or the case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. On November 24, 2012, Department Counsel requested a 
 
2 
 
hearing.1 The case was assigned to me on January 30, 2013. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 29, 2013, 
scheduling the hearing for April 15, 2013. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 24, 2013.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Pakistan. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as HE II. Applicant did not object, 
and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in HE II. The facts are 
summarized in the written request and will not be repeated in this decision.   
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which 
were admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since January 2011. He does not hold a security clearance. He 
attended college for a period, but he did not obtain a degree. He is married with two 
minor children.2 
  
 Applicant was born in Afghanistan to Afghan parents. His parents took him and 
fled to Pakistan in about 1984. They remained in Pakistan until they immigrated to the 
United States in 1988. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 1994. Applicant’s parents and 
three siblings also became U.S. citizens.3 
 
 Applicant’s wife was also born in Afghanistan. She is now a U.S. citizen. Their 
two children were born in the United States. Her parents and one of her siblings are 
citizens of Afghanistan, living in Pakistan. Another sibling is a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan. Two other siblings are U.S. citizens. None of Applicant’s in-laws have any 
association with the Pakistan government.4 
 
 
                                                          
1 (Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-25, 65; GE 1-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 22, 26, 33, 64; GE 1-5. 
 
4 Tr. at 22-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-5. 
 
 
3 
 
 From about January 2003 to January 2004, Applicant worked as the assistant 
manager at a charitable organization’s retail store. The charitable organization accepts 
donations, including clothes and other items, and distributes them or sells them in their 
retail stores. In January 2004, Applicant took a box of baseball cards that had been 
donated to the organization. The next day, he was confronted about the missing cards. 
He returned them and he was terminated from his job.5 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Public Trust Positions (SF 85P) on 
October 13, 2008. Under the employment question, he listed that he worked for an 
employer from June 2001 to June 2004 and another employer from June 2004 to June 
2005. He never listed that he worked for the charitable organization. He answered “No” 
to Question 12 of the SF 85P, which asked if any of the following happened in the 
previous seven years: 
 
 1 – Fired from a job 
 2 – Quit a job after being told you’d be fired 
 3 – Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct 
4 – Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of unsatisfactory 
performance 
5 –Left a job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances6 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
January 17, 2011. He listed his employment with the charitable organization from 
January 2003 to January 2004. Section 13C asked if in the last seven years, his 
employment ended under unfavorable circumstances. He answered “No.”7 
 
 Applicant completed a Counterintelligence-Focused Security Screening 
Questionnaire on January 26, 2011. It appears that much of the questionnaire was 
completed by someone asking the relevant questions to Applicant and then filling in the 
answers for him. Applicant reported his employment with the charitable organization 
from January 2003 to January 2004. The interviewer noted that Applicant stated that he 
left the position because he thought he could make more money in another job and that 
he regretted leaving the position.8 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation by an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator on February 17, 2011. A signed statement 
was not taken, but the interview was summarized in a report of investigation (ROI). The 
investigator confronted Applicant with the fact that he was terminated from the 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 34-39; GE 5. 
 
6 GE 3. 
 
7 GE 1. 
 
8 GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
charitable organization for stealing a box of baseball cards. Applicant denied stealing 
the baseball cards, and he denied being terminated from the charitable organization.9 
 
 Applicant telephoned the OPM investigator shortly after his interview on February 
17, 2011. He told the investigator that he lied about being fired from the charitable 
organization. He also admitted that he had lied about stealing the baseball cards. 
Applicant told the investigator that he was embarrassed because he had never stolen 
anything before. He stated that he did not report this information on his security 
questionnaire because he was embarrassed.10 
 
 The OPM investigator re-interviewed Applicant in person on February 18, 2011. 
Applicant told the investigator that he took the baseball cards to his car. He stated that 
he returned the cards back to the charitable organization, and he was told not to come 
back.11 
 
 In his response to the SOR and in his hearing testimony, Applicant denied 
stealing the baseball cards, and he denied intentionally providing false information on 
any of his forms and during his interviews. He stated that he would often sit in his car 
during breaks. He admitted that he took the baseball cards to his car, but he stated that 
he was just looking at the cards, and he had no intention of stealing the cards. He 
stated that he accidently left the cards in the car overnight. He stated the cards were 
returned the next day when he was confronted about the missing cards. Applicant 
stated that his failure to list his employment at the charitable organization on the SF 85P 
was a simple mistake, and he did not list his termination from the charitable organization 
because it was beyond the seven-year period requested on the forms.12 
 
 I did not find Applicant’s testimony credible. After considering all the evidence, I 
find that Applicant stole the baseball cards within the common law definition of 
larceny.13 I further find that he intentionally provided false information about his 
employment at the charitable organization on the 2008 SF 85P; in the January 2011 
Counterintelligence-Focused Security Screening Questionnaire; and during his OPM 
interview on February 17, 2011. There is insufficient information for a determination that 
Applicant intentionally provided any other false information during his interview of 
February 17, 2011. I find that Applicant was truthful with the OPM investigator when he 
called the investigator after his interview on February 17, 2011, and when he was re-
                                                          
9 GE 5. 
 
10 GE 5. 
 
11 GE 5. 
 
12 Tr. at 34-63, 72-74. 
 
13 The unlawful taking and carrying away of someone else’s personal property with the intent to deprive 
the possessor of it permanently. Black’s Law Dictionary, Ninth Edition. 
 
 
5 
 
interviewed on February 18, 2011. I find that Applicant again intentionally provided false 
information in his SOR response and during his hearing.14 
 
 There is insufficient information for a determination that Applicant intentionally 
provided false information on the SF 86 he submitted on January 17, 2011. His 
termination by the charitable organization occurred either outside the seven-year period 
of the question, or so close to being outside that seven-year period as to preclude a 
finding of intentional falsification.  
 
 Applicant has been a linguist for a defense contractor since January 2011. He 
has worked under combat conditions in Afghanistan for almost two years. The U.S. 
military personnel he worked with praised his abilities and service to the mission.15  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
14 Applicant’s false statements in his SOR response and during the hearing were not alleged in the SOR, 
and they will not be used for disqualification purposes. They may be considered when assessing 
Applicant’s credibility, in the application of mitigating conditions, and in analyzing the “whole person.” 
 
15 Tr. at 65; AE A-C. 
 
6 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 
7 
 
Applicant’s parents-in-law are citizens of Afghanistan and residents of Pakistan. 
This creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 
and 7(d) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Applicant’s wife is a U.S. citizen. There are no disqualifying conditions raised by 
her status. SOR ¶ 1.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Pakistan. Applicant has lived 
in this country for 25 years, and he has been a U.S. citizen for almost 20 years. His 
parents, siblings, wife, and children are all U.S. citizens. Applicant has worked overseas 
under dangerous conditions in support of the national defense. The Appeal Board has 
held that “an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the United States is very 
important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B case.”16 
AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) are applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
8 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
  
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
Applicant was terminated from his position with a charitable organization in 2004 
when he stole a box of baseball cards. That conduct showed poor judgment and an 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. It also created a vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) are applicable.  
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information about his employment at the 
charitable organization on the 2008 SF 85P; in the January 2011 Counterintelligence-
Focused Security Screening Questionnaire; and during his OPM interview on February 
17, 2011. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) are applicable.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant intentionally 
provided false information on his 2011 SF 86. Except for his false statement about his 
employment at the charitable organization, there is insufficient information for a 
determination that Applicant intentionally provided any additional false information 
during his interview of February 17, 2011. SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.f are concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
Applicant did not correct the falsifications on his 2008 SF 85P or on his January 
2011 Counterintelligence-Focused Security Screening Questionnaire before being 
confronted with the facts. He did correct his false statements to the OPM investigator on 
February 17, 2011, before being confronted with the facts. AG ¶ 17(e) is applicable to 
the false statement made on February 17, 2011. It is not applicable to any of his other 
false statements.  
 
Unfortunately, after being truthful in February 2011, Applicant again provided 
false information in his SOR response and during his hearing. There are no other 
applicable mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
10 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s work overseas and the dangers involved in that work. 
However, he cannot be trusted to be honest and truthful.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated foreign influence security concerns, but he has not mitigated personal conduct 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.c-2.d:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 2.e-2.f:   For Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
