 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12980 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Harvey, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
From July 1987 to September 2010, Applicant was arrested or charged seven 
times with misdemeanor-level offenses, which resulted in five-misdemeanor level 
convictions mostly for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) or assault. He 
recently filed his 2010 tax return, and financial considerations concerns are mitigated. 
More time without criminal conduct must elapse before criminal conduct and personal 
conduct concerns will be fully mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
revoked. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 17, 2010, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86). 
(GE 1) On September 5, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) the President promulgated on 
December 29, 2005. 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines J (criminal conduct) and E 
(personal conduct). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR further informed Applicant that 
DOD adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance, 
and it recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a 
determination whether his clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
(HE 2)  
 
On November 14, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a 
hearing. (HE 3) On January 2, 2013, Department Counsel indicated she was ready to 
proceed on Applicant’s case. On January 7, 2013, Applicant’s case was assigned to 
me. On February 11, 2013, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for 
February 21, 2013. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled using video 
teleconference. (HE 1) Department Counsel offered 17 exhibits, and Applicant did not 
offer any exhibits at his hearing. (Tr. 19; GE 1-17) There were no objections, and I 
admitted GE 1-17 into evidence. (Tr. 19-20) Additionally, I admitted the hearing notice, 
SOR, and Applicant’s response to the SOR into evidence. (HE 1-3) On March 4, 2013, I 
received the transcript. On March 22, 2013, I received nine exhibits from Applicant, 
which were admitted without objection into evidence. (AE A-I) 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to add an allegation under 
Guideline F (financial considerations) that Applicant had not filed his 2010 federal 
income tax return by the time of his hearing. (Tr. 65-68) Applicant objected because he 
did not believe his failure to file his tax return was pertinent. (Tr. 68) I overruled his 
objection as to relevance. (Tr. 69) Applicant decided to proceed with his hearing without 
requesting a delay in his hearing. (Tr. 68) I approved a 30-day delay to March 21, 2013, 
for Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. (Tr. 70, 116) Applicant 
provided additional information concerning financial considerations after his hearing. 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant admitted the conduct alleged in the SOR, and he provided some 
extenuating and mitigating information. (HE 3; GE 10) His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make 
the following additional findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old station mechanic performing facilities maintenance, 
who has been employed by a defense contractor for the last 10 ½ years. (Tr. 8-9) He 
graduated from high school in 1981, and he has not attended college. (Tr. 8) He has not 
served in the military. (Tr. 8) He has held a security clearance since January 2005, and 
there are no allegations of security violations. (Tr. 9-10) He has never been married. (Tr. 
                                            
1The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses or 
locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources contain more specific 
information. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
94) He has two children from a 17-year partner relationship and one child from another 
relationship. (Tr. 94, 96, 103) 
  
Criminal offenses 
 
 In July 1987, the police stopped Applicant for erratic driving and his breathalyzer 
test (BAT) result was above .08. (SOR ¶ 1.a) Applicant was convicted of DUI. (GE 1 at 
37) He was sentenced to a $500 fine ($250 suspended) and jail for 30 days (27 days 
suspended). (GE 10; GE 11 at 2)  
 
On September 2, 1991, Applicant was charged with a misdemeanor-offense of 
riot after a bar fight. (SOR ¶ 1.b; GE 9; GE 11 at 2) The charge was dismissed. (GE 9; 
GE 10; GE 11 at 2) 
  
 On February 28, 1992, Applicant was charged with assault and malicious 
mischief, resulting from a road-rage incident. (SOR ¶ 1.c; HE 2; GE 10) Both charges 
were dismissed upon payment of damages. (GE 10)   
  
 Applicant was in a relationship with V from 1996 to 2009. (Tr. 84) On November 
14, 1997, Applicant and V were in an argument. V pushed Applicant, and then she 
threw a fire extinguisher at him. (Tr. 52; GE 14 at 2) Applicant grabbed V by the throat 
and choked her for two seconds. (Tr. 52; GE 14 at 2) Applicant was charged with and 
convicted of assault in the fourth degree, a misdemeanor. (SOR ¶ 1.d; GE 2; GE 7; GE 
10)2 He was sentenced to detention, required to attend a violence prevention class, and 
placed on two years of probation. (SOR ¶ 1.d; GE 14 at 2) He completed 17 weeks of 
anger management after the 1997 arrest. (Tr. 83) 
 
On April 7, 2000, Applicant exited his car to converse with another driver after the 
other driver failed to let Applicant pass. (GE 11 at 3; GE 14 at 1) After arguing, Applicant 
grabbed the other driver’s neck, leaving marks. (GE 11 at 3; GE 14 at 1; GE 15 at 4) 
Applicant was charged with assault in the fourth degree, a misdemeanor. (GE 6 at 1) He 
was convicted of assault pursuant to his guilty plea. (SOR ¶ 1.e; GE 2 at 3-4; GE 6; GE 
10; GE 11 at 3; GE 14 at 1) On August 28, 2000, he was sentenced to 10 years of 
probation, a $5,000 fine ($5,000 suspended), and 365 days in jail (335 days 
suspended). (GE 2 at 4; GE 6; GE 10; GE 11 at 3; GE 15) The probation order required 
him not to have any criminal offenses. (GE 15) 
 
In 2004, Applicant made a statement at his security clearance hearing in which 
he indicated that he did not currently drink alcohol, does not go to bars, and stopped 
consuming alcohol two years previously. (Tr. 92-94 (citing GE 12 (2004 Tr. at 42)); GE 
11 at 3) A DOHA administrative judge noted Applicant’s abstinence from alcohol 
consumption as an important factor in his decision to continue Applicant’s security 
clearance. 
 
                                            
2Applicant’s SF 86 indicated he was convicted on a lesser charge of “interference of a 911 call.” 
(GE 1 at 37) Actually this charge was dismissed. (GE 7, 10)  
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
On January 28, 2009, Applicant grabbed V because she was yelling at him. (Tr. 
85, 88; GE 5) It was sufficiently violent to leave a mark on her skin. (Tr. 88; GE 2) On 
December 15, 2009, Applicant pleaded guilty to Harassment-2—Offensive Physical 
Contact, a class B misdemeanor. (Tr. 45; GE 5 at 1, 6; SOR ¶ 1.f) He was sentenced to 
30 days in jail (23 days suspended), no contact with V except through counsel, and 
unsupervised probation for 730 days beginning on December 15, 2009. (GE 5 at 6)  
 
In May 2010, V moved out of Applicant’s residence. (Tr. 44) He completed 36 
weeks of anger management classes after the 2009 arrest. (Tr. 82; GE 17) Applicant 
said V was bipolar and suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder and dissociative 
disorder. (Tr. 84) He said V caused Applicant to become depressed and gain weight. 
(Tr. 85) He conceded what he did to V was wrong. (Tr. 89) V maintained a restraining 
order against Applicant for two years; however, it may have expired. (Tr. 108-109) 
Applicant did not believe assault offenses would recur because of his anger 
management training and the reduction in stress due to having V out of his life. (Tr. 90) 
 
On September 18, 2010, Applicant was charged with DUI and refusal to take a 
BAT. (SOR ¶ 1.g; GE 1 at 36; GE 3) On January 10, 2011, Applicant pleaded guilty to 
DUI, and the refusal to take a BAT charge was dismissed. (GE 3; AE F) The DUI is a 
Class A misdemeanor. (GE 3) He was sentenced to 60 days in jail (53 days 
suspended), fine of $3,000 ($1,500 suspended), and other fines of about $500. (AE F) 
An interlock device was installed on his vehicle from January 19, 2011 to August 2, 
2011. (AE G) His use of the interlock device cost $990. (AE G) On November 7, 2012, 
he paid $510 towards his fine. (AE H) He said all fines have been paid. (Tr. 45) 
Applicant said the only time since 2004 that he drove while under the influence of 
alcohol was the time he was caught in 2010. (Tr. 72) He said after 2010, he has not 
driven a vehicle after consuming alcohol. (Tr. 73) Applicant said his three-year probation 
from his 2010 DUI ended in January 2013, except for an insurance requirement. (Tr. 
110-111; GE 2)  
 
After his alcohol-related offenses, he received some alcohol counseling. He did 
not indicate that he was currently participating in an alcohol counseling or treatment 
program. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
During Applicant’s July 2011 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal 
subject interview (PSI), he mentioned that he had not filed his 2010 federal tax return. 
(Tr. 54; GE 2) Applicant told the OPM investigator that he planned to file his 2010 tax 
return by February 2012. (GE 2 at 5)  
 
Applicant owed about $1,800 on his 2010 federal tax return. (Tr. 57) He filed his 
2011 federal tax return and expected to receive a $1,700 refund. (Tr. 57) From June or 
July 2012 to December 2012, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) wrote Applicant four 
or five times asking why he did not file his 2010 tax return. (Tr. 58-59) He did not 
respond to any of the IRS letters or file his tax return because he knew he owed the 
IRS, and he did not have the money to pay. (Tr. 59)  
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
At his hearing, Applicant said he planned to file his 2010 federal tax return soon 
after his hearing. (Tr. 54) He did not file his tax return because he lacked the funds to 
pay his taxes due to the necessity of paying his back child support and attorney fees. 
(Tr. 55) After his hearing, Applicant said he filed his 2010 federal tax return. (AE A) He 
provided a copy of his 2011 tax return, undated and unsigned, showing a refund due of 
$1,766, and his 2012 federal tax return, signed February 18, 2013, showing a refund 
due of $5,134. (AE A, C, D) He said: 
 
On the day of the hearing I mailed my 2010 tax forms into the IRS so it 
would be filed before I received my 2012 tax return, this has happened 
and I have not received that return to date, this should take care of the 
taxes owed for the 2010 tax year. I have provided you with a copy of my 
2011 and 2012 tax forms. (AE A)  
 
It is unclear why he did not provide a copy of his 2010 federal tax return or specifically 
indicate how much he owed or paid the IRS on that tax return.  
 
Applicant believed that excessive child support caused him to have financial 
problems. His monthly child support payment was reduced from $2,408 to $2,100, and 
then to $1,920, and in December 2012, it was further reduced to $1,680. (Tr. 55-56, 91) 
At one point, his child support arrearage was $5,000; however, he gradually paid his 
arrearage. (Tr. 91) Applicant is current on his child support. (Tr. 53-54) He provided 
child support records supporting his statements about required child support payments 
and current status. (AE E, I)  
 
Applicant had attorney fees from his child support, property distribution, and 
custody litigation of about $30,000, and he still owes about $15,000 to his attorney. (Tr. 
56, 72, 98-99, 103) 
   
Character evidence 
 
 Applicant’s employer did not take any disciplinary actions against Applicant. (Tr. 
22-23) Applicant is a good union member, who assisted in union activities whenever he 
was needed. (Tr. 25) He did not violate security at work. (Tr. 27-28, 36) Applicant’s 
supervisors described him as a great employee, who is an asset to the company. (Tr. 
28, 31, 36) Applicant is conscientious about ensuring that security is protected. (Tr. 31) 
He was promoted because of his demonstrations of diligence and responsibility. (Tr. 40) 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Adverse 
clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Nothing in this decision 
should be construed to suggest that I based this decision, in whole or in part, on any 
express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is 
merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the 
Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines J (criminal conduct), E (personal conduct) and F 
(financial considerations) with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR and 
amended SOR. 
  
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and 
“(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.”  
 
AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply. From July 1987 to September 2010, Applicant was 
arrested or charged seven times with misdemeanor-level crimes, which resulted in five-
misdemeanor level convictions mostly for DUI or assault.  
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Although none of the mitigating conditions fully apply, there are important 
mitigating factors. The most recent offense occurred on September 18, 2010, and is not 
particularly recent. He complied with all the terms of his most recent probation. He has 
been continuously employed for 10 ½ years. His employer describes him as a great 
employee without disciplinary problems at work. Applicant expressed regret and 
remorse concerning his offenses. He received anger management counseling and 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
alcohol-related counseling. Two of the allegations of assault involved V, and Applicant’s 
relationship with V has ended.   
 
Significant factors weighing against mitigating criminal conduct concerns remain. 
Applicant has five misdemeanor-level criminal convictions, including two in the last five 
years. Alcohol consumption contributed to several offenses, and he resumed alcohol 
consumption after two years of abstinence prior to his 2004 security clearance hearing. 
More time must elapse before there is enough assurance that criminal conduct and 
other behavior raising security concerns is unlikely to recur. Applicant is not ready to be 
entrusted with access to classified information at this time.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Two personal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially 
applicable. Those two disqualifying conditions provide:   
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: .  .  . (3) a pattern of . . . or rule 
violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing.  .  .  .   
 
AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) apply. Applicant violated rules when he committed five 
criminal offenses. When Applicant committed five criminal offenses, he engaged in 
conduct which adversely affects his personal, professional, and community standing. 
Further analysis concerning applicability of mitigating conditions is required.    
 
Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable:  
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;   
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
AG ¶ 16(e) is mitigated by AG ¶ 17(e) because Applicant has fully disclosed his 
criminal conduct. Law enforcement, the courts, and security officials are well aware of 
his criminal conduct, and he is not vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, or duress 
because of his criminal offenses. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions apply to mitigate concerns under AG ¶ 16(d). 
The personal conduct allegations in SOR ¶ 2.a duplicate the criminal conduct 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.g. The scope of his security-related conduct is thoroughly 
addressed under Guideline J and the Whole-Person Concept, infra. The five 
misdemeanor convictions raise unresolved security concerns as rule violations because 
they show Applicant has questionable judgment, is untrustworthy, unreliable, and may 
not properly safeguard protected information. Personal conduct concerns are not 
mitigated. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts; . . . (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and . . . (g) failure to file 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required. . . .”  
 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his OPM PSI and his 
hearing record. Applicant admitted that he failed to file his 2010 federal income tax 
return as of his hearing on February 21, 2013. He explained that he did not file his taxes 
as required because he was using available funds to pay his child support obligations. 
He also cited his substantial attorney fees as a significant cause of his financial stress. 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 
19(g) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s failure to file his 2010 federal income tax return is mitigated. Many tax 
payers do not understand that they must file a tax return on time, even if they do not 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
have the funds to pay the taxes owed. Applicant’s failure to respond to the IRS letters 
asking about his 2010 federal tax return was irresponsible. Applicant said that he filed 
his 2010 federal income tax return on February 21, 2013, the same day as his hearing. 
His child support is current, and he has paid half of his $30,000 debt to his attorney. 
Separation from his partner of 17 years and substantial child support obligations 
adversely affected his finances and constitute circumstances beyond his control. He 
showed some good faith when he admitted responsibility for not filing his 2010 federal 
income tax return during his OPM PSI and at his hearing.    
 
Applicant has taken reasonable actions to resolve the issue raised in the 
amended SOR. There is sufficient evidence that his financial problem is resolved and 
his finances are under control. He has established his financial responsibility. Financial 
consideration concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. My comments under 
Guidelines J, E, and F are incorporated into my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
There is considerable evidence supporting continuation of Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant is a 50-year-old station mechanic performing facilities 
maintenance, who has been employed by a defense contractor for the last 10 ½ years.  
He has held a security clearance since January 2005, and there are no allegations of 
security violations. He is conscientious about safeguarding security. He is a good union 
member. His supervisors described him as a great employee, who is an asset to the 
company. He was promoted because of his demonstrations of diligence and 
responsibility. He did not consume alcohol at work. There is no evidence at his current 
employment of any disciplinary problems. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he 
would intentionally violate national security.   
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The evidence against continuation of Applicant’s access to classified information 
is more substantial than the evidence supporting continuing his security clearance. 
From July 1987 to September 2010, Applicant was arrested or charged seven times 
with misdemeanor-level criminal offenses, which resulted in five-misdemeanor level 
convictions mostly for DUI or assault. In 2004, a DOHA administrative judge continued 
his security clearance and noted his abstinence from alcohol consumption prominently 
in his decision. Applicant resumed his alcohol consumption and committed two criminal 
offenses in the last five years. On August 28, 2000, Applicant was sentenced to 10 
years of probation after he grabbed a motorist around his neck. His 2009 harassment of 
V, which involved grabbing her with sufficient force to leave a mark on her skin, was an 
apparent violation of his 10-year probation. On September 18, 2010, Applicant 
committed his second DUI offense, and apparently violated the two-year probation from 
his 2009 harassment offense. His history of criminal conduct “creates doubt about [his] 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question [his] 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 30. His criminal 
conduct and personal conduct cannot be fully mitigated at this time because more time 
without criminal conduct and compliance with rules and statutes is necessary to 
establish his reliability and trustworthiness.  
  
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude continuation of Applicant’s 
access to classified information is not warranted at this time.    
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is revoked. 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
