 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11574 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 16, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DoD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 3, 2012, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on January 31, 2013. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
and he received it on February 14, 2013. Applicant was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He chose not to 
respond. The case was assigned to me on April 16, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. Those 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He is married and has three grown children. He has 
worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since April 2011. He has a high 
school education acquired through completion of a general educational development 
(GED) course. He served 20 years in his state’s National Guard and received an 
honorable discharge in 2005. He currently holds a security clearance.1  
  
 The debts listed in the SOR are supported by credit reports dated January 2013, 
September 2012, and June 2011. The SOR sets out nine debts amounting to about 
$36,868. Applicant’s finances became a concern in 2009 after his wife was laid off from 
her full-time job and he was earning less from his position as a result of the turndown in 
the economy. His wife received about $130 per week as unemployment insurance for 
an unknown period. With less income available to him, Applicant began using credit 
cards to pay for household bills and groceries. He was out of work, without pay, for a 
three-week period because of a medical condition (date of this incident is not in the 
record) and is awaiting a lump sum settlement from his disability insurance provider. His 
wife is still seeking full-time employment. He contacted an on-line credit consolidation 
company to seek assistance, but because their $500 monthly fee was too high, he did 
not pursue the company’s assistance.2  
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is a judgment accruing from a credit 
card account in the amount of $10,373. The date of the last action associated with this 
account was in September 2008.This debt is unresolved.3 
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a credit card account in the amount 
of $1,963. The date of the last action associated with this account was in July 2009.This 
debt is unresolved.4 
 
                                                          
1 Items 4-6. 
 
2 Items 4, 6. 
 
3 Items 6, 9. 
 
4 Item 8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a medical collection account in the 
amount of $663. The date of the last action associated with this account was in May 
2011.This debt is unresolved.5 
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is a credit card account in the amount 
of $6,906. The date of the last action associated with this account was in February 
2009.This debt is unresolved.6 
 
 The delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f are for two credit card 
accounts with the same creditor in the amount of $3,300 each.7 The date of the last 
action associated with these accounts was in March 2009.These debts are unresolved.8 
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is a credit card account in the amount 
of $7,502. The date of the last action associated with this account was in February 
2009. This debt is unresolved.9 
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is a collection account in the amount of 
$1,610. This debt is a duplicate of the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.b. When the same conduct 
is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations 
should be resolved in Applicant=s favor.10  
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is a consumer charge account in the 
amount of $1,251. The date of the last action associated with this account was in April 
2009.This debt is unresolved.11 
 
 In September 2012, Applicant prepared a personal financial statement listing his 
net monthly income at about $3,238, his total monthly expenses at about $3,121, and a 
monthly remainder of about $117. When he asked to provide the current status of all of 
his debts, he stated, “I am currently concentrating on catching up and or getting ahead 
on all my current obligations such as mortgage, car payments, etc.”12 
  
                                                          
5 Item 9. 
 
6 Item 9. 
 
7 Items 8 and 9 both list the amount of the debts as $3,300 and $3,600 respectively. The $3,300 figure will 
be used for both debts since that is the amount for which Applicant is on notice. 
 
8 Items 8-9. 
 
9 Item 9. 
 
10 Items 8-9. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice).   
 
11 Item 7. 
 
12 Item 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  
 
6 
 
 
 With the exception of the duplicate debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.h, all of Applicant’s 
debts remain unresolved. He did not provide sufficient evidence to show that the debts 
are unlikely to recur. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant 
provided evidence that his wife lost her job in 2009, that his income was reduced due to 
the economy, and that he was placed into a non-pay status due to a medical condition 
for three weeks, which all contributed to his financial problems. However, in order for 
this mitigating condition to fully apply, Applicant must demonstrate responsible behavior 
in light of the circumstances. Although he contacted a credit consolidation company to 
explore its ability to help him with his debts, he did not hire it because of the cost 
involved. Therefore, he failed to produce evidence that he was taking any action on his 
debts. This demonstrates a lack of responsible behavior. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies. Applicant failed to present evidence of financial counseling, and while one debt 
was duplicated, there is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial problems are being 
resolved or under control because the debts remain unpaid. There is no evidence that 
he has made a good-faith effort to pay the debts. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 20 years of 
service in the National Guard and the impact his wife’s job loss had on his debt 
situation. However, he has not shown a track record of financial stability. His financial 
worksheet shows that he barely has a remainder left after paying all his current 
obligations, but an insufficient amount to address his past debts listed in the SOR. The 
record lacks evidence that Applicant has made an overall good-faith effort to resolve his 
debts. Therefore, he failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns.  
 
7 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.h:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.i:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
