1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 11-12790
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esquire 
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On December 7, 2012, the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) issued to
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns under
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
In a response dated December 27, 2012, Applicant admitted all three allegations
raised, with explanations, and requested a hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January
30, 2013. The parties agreed to a hearing date of February 14, 2013, a notice to that
effect was issued on February 1, 2013. Applicant waived his right to 15 days notice and
the hearing was convened as scheduled.
Applicant gave testimony and offered eight documents, which were accepted into
the record without objection as exhibits (Exs.) A-H. Department Counsel offered five
documents, which were admitted without objection as Exs. 1-5. The transcript (Tr.) of
the proceeding was received on February 25, 2013, and the record was closed. Based
on a thorough review of the testimony, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant did
 Tr. 18.      1
 Tr. 18-19.      2
 Tr. 26.      3
 Tr. 26-28.      4
 Tr. 20, 34-35; see Ex. 4 (Interrogatories). Applicant was laid off by one employer in April 2009, then hired      5
by another entity in May 2009. Applicant considered the new position to be a demotion.
 Tr. 30.      6
2
not meet his burden of mitigating security concerns related to personal conduct.
Clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 30-year-old senior information systems consultant. He has worked
for the same employer for over a year. Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in
business administration with a concentration in accounting. He is single and has no
children. 
Growing up and through his time as a collegiate freshman, Applicant was “a very
good student, son, [and] brother.”  However, from November 2002 through college1
graduation in 2005 and until about May 19, 2009, when he executed an Electronic
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), he used marijuana, socially with
friends, on a “few occasions.”   For example, between his sophomore and senior years2
in college, he used marijuana about “two to four” times.  He continued this use after3
college while working in his first two professional positions in different cities. 
When Applicant executed his e-QIP in May 2009, he had used marijuana maybe
two, but “no more than four” times, since college graduation.  At the time, he had4
recently been laid off from one job in April 2009, was being recruited for a new position
that required he complete a security clearance application, and was temporarily without
a permanent position in the interim. Applicant was immature at the time; he was bitter
about both having been laid off due to downsizing and having to pursue a job he
considered to be a demotion. The e-QIP he completed in May 2009 had multiple errors,
which he ascribes to youthful inexperience, lack of enthusiasm for the new job
prospect, and haste.  He notes he made multiple errors on the e-QIP. When he saw the5
question about drugs, he reflected, then concluded, that he was not a “drug user”
because he had used marijuana so few times.  Therefore, he answered “No” to6
Question 23 - Illegal Drug Use or Drugs or Drug Activity:
The following questions pertain to the Illegal use of drugs or drug
activity. You are required to answer the questions fully and
truthfully, and your failure to do so could be grounds for an
adverse employment decision or action against you, but neither
your truthful responses nor information derived from your
 See, e.g., SOR, dated Dec. 7, 2012.      7
 Tr. 55-56. Applicant was 26 years old at the time. Tr. 56. He admits that despite not having a current      8
income flow, despite the sour economy, and despite the tight job market, he was still in the stage when a
rafting trip took priority over his profession. Therefore, he resented the fact that the e-QIP and related
paperwork from his prospective employer cut into the time he had otherwise planed to spend with his brother
on a rafting trip. Applicant acknowledges that he no longer has such an immature outlook and would now put
job stability, responsibility, and his profession at the top of his list of priorities. Tr. 57.  
 Tr. 34.      9
 Tr. 31-32.      10
 Tr. 32-33.      11
 Tr. 54.      12
3
responses will be used as evidence against you in a subsequent
criminal proceeding, a. In the last 7 years, have you illegally used
any controlled substance, for example, cocaine, crack cocaine,
THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.), narcotics (opium, morphine,
codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants (amphetamines, speed, crystal
methamphetamine, Ecstasy, ketamine, etc.), depressants
(barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, et), hallucinogenics
(LSD, PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants (toluene, amyl nitrate, etc.), or
prescription drugs (including painkillers)? Use of a controlled
substance includes injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing,
experimenting with, or otherwise consuming any controlled
substance.7
Applicant’s “No” answer was based partly on his inexperience with the process
and partly with his own lack of patience while rushing through the form.  Indeed, lack of8
effort on the e-QIP reflected his overall poor judgment from that time period.  Aside9
from growing anxiety about the direction of his career, Applicant was in an unsettling
personal relationship with a woman he now views as having been a bad influence. It
was with this woman, who regularly used illegal drugs, that Applicant used marijuana
and cocaine in 2009.  
Shortly after he completed the e-QIP and certified his answers, Applicant met
with an investigator. He does not recall the investigator addressing the questions
regarding past drug use.  Meanwhile, although Applicant kept in communication with10
his facility security officer, he was unaware that he had been granted an Interim Secret
Clearance in late May 2009 or that he had been granted an Interim Top Secret
Department of Defense Industrial Security Clearance in June 2009.  There is no11
evidence that Applicant was aware that he had been granted any interim clearance.12
Had he known that he had been granted some level of security clearance, he “might
have made some different decisions” during this period, including his decision to use
cocaine on one occasion and marijuana on two occasions in about October 2009 with
 Tr. 32.      13
 Tr. 34.      14
 Tr. 33.      15
 Tr. 46-47.      16
 Tr. 47-50.      17
 Tr. 48.      18
4
his former lady friend.  However, the implications of using illegal drugs shortly after13
submitting a security clearance application “did not cross [his] mind at the time.”  It was14
not until November 2009 that he learned that he already had been granted a Top
Secret Clearance.15
In May 2010, Applicant and the lady friend were drinking alcohol to the point of
intoxication. The woman fell repeatedly during their binge. At some point after they
arrived at Applicant’s apartment, she stopped breathing, and Applicant called 911. He
went with her to the hospital as she received treatment. Later, unbeknownst to
Applicant, she filed a complaint against Applicant claiming that he had caused her to fall
and caused her injury. The inaccurate accusation upset Applicant. He reevaluated their
relationship and considered both her drug use and her behavior. Within a week, they
ended their relationship. 
Other than two subsequent e-mails used to solicit money from Applicant,
Applicant has had no contact with her since that time. In the interim, Applicant worked
with the local police concerning her allegation. The charge was ultimately dismissed
and the charge eventually expunged from his record. He dutifully reported the incidents
to his security contact person at work in about January 2011, as the incident was being
resolved with the local authorities.  The information eventually culminated in a new16
Defense Department investigation regarding Applicant’s security clearance.  During17
that investigation, Applicant was interviewed in July 2011. It was during that interview
that Applicant described his relationship with his former lady friend in depth and
discussed the incident at issue; he does not recall whether his personal use of drugs
was raised.  After that interview, Applicant wished to clarify some issues and a second18
interview was conducted in August 2011. It was during this interview Applicant
disclosed the couple’s use of cocaine in 2009. It is unclear when Applicant disclosed his
past marijuana use. Notes from the August 2011 interview state “Subject’s history with
marijuana was taken in a previous interview,” but the substance is not referenced in the
 Tr. 50-53; Ex. 3 (Interrogatories) at 12 (Testimonies, Interview of Aug. 22, 2011, at 3). The interview notes      19
reflect that Applicant and his former lady friend used cocaine on one occasion. Later, it states that Applicant’s
marijuana use was previously discussed in a previous interview, but does not indicate where such information
may be found. The July 2011 interview testimonies found later in Ex. 3 do not mention marijuana use. 
  The only other significant reference in those exhibits to drugs are in Ex. 3 at pages 2-6, which are      20
answers to interrogatory questions signed November 1, 2012, over a year after the August 2011 interview.
 Exs. C-E (W ork-related evidence).      21
 Tr. 58.      22
5
interviewer’s notes from their July 2011 meeting.  The Government’s exhibits only19
include interview notes from July and August 2011 (Ex. 3) and July 2009 (Ex. 4).20
Today, Applicant has overcome his initial misgivings that his current employer
and initial job offer were a poor match. He is now thriving in his work and fully
committed to his employer. In describing his present employment, Applicant
demonstrates a vastly improved level of maturity. In the past year, he has received a
promotion. He has received good ratings for his performance and he is lauded by both
his superiors and peers.  He changed his circle of friends and peers, no longer21
associating with those who are not good influences on his life.  His family and friends22
encourage his dedication to his work, and he genuinely enjoys his professional
obligations. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
 Sees also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      23
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      24
 Id.      25
 Id.      26
 AG ¶ 15.      27
 Id.      28
6
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a23
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  24
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified
information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access25
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.26
Analysis
Guideline E – Personal Conduct
Security concerns arise from matters of personal conduct because conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  In addition, any failure to27
provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process is of special interest.  Here,28
Applicant denied having used illegal drugs in the past when he completed his October
2009 e-QIP. If that omission was intentional and was meant to deceive, it would be
sufficient to raise Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate
7
omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities).
When Applicant completed his e-QIP in 2009, he was a college graduate in his
mid 20s. Applicant initially testified that he answered “No” to the question about past
drug use because he completed the e-QIP in haste. While he may have been
depressed or distressed due to either his professional or romantic situation, he surely
understood the significance of the e-QIP, which is a detailed inquiry. Its length and its
focus on detail should give the average applicant sufficient notice that it must be
addressed in more than a perfunctory manner.
Applicant also argued that he failed to identify his past marijuana use because
he did not consider himself to be a drug user, per se. Question 23 Illegal Drug Use or
Drugs or Drug Activity does not parse words regarding marijuana use in terms of how
often one abused the drug. It simply inquires about illegal drug use in the preceding
seven years. Consequently, the fact that Applicant’s past use may have been relatively
negligible becomes somewhat irrelevant under this guideline. The lapse in personal
judgment demonstrated here is not his past use of marijuana (which would be
appropriate for review if Guideline H was at issue), but his failure to disclose it on the e-
QIP. Here, that failure was volitional, which gives rise to AG ¶ 16(a). 
Moreover, Applicant and his former lady friend illegally used cocaine and
marijuana in 2009, after Applicant completed his e-QIP. While it is unclear whether
Applicant knew he had already been granted an interim security clearance, this fact
invokes AG ¶ (16)(c) (credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but
which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to
comply with the rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person
may not properly safeguard protected information).   
It is hard to accept Applicant’s failure to note his past drug use on his e-QIP or
his use of illegal drugs after certifying that eQIP as mere misunderstandings or lapses.
They were volitional choices demonstrating poor judgment and untrustworthiness. More
time is needed for Applicant to mend his track record for reliability, obviating application
of mitigating conditions such as  Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 17(c) (the
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). At best, given his
candor since 2011, AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress) applies in part.
8
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Multiple facts speak in Applicant’s favor. He is articulate, straightforward, and well-
educated. He has clearly matured in recent years. He now values the stability of a
profession and recognizes the importance of maintaining a challenging job he enjoys.
He now prefers to socialize with disciplined professionals, rather than those who abuse
substances. He has made considerable personal progress in the past few years. 
Applicant chose to mince words when he declined to divulge his past use of
illegal drugs on his e-QIP. He also chose to use illegal drugs after certifying his
application for a security clearance. Good judgment dictated that he report his past use
of any illegal drugs, it also dictated that he refrain from illegal drugs and illegal activity
while a security clearance application was pending. To make such poor choices and to
then wait until 2011 to disclose them to his employer or security personnel
demonstrates poor reliability and dubious trustworthiness. This is true despite recent
personal growth, maturation, and professional success, all of which indicate that
Applicant is presently on the right track and needs little more than additional time to
demonstrate his worthiness for a security clearance. At present, however, security
concerns remain unmitigated. Clearance is denied.   
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c: Against Applicant
9
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
