 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14056 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan K. Hahn, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 13, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on September 24, 2012, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 25, 
2013. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on February 7, 2013, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on March 13, 2013. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 22, 2013.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Withdrawal of SOR Allegations 
 
 On December 31, 2012, Department Counsel amended the SOR by withdrawing 
the allegations stated in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 1.f, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 2.a, and 3.a. This amendment 
was made pursuant to ¶ E.3.1.13 of the Directive. For clarity, I decided against 
renumbering the remaining allegations. I will enter findings in favor of Applicant on those 
allegations that were withdrawn through the amendment. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about The Republic of Korea (South Korea). No objection was raised 
and the request was approved. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The 
facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Evidence 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 2, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as HE II. 
Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant’s exhibit index is marked HE III. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was born a U.S. 
citizen to Korean parents who were residing in the U.S. territory of Guam at the time. 
Because of his parents’ South Korean citizenship, he is a dual citizen of South Korea 
and the United States. He has a doctorate degree in engineering. He is married to a 
South Korean citizen, who is currently a resident alien. They were married in December 
2005 in the United States. They have one child who is a native-born a U.S. citizen. He is 
seeking a security clearance for the first time.1  
 
 Applicant’s father worked as a banker for the Korean Exchange Bank at the time 
of Applicant’s birth. His father was not a South Korean government official even though 
the bank was a quasi-government entity. The purpose of the bank was to provide capital 
to South Korean businesses located throughout the world. Applicant lived in various 
places in the world as a result of his father’s job. He attended high school and college in 
Korea. In 1994, he came to the United States to pursue advanced educational degrees. 
He obtained a master’s degree and a Ph.D. from U.S. universities. He has remained 
and lived in the United States since 1994. After receiving his Ph.D., he was hired by the 
company for whom he currently works. He has achieved great success working for the 
company. He currently earns an annual income of about $140,000, exclusive of 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24, 29; GE 1; Answer. 
 
 
3 
 
bonuses which vary in amount. He has a 401(k) retirement plan worth about $260,000. 
He also has other investments totaling about $50,000. He owns a home that he 
currently rents to someone else. He and his family reside in a leased home. He moved 
from his own home because he wanted to live in a better school district. He owed more 
on his home than what he could sell it for, so he decided to rent his home and become a 
renter himself until the market conditions improved. He has voted in every federal and 
state election since moving here in 1994. He has never voted in any South Korean 
elections. Applicant admitted that his mother, father, mother-in-law, father-in-law, 
brother-in-law, and some friends are citizens and residents of South Korea.2   
 
 Applicant met his wife in 2005 when he was visiting South Korea. They were 
married in December 2005 and she moved to the United States with him. She received 
an MBA degree from a U.S. university. Their son, who was born in 2008, is not a dual 
South Korean-U.S. citizen.3 
  
 Applicant’s mother is 78 years old. She worked as a school teacher in the 1960s, 
but has not worked outside the home since then. She does not have any government 
affiliations. Applicant communicates with her about once a week.4 
 
 Applicant’s father is 82 years old. He is a retired banker. He supports himself and 
his wife with his investments and real estate holdings. He does not have any 
government affiliations. Applicant has contact with him weekly.5 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law is 64 years old. She is a homemaker and has no 
connection to the South Korean government. His wife has contact with her about every 
two weeks.6 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law is 69 years old. He owned a small business, but is now 
retired. He has no connection with the South Korean government. Applicant and his wife 
have contact with him about every two or three weeks.7 
 
 Applicant’s brother-in-law (his sister’s husband) works for private industry. He 
has no connection with the South Korean government. Applicant is in contact with him 
once every few months.8 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 25-28; AE B-D; Answer. 
 
3 Tr. at 40-41. 
 
4 Tr. at 33-34. 
 
5 Tr. at 34-35. 
 
6 Tr. at 35-36. 
 
7 Tr. at 36. 
 
8 Tr. at 37-38. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant’s friend is from his high school years. The friend has no connection to 
the South Korean government. Applicant is in contact with him about once a year.9 
 
 Applicant’s brother is a South Korean citizen who is a legal resident alien in the 
United States. He is an attorney who works for a large national law firm. Applicant 
denies the allegation in the SOR that his brother is currently a trade consultant to the 
South Korean Foreign Ministry. His brother stated that his law firm was retained by the 
South Korean government to represent it in connection with the passage of a trade 
agreement between the United States and South Korean governments, which was 
ratified in March 2012. His brother’s role in the representation included lobbying for the 
passage of the agreement. His law firm registered their activities under applicable law. 
Applicant and his brother do not discuss each other’s business.10 
 
 Applicant admitted that he owned property in South Korea that was valued at 
approximately $400,000, but now is probably worth about $800,000. The property was 
acquired by his father some time ago. It is a residential condominium. His father gave 
him the property as a future inheritance. Applicant did not pay anything for the property, 
nor has he collected any rental income from it. Any rental income has gone to his father. 
Currently, Applicant’s sister and her family reside there, rent free, and will remain there 
for at least the next three years while her children are still in school. Applicant has 
thought very little about the property, letting his father deal with it during his lifetime.11 
 
 Applicant attempted to renounce his South Korean citizenship some time ago, 
but because he was of military service age, South Korean law would not let him 
renounce. Applicant presented character letters from several coworkers, including 
company officers, such as the president and two vice presidents, and former 
colleagues. Universally, Applicant is held in great esteem for his integrity, 
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. He has been exposed to sensitive 
proprietary and personnel information and has treated this information with the utmost 
care.12 
 
South Korea  
 
 I have taken administrative notice that South Korea is a stable, democratic 
republic. The South Korean government generally respects the human rights of its 
citizens. However, South Korea has some reported human right problems including: 
hazing of military personnel, imprisonment of conscientious objectors, the government’s 
interpretation of laws regulating the Internet and telecommunications, and sexual and 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 38-39. 
 
10 Tr. at 41-42; AE A. 
 
11 Tr. at 42-46; Answer. 
 
12 Tr. 32, 61-62; AE E. 
 
 
5 
 
domestic violence. South Korean National Security Law allows arrest and detention for 
conduct the Government views as “endangering the security of the State.”13 
 
I also have taken administrative notice that South Korea and North Korea have a 
strained relationship. In 2010, relations between the two nations experienced significant 
setbacks when a South Korean warship was struck by a North Korean torpedo and 
sunk. Tensions further increased when North Korea fired upon a South Korean island 
with artillery.14 
 
Finally, I have taken administrative notice that South Korea has a history of 
collecting protected U.S. information. On several occasions, South Korea has been the 
unauthorized recipient of sensitive technology in violation of U.S. export control laws. 
South Korea has been identified as one of the seven most active nations engaging in 
foreign economic collection and industrial espionage.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
13 HE I. 
 
14 HE I. 
 
15 HE I. 
 
 
6 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 7 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
7 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person regardless of citizenship status, if 
that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial property interest in a foreign country. 
 
  Applicant’s father, mother, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, and friend 
are citizens and residents of South Korea. His wife and brother are citizens of South 
Korea, but reside in this country. South Korea is a strong ally of the United States, but it 
has engaged in industrial espionage in the past. The presence of Applicant’s relatives in 
South Korea creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. He 
also lives with his wife who is a citizen of South Korea and his brother’s law firm has 
represented the interests of South Korea. He owns a substantial property interest in 
South Korea. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(d), and 7(e) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the property interest is such that it is 
unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, 
manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 Applicant’s contact with his South Korean relatives is normal. None of his 
relatives are affiliated with the South Korean government. The South Korean 
government is a stable, democratic government that generally respects human rights. It 
is also a very supportive ally of the United States. Consequently, given the nature of the 
relationship Applicant has with his relatives, it is unlikely Applicant will be put in a 
position of having to choose between his relatives’ interests and those of the United 
States. AG ¶ 8(a) applies.  
 
8 
 
 Applicant was born a U.S. citizen and has lived in this country since 1994. He 
attended graduate school here, obtained his first job here, and is raising his family here. 
He attempted to renounce his South Korean citizenship, but was unable to do so 
because of Korean law. He is respected as a loyal employee with good judgment who 
has been exposed to sensitive information and has always properly safeguarded it. His 
brother’s representation of South Korean interests was a typical attorney-client 
relationship properly documented under U.S. law. His wife has assimilated to the 
lifestyle and culture in this country. I find Applicant’s obligations to his relatives are 
minimal and he has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
United States that he can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. Both AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(d) are applicable.  
 
 Applicant’s property interest, although substantial in value, is not important 
enough to him to cause a conflict in his loyalty to the United States. His father 
essentially controls the property and his sister lives in it. He does not collect any rent 
from the property and never has. These circumstances make it extremely unlikely that 
the property could be used to influence, manipulate, or pressure him to betray interests 
of the United States. AG ¶ 8(f) applies.    
 
Analysis 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
9 
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and his nearly 20 years 
living in this country. I also considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to South Korea. 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United States 
has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information from any 
person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of 
whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.”16 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be 
made with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism. Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has strong ties 
to his community. South Korea is a strong, reliable ally of the United States. It has a 
democratic government and respects human rights.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Foreign Influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k: For Applicant (¶1.a, 1.d, 1.f, 1.h-1.k 
withdrawn) 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT (Withdrawn) 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:   For Applicant (Withdrawn) 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT (Withdrawn) 
 
  Subparagraph   3.a:   For Applicant (Withdrawn) 
 
 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
