 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12412 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant refuted the Guideline E (Personal Conduct) allegation and mitigated the 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) allegation. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) on August 10, 2011. On December 3, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines H and E. This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 20, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the ready-to-proceed notification on February 4, 2013. 
 
2 
 
The case was assigned to me on February 11, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 15, 2011. The hearing was 
held as scheduled on March 19, 2013. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 
Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 that were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s list of exhibits was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. Applicant 
testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. The record was held open until March 26, 2013, for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant timely submitted an email (AE D) 
with an attachment (AE E) that was admitted into evidence without objection. 
Department Counsel’s letter forwarding the post-hearing submission was marked as HE 
2. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 26, 2013. 
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old senior subcontract administrator who works for a 
defense contractor. He began working for that defense contractor in December 2005. 
He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1995 and a master’s degree in 1999. He is married 
and has one child who is six years old. This is the first time that he has sought a 
security clearance.1 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant used marijuana from about 1990 to at least 
February 2011 and that he falsified material facts about his marijuana use during a 
security clearance interview in September 2011. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted the drug involvement allegation and denied the falsification allegation. His 
admission is incorporated as a finding of fact.2 
 
In responding to Section 23 (Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity) on his e-QIP, 
Applicant was asked if he had illegally used drugs in the last seven years. He answered 
“Yes” to that question and disclosed the following: 
 
Dates of use/activity 
From (Month/Year): 01/2004 (Estimated)  To (Month/Year): 
12/2010 (Estimated) 
 
Type of controlled substance(s) 
 THC 
 
Explain (nature of use/activity, frequency of activity and number of times 
used) 
In the last 7 years I have smoked marijuana less than 5 times. I 
did not purchase marijuana during that time. The times were at 
a (sic) concert settings. I am willing to take a drug test at any 
                                                          
1 Tr. 6-7, 22-25, 40; GE 1.  
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
3 
 
time being that I have not used marijuana for an extended time 
and do not plan on ever using it again.3 
 
On September 1, 2011, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
interviewed Applicant as part of a security clearance investigation. The summary of that 
interview stated,   
 
Subject answered ‘Yes’ to Question 23(a) on case papers indicating that 
he has used an illegal substance within the past seven years. 
 
In or about 02/05, subject smoked marijuana on two occasions with 
unrecalled companions while skiing at [location specified]. Subject does 
not remember the identities of anyone he was skiing with or the specific 
dates. On each occasion, both in or about 02/05, subject was given a 
marijuana cigarette by unrecalled person(s); subject smoked a small 
quantity of the cigarette and passed it to another unrecalled person. 
 
In 02/11, subject was attending a musical concert at [location specified]. 
An unknown person passed a marijuana cigarette to subject, who took a 
puff and handed it back. Subject does not know the identity of the person 
who passed him the marijuana. 
 
On each occasion, both in 02/05 and 02/11, subject used less than ¼ 
gram of marijuana, which was smoked in the form of dry vegetation. 
Subject does not normally use marijuana or any illegal substances; the 
reason for use on these three occasions is described by subject as 
experimentation only. Subject’s marijuana use has never caused or 
contributed to any problems. Other than twice in or about 02/05 and once 
in 02/11, subject has never used any illegal substances. These are 
isolated incidents and not reflective of a pattern of behavior. Subject has 
never participated in selling, distributing or manufacturing any illegal 
substances. 
 
Subject was never professionally diagnosed as abusing drugs or being 
drug dependent; no treatment was ever obtained or recommended. He 
has completely stopped using marijuana, does not associate with anyone 
who uses drugs illegally, has never had a position drug test, and has no 
future intent on using marijuana, or any other drugs illegally. 
 
Subject used marijuana voluntarily at age 35 on two occasions while 
skiing, and once at age 39 at the concert, each time due to indiscretion. 
Nothing regarding his marijuana use has potential to be used against him 
to pressure, coerce, blackmail, or otherwise influence future conduct or 
behavior. There is no likelihood of the recurrence of this conduct, and no 
related incidents, other than mentioned above. 
                                                          
3 GE 1. 
 
4 
 
Other than subject and the unrecalled companions while skiing and at the 
concert, [friend identified by name] is the only person aware of subject’s 
marijuana use.4 
 
In responding to interrogatories on October 16, 2012, Applicant indicated that he 
used marijuana monthly from 1990 to 2000 and that he used it three times from 2000 to 
2011. He also indicated that his last use of marijuana was in February 2011 and that he 
had no intention of using it again. In the interrogatories, he adopted the summary of the 
OPM interview without making any modifications to it. He stated that he probably 
skimmed the summary of interview before adopting it.5 
 
In denying the falsification allegation in his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated, 
 
I did not state that I never used illegal drugs on any other occasion during 
a September 1, 2011 interview. I do not recall being asked that question. I 
did not deliberately falsify material facts during this interview or in 
completing any of the questionnaires. The questionnaire for national 
security positions that I completed on 8/10/11, Section 23 Illegal Use of 
Drugs or Drug Activity requested information dating back 7 years. The 
questionnaire that I received on 10/3/12 requested any drug involvement. 
No time period assigned to it. I completed ever (sic) section honestly and 
to the best of my ability. I answered all the questions honestly during the 
interview.6 
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified he began using marijuana in about 1990, most 
likely when he was a senior in high school. For about ten years, he used it about 
monthly. While in college, he would purchase marijuana from friends. After completing 
his education, his marijuana use effectively ceased. He stated that he started working 
and grew up at that point. Since 2000, he indicated that he used marijuana about three 
to five times. He recalled using marijuana twice with friends while skiing in 2005. His last 
use of marijuana occurred at a concert, but did not recall exactly when that concert was 
held. He thought that it was held sometime in late 2010 or early 2011, which explained 
why he used different dates in referring to that incident, i.e., December 2010 in his e-
QIP and February 2011 during his interview. At that concert, he ran into high school 
acquaintances that he had not seen in years, and they handed him the marijuana. He 
described that use of marijuana as “foolish” and indicated it was a great mistake. He 
said he never used any illegal drugs other than marijuana and never misused 
prescription drugs.7 
 
                                                          
4 GE 2. 
5 Tr. 34-35; GE 2. 
6 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
7 Tr. 25-28, 30-51, 54-55; GE 2. 
 
5 
 
In testifying about the OPM interview, Applicant explained that he thought the 
investigator was only asking him about his drug involvement in the last seven years. 
Consequently, his statements about his marijuana use during that interview only 
addressed that seven-year period.8 
 
At the hearing, Applicant was open and forthcoming about his marijuana use. I 
found his testimony credible. In his post-hearing submission, he provided a statement of 
intent to not abuse drugs in the future and acknowledged that any future drug abuse 
would subject him to an automatic revocation of his security clearance.9 
 
Applicant has worked part-time in a ski shop since 1991. The owner of the ski 
shop submitted a reference letter stating that Applicant was a reliable and highly 
trustworthy individual. The owner indicated that Applicant ran the ski shop on many 
occasions in the owner’s absence.10 
 
Applicant’s latest work performance evaluation from his full-time employment 
indicated that he performed his duties with the utmost integrity and the highest ethical 
standards. It also stated that he could be counted on to follow all corporate policies and 
that he consistently exceeded requirements. His performance evaluation for the 
preceding six years described him as a dedicated professional and valued team 
player.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
8 Tr. 19-21, 25-26, 28-35, 41-45, 54-55, 60-62; GE 2. 
9 Tr. 19-55, 60-62; AE D, E. 
10 Tr. 21-22, 26-27; AE A. 
11 AE B, C. 
 
6 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and 
listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and  
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;  
 
7 
 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
 The guideline lists several conditions that could raise disqualifying security 
concerns under AG ¶ 25. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
From 1990 to 2000, Applicant used marijuana monthly and purchased that 
substance from friends. From 2000 to 2011, he used marijuana three times, twice in 
2005 and once in either late 2010 or early 2011. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply. 
 
Two drug involvement mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
In the past 13 years, Applicant used marijuana three times. His latest use of 
marijuana was relatively recent when he was approximately 39 years old. His latest use 
of marijuana cannot be categorized as a youthful indiscretion or as experimental. He 
described his last use of marijuana as foolish and a great mistake.   
 
Applicant is well aware of the negative consequences that illegal drug 
involvement could have on him, particularly his career. He signed a statement of intent 
that he will abstain from any illegal drug use and acknowledged that any future use of 
such substances would result in automatic revocation of his security clearance. He does 
not associate with drug users. His latest use of marijuana was an aberration from his 
recent abstinence that is not likely to recur and does not cast doubt about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He has not used marijuana for the past 
two years. He has acknowledged his wrongdoing and expressed remorse. He will not 
abuse drugs in the future. AG ¶ 26(a) and 26(b) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
8 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
On his e-QIP dated August 10, 2011, Applicant disclosed his use of marijuana 
during the previous seven years. He testified that, during his subsequent OPM 
interview, he thought the investigator only asked him about his drug abuse during that 
seven-year period. Of note, the portion of the summary of the interview addressing 
Applicant’s drug abuse started with a discussion of his response to Section 23A of the   
e-QIP, which only addressed his use of marijuana in the last seven years. In later 
responding to interrogatories that clearly asked when he first used drugs, Applicant 
disclosed his entire history of marijuana use. Applicant’s explanation for not disclosing 
his marijuana use between 1990 and 2000 during the interview is plausible and 
credible. The evidence supports a determination that Applicant was not attempting to 
conceal his earlier marijuana usage during the OPM interview and either Applicant or 
the OPM investigator misinterpreted or misunderstood the exchange between them. I 
find that Applicant did not intentionally fail to disclose the extent of his use of marijuana 
during the OPM interview. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. Personal conduct security 
concerns are concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant is a mature adult. His performance evaluations vouch for his 
trustworthiness and reliability. He knows that his most recent use of marijuana was a 
foolish mistake. He understands the potential negative consequences that could arise 
from using marijuana in the future and is committed to abstaining from it. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with no questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising from the drug involvement and personal conduct guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
