 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-11475 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Tuider, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges six delinquent debts, totaling 
$247,577. The crash of the housing market and her husband’s unemployment were 
circumstances beyond her control, which caused her to have delinquent debts. She 
maintained contact with her creditors, established payment plans, and made sufficient 
progress to mitigate financial consideration concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 24, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86) (GE 1). On 
December 4, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued an SOR to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
with the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
recommended that her case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether her clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On December 22, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR. On January 31, 2013, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On February 8, 2013, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. 
On February 15, 2013, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for March 6, 
2013. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered five exhibits, and Applicant offered one exhibit. (Tr. 13; GE 1-5; AE A) There 
were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-5 and AE A. (Tr. 13) After the hearing, 
Applicant provided one exhibit, which was admitted without objection. (AE B) On March 
14, 2013, DOHA received the transcript of the hearing, and on March 15, 2013, the 
record was closed. (Tr. 53, 55-56)      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant accepted responsibility for all six of the SOR 
debts. She denied that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f was delinquent, as it had been settled and 
a new payment plan established. She also explained what she had done and was doing 
to resolve her delinquent debts. (HE 3) Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old program manager for a defense contractor. (Tr. 14; GE 
1) She has worked continuously for the same defense contractor since October 1989. 
(Tr. 11, 17) She began as a secretary and worked her way up to financial analyst and 
then to her current position as a program manager. (Tr. 11, 15) She has intermittently 
held a security clearance during her 24 years of employment. (Tr. 17) She graduated 
from high school in 1976. (Tr. 17) She earned an associate’s of science degree in 
finance in 2000. (Tr. 18) She was awarded various certifications and licenses, such as a 
real estate license. (Tr. 18) She married in 2000. She has one son, who is 33 years old. 
(Tr. 19) She has never served in the military. (Tr. 19) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges six delinquent debts, totaling $247,577. Those six 
delinquent debts are described and discussed in her SF 86, June 7, 2011 Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), responses to DOHA 
interrogatories, SOR response, and at her hearing. All the documentation consistently 
and credibly discusses her finances. (GE 1-5) 
 
Applicant’s husband was a very successful self-employed contractor until 2006, 
when the economy in their state went into recession, and he became unemployed. (Tr. 
11, 20) At one point, he had 20 employees in his construction company and had annual 
income of about $150,000. (Tr. 46-47) They took out a second mortgage to make a 
down payment on a residential-rental property. (Tr. 20) They owned two rental 
properties, and their tenants stopped paying their rent, “and it just basically spiraled 
from there.” (Tr. 20-21) They sold one rental property through a short sale. (Tr. 21) For 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
the other rental property, their tenant pays the rent, which is sufficient to pay the 
mortgage, and the mortgage is current. (Tr. 21, 31)  
 
Applicant maintained contact with her creditors. (Tr. 11) She has vacant land 
zoned residential in an exclusive neighborhood that is for sale, and she intends to use 
the proceeds from the sale to pay her debts. (Tr. 12, 21, 34, 46) The land was 
purchased for $115,000; at one point it was worth $500,000; and it is now priced to sell 
at $158,000. (Tr. 33-34, 46; AE A) This vacant property does not have any liens. (Tr. 
21) It has been on the market for two years. (Tr. 33) She has maintained contact with all 
of her SOR creditors, and she plans to settle and pay all of her SOR debts with the 
proceeds from the sale of this land. (Tr. 35-38; SOR response)   
 
Applicant’s husband’s business has started to recover, and he has recently made 
some money. (Tr. 22; AE A) He provided receipts for February 2013 indicating 
thousands of dollars of business. (AE A) They have four rental properties and the 
residence where they live. In August 2010, her husband was injured at work, and he 
could not work until about February 2011. (Tr. 23-24) He is 61 years old, and he cannot 
work as hard as when he was younger. (Tr. 47-48) The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c and 
1.f are in established payment plans.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a credit card debt for $15,795. (Tr. 24) The debt became 
delinquent in 2008. (Tr. 24) The creditor has accepted a $50 monthly payment, and she 
has been making her payments for two years. (Tr. 25-27; GE 2, AE B) A February 21, 
2013 letter from the creditor states the balance is $15,596. (AE A)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a delinquent credit card debt for $3,859. Applicant made 
monthly $25 payments for three years, and she has reduced the balance from about 
$5,000 to $3,709. (Tr. 28; AE A, B) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a delinquent credit card debt for $3,204. Applicant made 
monthly $25 payments. (Tr. 29-30) She has been making her payments for more than 
one year. (Tr. 29; AE B) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a delinquent equity line of credit debt for $100,000, which was 
secured by a rental property. (Tr. 30) The $100,000 was used to purchase a rental 
property, which was sold. (Tr. 30) On February 2, 2013, the creditor stated the balance 
owed is $116,108, and the creditor offered to settle the debt for $75,470. (Tr. 32; AE A) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a delinquent second mortgage on Applicant’s residence for 
$42,349. (Tr. 35) She took out the second mortgage in 2002, and it became delinquent 
in 2008. (Tr. 35) The monthly payment on the second mortgage was $459. (Tr. 35)   
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges a delinquent mortgage for $82,370 on a property valued at 
about $300,000. (Tr. 39) The property was waterfront land. (Tr. 29) She took the 
mortgage out in 2008 to pay other debts. (Tr. 39) She stopped making payments in 
2011. (Tr. 39-40) She borrowed from her 401(k) account, and she brought this debt to 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
current status in the fall of 2012. (Tr. 39-41) She owes $25,000 to her 401(k) account, 
and her payments on that account are also current. (Tr. 40; SOR response; AE A) 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement (PFS) contains the following information: 
gross salary is $7,227; net salary is $4,338; monthly expenses are $3,444; payments to 
creditors are $2,421; and positive remainder is $73. (Tr. 41-44; GE 2) Applicant has 
about $85,000 in her 401(k) account. (Tr. 41) 
 
Character evidence 
 
Applicant provided five years of employment reviews and six letters from 
character witnesses, including her husband. (AE A) Coworkers, friends, and supervisors 
have known her and worked closely with her for decades. They describe her as honest, 
generous, responsible, dedicated, trustworthy, sincere, ethical, responsive, mature, 
professional, and reliable. She is an outstanding program manager, who makes 
valuable contributions to her company and the U.S. Government. On January 23, 2012, 
she received a $5,000 cash award from her company for contributions she made to the 
success of her company. (AE A) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit reports, her 
OPM interview, her SOR response, and her statement at her hearing.  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant’s debts became delinquent beginning in 2008 and some of them 
continue to be delinquent. Applicant’s SOR alleges six delinquent debts, totaling 
$247,577. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving her debts warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
and 20(b). The decline in the real estate market in Applicant’s state caused Applicant to 
be saddled with mortgages she could not afford to pay. Some of her properties were 
worth less than the mortgages encumbering those properties. She made numerous 
payments on several substantial debts. The construction industry in her state suffered a 
precipitous decline, and her husband lost his employment. He was also injured and 
unable to work for six months. Her financial problems were generated by circumstances 
largely beyond her control. There is no evidence that she acted irresponsibly. She put 
some land on the real estate market, and reasonably expects to make sufficient funds 
from the sale to pay all of her SOR debts. She promised to use the proceeds of that 
sale to pay all of the SOR creditors.1  
                                            
1
 The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially 
responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). 
 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Two recent Appeal Board decisions illustrate the analysis for applying AG ¶¶ 
20(a) and 20(b). In ISCR Case No. 09-08533, the applicant had $41,000 in delinquent 
credit card debt and defaulted on a home loan generating a $162,000 delinquent debt. 
Id. at 2. That applicant filed for bankruptcy the same month the Administrative Judge 
issued her decision. Id. at 1-2. The applicant in ISCR Case No. 09-08533 was recently 
divorced, had been unemployed for 10 months, and had childcare responsibilities. Her 
former husband was inconsistent in his payment of child support to her. The Appeal 
Board determined that AG ¶ 20(a) was “clearly applicable (debt occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and [the debt] does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)” even though that 
applicant’s debts were unresolved at the time the Administrative Judge’s decision was 
issued. The Appeal Board also decided that the record evidence raised the applicability 
of AG ¶ 20(b) because of the absence of evidence2 of irresponsible behavior, poor 
judgment, unreliability, or lack of trustworthiness. Id. at 4.   
  
Similarly, in ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) the Appeal 
Board addressed a situation where an applicant, who had been sporadically 
unemployed and lacked the ability to pay her creditors, noting that “it will be a long time 
at best before she has paid” all of her creditors. The applicant was living on 
unemployment compensation at the time of her hearing. The Appeal Board explained 
that such a circumstance was not necessarily a bar to having access to classified 
information stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which 
evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). The applicant in ISCR Case 
No. 08-06567 used his limited resources to (1) resolve some of his debts; (2) had a 
repayment plan for the remaining debts; and (3) took “reasonable actions to effectuate 
that plan.” Id. The Appeal Board remanded the Administrative Judge’s decision because 
it did not “articulate a satisfactory explanation for his conclusions,” emphasizing the 
Administrative Judge did “not explain[] what he believes that applicant could or should 
have done under the circumstances that he has not already done to rectify his poor 
financial condition, or why the approach taken by applicant was not ‘responsible’ in light 
of his limited circumstances.” Id.   
 
 Application of AG ¶ 20(c) is warranted. Applicant has an associate’s of science 
degree in finance, and she was employed as a financial analyst. She provided an 
                                            
2
 Applicant has the burden of proving the applicability of any mitigating conditions, and the burden 
to disprove a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.  
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
updated budget. Her financial situation was damaged by the decline in the housing 
market and construction employment. Her husband was unemployed for a substantial 
period of time. Applicant established that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. She maintained contact with her creditors,3 and her financial problem is 
being resolved or is under control. She consistently made payments on several SOR 
debts before she received the SOR. All of her SOR debts will be settled and paid when 
her land, which is on the market, is sold. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is partially applicable. Applicant admitted responsibility for and took 
reasonable and responsible actions to resolve her SOR debts.4 AG ¶ 20(d) cannot be 
fully applied until she settles and pays several SOR debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. 
Applicant did not dispute any of her delinquent SOR debts.    
 
In sum, Applicant has placed her land on the market, and upon sale has 
promised to use the funds received from the sale to pay her SOR debts. It is unlikely 
that financial problems will recur. Her efforts are sufficient to fully mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns. Assuming, financial considerations concerns are not 
mitigated under AG ¶ 20, security concerns are mitigated under the whole-person 
concept, infra. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
                                            
3
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
4
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 54-year-old program manager for a defense contractor, who has 
worked continuously for the same defense contractor since October 1989. She began 
as a secretary and worked her way up to financial analyst and then to her current 
position as a program manager. She has intermittently held a security clearance during 
her 24 years of employment, and there are no allegations of security violations. She 
earned an associate’s of science degree in finance in 2000 and generated a budget. 
She married in 2000. She is sufficiently mature to understand and to continue to comply 
with her security responsibilities. She deserves substantial credit for supporting the U.S. 
Government as an employee of a contractor for 24 years. There is every indication that 
she is loyal to the United States and her employer. The decline in the real estate market 
caused a significant reduction in the value of their investments. The deterioration in 
construction employment in their state caused her husband to lose his job, and he was 
injured and unable to work for six months. These circumstances beyond her control 
caused her financial woes. She admitted responsibility for her delinquent debts in her 
SF 86, OPM PSI, responses to DOHA interrogatories, SOR response, and at her 
hearing. On January 23, 2012, Applicant received a substantial cash award from her 
employer, and her evaluations and character references strongly support continuation of 
her access to classified information.  
 
Even though she lacked financial resources because of the financial stress 
engendered from her husband’s unemployment and the decline in the real estate 
market, Applicant made numerous payments and brought several large SOR debts to 
current status over the last three years. Her financial actions are appropriate and 
reasonable. The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person 
analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination). There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant is an intelligent person, and she understands how to budget and what 
she needs to do to establish and maintain her financial responsibility. There is simply no 
reason not to trust her. Moreover, there is no evidence that her finances were anything 
but excellent prior to the decline in the real estate market. She established a 
“meaningful track record” of debt re-payment. I am confident she will use the proceeds 
from the sale of her land to settle and pay her SOR debts, and that she will maintain her 
financial responsibility.   
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
