 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11290 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 22, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing. On November 27, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On December 21, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR. On December 26, 2012, 
by email she elected to have her case decided on the written record.1 On February 13, 
2013, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material 
(FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant and it was received on February 26, 2013. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant provided additional information. The case was 
assigned to me on March 30, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the SOR allegations except ¶¶ 1.f and 1.p.2 After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. She married in 1995 and has two children, ages 19 and 
17. She has completed some college course work, but has not earned a degree. She 
has been employed with her current employer since May 2010. She was unemployed 
from June 2009 until she was hired by her present employer. Applicant’s husband is 
employed.  
 
 Applicant admitted she owed 17 of the 19 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, 
totaling approximately $42,800. She provided documentary proof that she paid the $53 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f.3 She stated in her Answer to the SOR that she pays $70 a 
month on the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g ($4,091) for a charged off credit card account. 
She stated she made arrangements with the creditor “months ago” to make payments of 
$70 toward repayment of this debt. It has been delinquent since 2005. She provided 
proof of $70 payments made in December 2012, January 2013, February 2013, and 
March 2013. In her interview with a Government investigator on April 11, 2011, she 
stated she was making payments of $50 toward this debt, but provided no documentary 
proof of her actions. She also indicated in another statement that she had a significant 
portion of this debt paid, but did not provide documents to support her statement.4  
 
 Applicant indicated in her SOR Answer that she has made two payments of 
$35.72 toward the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($250) and has an agreement with the 
creditor to make three more payments, the final one due on January 21, 2013, to satisfy 
the debt. She provided documentary proof that she made payments on November 27, 
2012 and December 11, 2012. She did not provide any further proof that she made the 
final three payments to completely resolve the debt.5 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
2 Item 3.a. 
 
3 Answer to SOR, Attachment A. 
 
4 Answer to SOR; Answer to FORM; Item 7. 
 
5 Answer to SOR, Attachment B and C.  
 
3 
 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($40), 1.c ($855), 1.d ($107), 1.e ($399) and 1.r ($85) 
are medical debts owed to the same creditor. Applicant attributed them to an operation 
her son required. The accounts have been delinquent since 2009. Applicant indicated in 
her Answer to the SOR that she attempted to contact the creditor on December 21, 
2012. She left a voice mail asking the creditor to return her call. She indicated that as of 
close of business December 21, 2012, she had not received a return call. She did not 
provide any additional information about what actions she has taken to contact the 
creditor or resolve the debts since then.  
 
 During her interview with the Government investigator in April 2011, Applicant 
stated she had no recollection of the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.q ($399), but intended to 
research it. In her Answer to the SOR on December 21, 2012, she stated that she had 
made arrangements to pay the bill with two payments of $67.50 to be paid on 
December 26, 2012 and January 10, 2013. She failed to provide documentary proof that 
she made the payments.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($70) is a delinquent telephone account. Applicant stated 
in her Answer to the SOR that she made arrangements to pay the account on 
December 24, 2012. She did not provide documentary proof that the account was paid.  
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.i ($3,028) 1.j ($3,028, 1.k $3,028, 1.l ($5,125), 1.m 
($5,024), 1.n ($4,927) and 1.s ($3,141) are delinquent student loan accounts. The debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.s is a different creditor than her other student loan debts. In her interview 
with a Government investigator in April 2011, Applicant stated she believed her student 
loans had been deferred until 2010. She stated she received a telephone call in 
February 2010 from the creditor of the SOR ¶ 1.s debt, advising her that she needed to 
begin making payments on the loan. She stated the loan did not go into collection and 
she was paying $240 a month. Applicant did not provide proof of these payments. In her 
Answer to the SOR, she indicated this debt was returned to the original creditor and she 
is researching a payment plan. Regarding the other student loan debts, she stated in 
her Answer to the SOR that she has an alternative payment plan for 360 payments. She 
was to pay $209.98 on December 14, 2012. She stated she paid $104.99 on December 
13, 2012, and intended to make a second payment on December 24, 2012. After that, 
she agreed to make payments of $96.54 per month starting on January 14, 2013. 
Applicant provided proof that she made a payment of $104.99 on December 13, 2012.6 
It appears she made a payment of $45 to the creditor on March 14, 2013.7 No other 
documents were provided to substantiate a payment plan with the creditor or any other 
payments made on the debts.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.o ($9,526) is for a vehicle that was repossessed in 2007. 
Applicant indicated in her interview with a Government investigator in April 2011 that 
she had received a letter about the debt from a lawyer representing the creditor. She 
planned to speak to the lawyer so she could reach a payment agreement. In her Answer 
                                                          
6 Answer to SOR, Attachment D. 
 
7 Answer to the FORM.  
 
4 
 
 
to the SOR, she indicated she contacted the creditor in September 2012, but was 
unable to reach a settlement agreement to resolve the debt. She indicated she would 
attempt to contact the creditor again to try and resolve the debt.  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.p is a judgment ($800) entered in 2005. Applicant indicated 
in interview with the Government investigator that she had no recollection of the 
judgment, but she would research it. In her Answer to the SOR, she indicated she was 
in the process of researching who obtained the judgment. The judgment is not resolved.  
 
 In Applicant’s personal financial statement provided in October 2012, she 
indicated her net monthly remainder after paying her bills was $8.47. Her personal 
financial statement did not include payments to the creditors of her delinquent debts.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
                                                          
8 Item 8.at 147. 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has accumulated 18 delinquent debts since 2005 totaling over $42,000 
that she is unwilling or unable to pay. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise the 
above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant experienced a period of unemployment from June 2009 to May 2010 
that was beyond her control and contributed to her financial problems. For the full 
application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must submit evidence that she acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant was experiencing financial difficulties prior to her 
unemployment in 2009. She had a vehicle repossessed in 2007 and a credit card that 
became delinquent in 2005. After receiving the SOR, she paid one small medical bill. 
She indicated she had addressed some of the other debts, and she provided some 
proof of small payments on a couple of debts, but she failed to provide documents to 
support most of her other assertions. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. There is 
insufficient evidence that she initiated good-faith efforts to repay her overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve her debts. Applicant’s personal financial statement shows she has 
less than $10 remaining at the end of the month to pay delinquent debts. There are no 
clear indications that her financial problems are being resolved or under control. I find 
AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant disputed the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.p because she did not recognize it. 
She indicated she intended to research the origins of the judgment, but failed to provide 
evidence of actions she has taken. I find AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 46 years old. She began having financial problems in 2005. She had 
a period of unemployment in 2009 that had a negative effect on her finances. She has 
been steadily employed since May 2010, but has not addressed most of her delinquent 
debts. According to her personal financial statement, she does not have sufficient 
income to make regular payments to resolve her delinquent debts. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.s:  Against Applicant 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
