 
1 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-11017 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, foreign 
influence security concerns are mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 30, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF 86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On August 20, 
2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to him, 
alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence).  The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1990), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted for Applicant. 
 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
On October 10, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge (Answer). On January 4, 2013, Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed. On January 10, 2013, DOHA assigned the case to me. On 
January 22, 2013, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, setting the hearing for February 
19, 2013. The hearing was held as scheduled. I received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on February 28, 2013.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered three exhibits that he marked as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3. Applicant did not object to my consideration of 
the exhibits, and I admitted them. (Tr. 14.) The following day, on February 20, 2013, I 
received Applicant’s resume that I marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1, and admitted 
into evidence without objection from Department Counsel.   
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Taiwan. (Tr. 13; Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1, AN Request.) Department Counsel provided 16 
supporting documents to show detail and context for those facts. (HE 1: I to XVI.) 
Applicant did not object, and I granted Department Counsel’s request. (Tr. 13.) 
Applicant offered one AN document that I marked as HE A and admitted without 
objection from Department Counsel. (Tr. 15.)  
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.e. 
(Answer). After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old senior security engineer and program manager. In 
August 2008, he started working for a defense contractor and applied for his first 
security clearance that same month. (Tr. 42.)  
 
Applicant was born and raised in Taiwan. In 1984, he received a bachelor’s 
degree in library and information science from a Taiwanese university. From 1984 to 
May 1986, he was conscripted into Taiwanese military service. In 1987, he moved to 
                                            
1
The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups or locations in order to protect Applicant’s and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information.  
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
the United States on a student visa and began studying at a U.S. university. In 1988, he 
earned a master’s degree in library science, and in 1990 he earned a master’s degree 
in telecommunications. In October 1999, he became a U.S. citizen and obtained his 
U.S. passport.  
 
From 1995 to 1999, Applicant worked for U.S. universities. From 1999 to 2000, 
he was a senior system analyst for a private company. From March 2000 to November 
2001, Applicant worked for a private company as a director of information technology, at 
which time the company went out of business and he became unemployed until July 
2002. He then took a position as a senior technical engineer with another private 
company and worked there until November 2005, when he began working for a 
Taiwanese company with its main office in Taiwan. He worked for that company from 
December 2005 until March 2010 as its director for the information management 
division. (GE 1, 2, 3; AE 1.) In August 2010, he renounced his Taiwanese citizenship 
and surrendered his Taiwanese passport to the Taiwan Consular Office. (Tr. 43-45; GE 
1, 2, 3.) He does not receive any benefits from the Taiwanese government. (Tr. 59.) 
 
 During those years that Applicant worked in Taiwan, he commuted back and 
forth from the United States. He lived and worked there approximately eight months a 
year. (Tr. 65.) He was a dual citizen at the time and used his Taiwanese passport to 
enter and exit as a convenience. (Tr. 44, 65.) While working there, he had a checking 
account into which his paycheck was deposited. He believes it is inactive because he 
withdrew his money from it. (Tr. 62.)  
 
In August 2010, Applicant started his current position with a U.S. company. Since 
then, he traveled to Taiwan twice, once in 2011 and in December 2012 to visit his 
parents. He used his U.S. passport both times. (Tr. 55-56, 66.)  
 
Applicant’s spouse was born in Taiwan. They met in 1988 while studying in the 
United States. In February 1992, they married. She became a U.S. citizen in 1999. She 
worked for a U.S. company from 1999 to 2005. Now, she is a housewife. (GE 3.) She 
has an expired Taiwanese passport. (Tr. 46.) They have a 10-year-old child who was 
born in the United States.  
 
Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of Taiwan. His father, age 85, was 
employed by a Taiwanese agency for 30 years and receives a government pension. His 
mother, age 81, is a housewife. (Tr. 25; GE 3.) Both parents resided with him in the 
United States for two or three years. They returned to Taiwan for medical reasons. They 
have U.S. alien registration status since 2002. (Tr. 26, 56; GE 1.) Applicant speaks to 
them twice a month. (Tr. 31, 52.) He visited them on the weekends when he worked in 
Taiwan. (Tr. 54.) 
 
Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. His brother and sister-in-
law work for an insurance company. (Tr. 27.) He speaks to his brother twice a month, 
when he calls his parents because they reside in the same building. (Tr. 58.) Applicant’s 
sister was born in Taiwan and is a U.S. citizen and resident. ( GE 1.) Her husband is the 
Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Taiwanese company where Applicant formerly 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
worked. He is a citizen and resident of Taiwan, and commutes to and from the United 
States. (Tr. 53, 68.) 
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law were born in Taiwan (formerly China). 
Her father, a retired construction worker, died in November 2012. (Tr. 54.) Her mother is 
a citizen and resident of Taiwan. She was a housewife. Applicant’s wife telephones her 
mother once or twice a year. (Tr. 58.)  
 
Applicant owns his residence in the United States. As of July 2011, he has paid 
half of the mortgage. (GE 3.) His annual income is $125,000. (Tr. 61.) He has bank, 
retirement, and investment accounts in the United States. (Tr. 34.) He does not have 
financial interests in Taiwan. (Tr. 34.) He does not provide financial support to his family 
in Taiwan. (Tr. 30.)  
 
Applicant testified credibly. He would report to his employer or local authorities 
any incident in which someone sought information from him, or threatened him or his 
family to obtain it. (Tr. 70.) He expressed strong allegiance to the United States and his 
intention to remain living in the United States. (GE 2, 3.) The investigator, who 
interviewed Applicant in July 2011, reported that Applicant was cooperative and direct in 
his responses. (GE 3.) There is no evidence that Applicant has engaged in criminal 
activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or has financial problems. 
  
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant’s supervisor testified. He holds a Top Secret security clearance. He is 
the president and owner of the company where Applicant works. He has known 
Applicant since 1999, when Applicant worked for him at a company that went bankrupt. 
He stated that Applicant is “extraordinarily skilled in the area of system administration, 
network engineering.” (Tr. 75.) Applicant holds “over 20 certifications in related fields 
which is extraordinary. Most people have one or two.” (Tr. 75; AE 1.) He has no 
reservations about Applicant holding a security clearance and protecting classified 
information. (Tr. 77.) He considered Applicant to be a family man, a dedicated 
employee, and non-political in his attitude or activities. (Tr. 81.) 
    
Taiwan 
 
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy. The United States does not support Taiwan 
independence, in keeping with the Chin policy; however, it maintains strong and, 
unofficial relations with Taiwan  in order to further peace and stability in Asia. The 
United States supports Taiwan’s membership in appropriate international organizations 
where statehood is not a requirement for membership and encourages its meaningful 
participation in appropriate international organizations, such as the World Trade 
Organization, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, and the Asian 
Development Bank. Maintaining diplomatic relations with the People’s Republic of China 
(PRC) has been recognized to be in the long-term interest of the United States by six 
consecutive administrations.  
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
There are significant economic ties between Taiwan and the PRC, which are 
attributable to their physical proximity and history. Because of its location, Taiwan has a 
particular interest in information from the United States that could aid it in its own 
defense. Taiwan’s primary defense goal is to deter invasion from the PRC. The PRC 
maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan through a bureau utilizing PRC nationals 
with Taiwanese connections. Unlike the PRC, however, the constitutional basis of the 
Taiwanese government suggests that resort to coercive measures against its citizens to 
collect economic intelligence is unlikely. 
 
Taiwan’s commercial ties with the United States have expanded since 1979. 
Export-Import Bank financing, Overseas Private Investment Corporation guarantees, 
normal trade relations (NTR) status, and ready access to U.S. markets have enhanced 
the Taiwan economy.  
 
The record references various cases involving the illegal export or attempted 
illegal export of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to and/or through Taiwan. One 
report to the U.S. Congress concerns foreign economic collection and industrial 
espionage. That report notes that Taiwan was then known to be an active collector of 
U.S. economic intelligence. The report ranked Taiwan after China, Japan, Israel, 
France, and Korea as an active collector of such information. Although some of the 
record information about Taiwan’s intelligence activities targeting U.S. classified or 
sensitive information is more than 10 years old, several exhibits address more recent 
espionage by Taiwan’s National Intelligence Bureau. There is some evidence that 
Taiwan has specifically targeted U.S. citizens in the last five to seven years to obtain 
protected and classified information.  
 
Taiwan is a modern democracy with vibrant public participation during which 
demonstrations may become confrontational. The U.S. State Department urges caution 
within the vicinity of any political demonstrations. Overall crime is noted as low.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Adverse 
clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1.  
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating that such concerns may arise: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant, his parents, his spouse, some of his in-laws, and two siblings were all 
born in Taiwan. His parents and brother are citizens and residents of Taiwan. He has 
frequent contact with his parents and brother. He cares about the welfare of his family 
living in Taiwan. Taiwan’s economic espionage activities create a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Taiwan, 
is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has 
a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of Taiwan with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his family members living in Taiwan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should 
not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the 
United States and a desire to assist a family member living in Taiwan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Taiwan 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as capable state intelligence services; however, Taiwan does not have a significant 
problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with family members living in Taiwan 
creates a potential conflict of interest because this relationship is sufficiently close to 
raise a security concern about his desire to assist family members in Taiwan by 
providing sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial 
evidence of Applicant’s contacts with his family living in Taiwan and has raised the issue 
of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and 
further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not apply. Applicant has frequent contacts with his 
parents and sibling, who are citizens and residents of Taiwan. His parents are in their 
80s and retired. His father receives a government pension. Applicant traveled back and 
forth to Taiwan for work between December 2005 and March 2010, and resided there 
about eight months a year. He used his Taiwan passport for that travel and after 
becoming a U.S. citizen. He most recently traveled to Taiwan in December 2012 to visit 
his parents. His loyalty and connections to his family living in Taiwan are a positive 
character trait; however, for security clearance purposes, those same connections to his 
family living in Taiwan negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c). 
Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his 
relationships with his relatives who are Taiwan citizens] could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.”   
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States. His spouse, child, and sister are U.S. citizens and 
residents. In 1987, he moved to the United States to attend graduate school. In 1988, 
he met his spouse, who was studying at the same university. In both 1988 and 1990, he 
earned a master’s degree. In 1992, he married his spouse. In 1999, he became a U.S. 
citizen. He has worked for universities and private companies since living in the United 
States. He intends to continue residing in the United States with his spouse and child.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family living in Taiwan, 
and indirectly, his family’s relationships with other Taiwan citizens living in Taiwan. He 
frequently communicates with his family living in Taiwan. There is no evidence, 
however, that terrorists, criminals, the Taiwan Government, or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his family in Taiwan to coerce 
Applicant or his family for classified or sensitive information.2 As such, there is a 
reduced possibility that Applicant or his family would be specifically selected as targets 
for improper coercion or exploitation. While the Government does not have any burden 
to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence were present, 
Applicant would have a heavier evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ many years of friendship 
and trade with Taiwan. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Taiwan. Applicant is not required 
to report his contacts with family members living in Taiwan. 
 
                                            
2
There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
AG ¶ 8(f) does not apply because there is no evidence that Applicant has any 
interest in property or bank accounts in Taiwan. However, this mitigating condition can 
only fully mitigate the disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 7(e), which provides, “a 
substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any 
foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” Applicant’s assets in the United 
States, which include his residence, retirement, investment, and bank accounts, and 
gross annual earnings of about $125,000, are an important connection to the United 
States.  
  
In sum, Applicant’s connections to family living in Taiwan are significant; 
however, they are less important than his and his family connections to the United 
States. His connections to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully 
overcome the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B. Foreign influence 
concerns under Guideline B are mitigated; however, even if AG ¶ 8(b) was not 
applicable, security concerns are separately mitigated under the whole-person concept, 
infra.     
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
   
There are foreign influence security concerns arising from Applicant’s parents, in-
laws, and brother being citizens and residents of Taiwan. Applicant, his spouse, his 
parents, and his siblings were born in Taiwan. He frequently communicates with his 
parents and brother in Taiwan. He regularly visited them when he worked there. His 
wife has some communication with her parents. His father receives a government 
pension. Applicant worked for a Taiwanese company for about four years that was 
managed by his brother-in-law, and required him to live in Taiwan eight months a year. 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
He used his Taiwanese passport to enter and exit the country during those years as a 
convenience.   
 
The factors weighing towards approval of Applicant’s security clearance are more 
substantial than the factors weighing against its approval. There is no evidence that 
Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or has 
financial problems. His spouse, child, and sister are U.S. citizens and live in the United 
States. In 1987, he moved to the United States, where he met his wife the following 
year. In 1988 and 1990, he earned master’s degrees. In 1992, he and his wife married. 
He has worked at U.S. universities and private company since arriving in the United 
States. In 1999, he became a U.S. citizen, which included swearing an oath of 
allegiance to the United States. His parents resided in the United States for two or three 
years. He began working for his current employer in August 2010. After leaving his 
previous employer, he renounced his Taiwan citizenship and surrendered his Taiwan 
passport to the Taiwan Consular Office. He intends to reside in the United States with 
his spouse and child. He has U.S. employment with income of $125,000 per year and 
U.S. assets, including real estate and financial accounts. Applicant’s supervisor, who 
has known him for over ten years, lauds his knowledge and achievements. He has no 
reservations about Applicant’s loyalty, trustworthiness, or reliability to hold a security 
clearance.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Taiwan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.3 Various court cases establish the illegal export 
or attempted illegal export of U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to and/or through 
Taiwan. One U.S. Government report describes Taiwan as one of the top seven 
countries, who are active collectors of U.S. economic intelligence. There is some 
evidence that Taiwan has specifically targeted U.S. citizens in the last five to seven 
years to obtain protected and classified information. However, the United States is 
committed to assisting Taiwan with the maintenance of Taiwan’s defensive capabilities 
and a free and independent Taiwan Government. Taiwan and the United States have 
close relationships in diplomacy and trade.  
 
I have carefully assessed Applicant’s demeanor and sincerity at his hearing, and 
I find his statements to be credible. I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in 
Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and 
the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
Applicant has carried his burden and foreign influence concerns are mitigated. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
                                            
3
 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion). 
  
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Shari Dam 
Administrative Judge 
