 
1 
 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12665 
                                                                      )                         
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                             Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2011, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 9, 2013, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant provided an answer to the SOR, with additional information, dated 
February 1, 2013. She also requested that, in lieu of a hearing, her case be determined 
on the record by an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
2 
 
 
Appeals (DOHA). The Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on 
February 20, 2013.1 The FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 6. 
On February 20, 2013, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with 
instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections within 30 days of 
receipt. Applicant received the file on March 4, 2013. Her response was due on April 3, 
2013. Applicant timely filed additional information in response to the FORM. Department 
Counsel did not object to the information in Applicant’s response to the FORM. On April 
8, 2013, the case was assigned to me for a decision, and I marked Applicant’s 
submission as Item A and entered it in the record. 
 
                                                     Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.). In her Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted three allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.c., and 1.e.). She denied the 
Guideline F allegations at SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 1.d. Applicant’s admissions are entered as 
findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 3.) 
  
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and the Applicant. In addition to Applicant’s response to the FORM, the record evidence 
includes Applicant’s 2011 e-QIP; her responses to DOHA interrogatories;2 and her 
credit report of October 19, 2012. The credit report establishes the debts alleged on the 
SOR. One of the delinquent debts was reduced to a judgment in July 2011. The 
remaining three debts are in charged-off status. The fifth debt alleged on the SOR was 
Applicant’s home mortgage loan, which had been past due since January 2010. (See 
Items 4 through 6; Item A.) 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old, married, and the mother of three young children. She 
earned a bachelor’s degree in 1996. She has worked for her current employer as a 
senior project manager since June 2010. She seeks a security clearance from the 
Department of Defense for the first time. (Item 4.) 
 
 In December 2009, Applicant’s husband became unemployed. Applicant, her 
husband, and their children moved out of their home and into her parents’ home in June 
2010. While living in her parents’ home, Applicant and her husband paid rent and 
contributed to the food and utilities of the household. (Item 4; Item A.) 
                                            
1 The FORM is dated February 21, 2013. 
 
2
Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on August 3, 2011. On November 23, 2012, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant 
signed a notarized statement in which she declined to agree that the investigator’s summary accurately 
reflected her interview. She did not specifically change any facts in the interview; instead, she provided 
additional information about her maiden name, the spelling of her husband’s name, and the names of 
individuals who supervised her at the companies where she was employed between 2005 and June 
2010. She also stated that because of a short sale of her home and her husband’s recent employment, 
she would be able to address her delinquent debts.  (Item 6.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s husband tried to find work as a freelance architect but was 
unsuccessful. He remained unemployed until he took a salaried position in October 
2012. (Item A.) 
 
 Applicant is responsible for delinquent debts totaling over $69,000. Her credit 
report shows that Applicant acquired a personal loan in January 2008. In July 2011, the 
creditor obtained a judgment against Applicant for failure to pay the loan. This 
delinquent debt totals $23,787 and is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
 
 On November 23, 2012, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated 
that she was “attempting to determine the debt holder in order to work out a payment 
plan.” In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she would begin making $400 
monthly payments on the debt on February 5, 2013. In response to the FORM, 
Applicant provided a document, dated February 25, 2013, from a debt collector, stating 
that, pursuant to her authorization, $400 would be sent from her bank account to the 
creditor on March 5, 2013. (Ex. 6; Ex. A.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.b. that Applicant owes a $2,012 credit card debt, in 
charged-off status. Applicant’s credit report shows that she opened the account in June 
2009.  In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied this debt. She stated that she began 
making payments on the debt in December 2012, and she anticipated she would have it 
paid off in April 2013. In her response to the FORM, Applicant provided a document 
from the creditor reminding her that an authorized payment of $401 would be deducted 
from her account in partial payment of the debt on March 25, 2013. The notice did not 
identify the balance owing on the debt, and Applicant did not provide documentation to 
corroborate payments made on the debt. (Item 1; Item 3; Item A.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.c. that Applicant owes a delinquent credit card debt of 
$41,677. She opened the account in the 1990s. Applicant’s credit report shows that the 
account was closed by the credit grantor and became delinquent in 2012. In her answer 
to the SOR, Applicant stated that she had agreed to make monthly payments of $1,000 
on the debt, beginning on February 5, 2013. In her response to the FORM, Applicant 
provided a notice from the creditor reminding her that $1,000 would be deducted from 
her bank account on March 5, 2013, in partial payment of the debt.  (Item 1; Item 3; Item 
5; Item A.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.d. that Applicant is responsible for a $2,151 credit card 
debt in charged-off status. Applicant’s credit report shows that the account was opened 
in 2009 and became delinquent in 2012. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the 
debt. She stated further that she began making payments on the debt in December 
2012 and anticipated having it paid off in February 2013. In her response to the FORM, 
Applicant provided a document from the creditor stating that the debt had been settled 
for less than the full balance. (Item 1; Item 3; Item 5; Item A.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.e. that Applicant became past due on her home 
mortgage loan in January 2010, and, in the summer of 2012, she sold the property in a 
 
4 
 
 
short sale. Applicant’s credit report of October 19, 2012, shows a zero balance on 
Applicant’s first and second mortgages on the property. In her August 2011 interview 
with an authorized investigator, Applicant stated that if she were able to sell her home in 
a short sale, she would then pay her delinquent debts. (Item 1; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant did not provide a personal financial statement. The record is therefore 
silent regarding her net income, her husband’s net income, their monthly living 
expenses, the amount of income they have each month to pay delinquent debts, and 
any funds they have set aside in savings or retirement accounts. In her August 2011 
interview with an authorized investigator, Applicant stated that she had not made 
payments on any of the delinquent debts alleged on the SOR since 2009. She also told 
the investigator that she had not had financial credit counseling. (Item 6.)        
   
                     Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
    
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes two conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns.   
 
When Applicant became delinquent on her home mortgage loan payments, she 
arranged a short sale of the property, and her credit report reflects that her home 
mortgage debt was resolved by the short sale. I conclude the SOR allegation at ¶ 1.e. 
for Applicant. 
 
6 
 
 
 
The record reflects that Applicant is responsible for several additional long-
standing unresolved debts. This evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20(d)).  Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20(e)). 
   
Applicant has a history of financial delinquency, and she has not sought financial 
credit counseling. She failed to provide a personal financial statement showing her 
family’s net monthly income, current expenses, and resources for paying delinquent 
debts. Moreover, she only recently contacted her creditors to initiate payment of her 
delinquent debts. While to her credit, she supplied documentation that she had settled 
the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d., she also provided documentation showing that her 
payment plans for the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c. were initiated in late 
2012 or in early 2013. She has yet to establish a track record of timely and consistent 
payment of those delinquencies, which total over $67,000.  
 
Applicant acknowledged that she stopped paying the debts alleged on the SOR 
when her husband lost his job in 2009, and she attributed her financial delinquencies to 
her husband’s loss of employment and her family’s subsequent reduced income. While 
Applicant’s husband’s job loss and resulting unemployment were circumstances beyond 
her control, nothing in the record suggests that Applicant contacted her creditors and 
informed them of the reasons for her inability to pay her delinquent debts. By failing to 
inform her creditors of her inability to pay her debts for three years, Applicant did not act 
responsibly when confronted with circumstances beyond her control. 
 
I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) applies in part in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s 
case. However, I also conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 20(c) do not apply in 
 
7 
 
 
mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. Because Applicant did not dispute the 
legitimacy of the debts alleged on the SOR, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a history of 
unresolved debt. While circumstances beyond her control prevented her from paying 
her delinquent debts, she failed to inform her creditors of these circumstances for three 
years. She provided documentation for recently-established payment plans, but failed to 
provide documentation demonstrating a track record of timely and consistent payment 
of three of her four delinquent debts. Her credit report reflected no mortgage debt 
resulting from a short sale of her home in the summer of 2012. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns about her financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.c.:                Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.d. and 1.e.:                  For Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
