1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-14131
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on January 5, 2011. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 10, 2012, detailing security
concerns under Guideline D, sexual behavior, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant received the SOR on October 22, 2012, and he answered it on
November 5, 2012. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge with
AE C; AE Q; Department Counsel’s Response to Applicant’s supplemental information; Tr. 15.1
2
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). Department Counsel was
prepared to proceed on January 28, 2013, and I received the case assignment on
January 30, 2013. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 14, 2013, and I
convened the hearing as scheduled on February 27, 2013. The Government offered
exhibits (GE) marked as GE 1 through GE 3, which were received and admitted into
evidence without objection. Applicant and one witness testified. He submitted exhibits
(AE) marked as AE A through AE I, which were received and admitted into evidence.
AE C was admitted subject to verification and authentication. DOHA received the
hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 12, 2013. I held the record open until March 21, 2013,
for Applicant to submit additional matters. Applicant timely submitted AE J - AE AA,
which were received and admitted without objection. The record closed on March 21,
2013.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Notice
Applicant received the notice of the date, time and place of the hearing on
February 21, 2012, less than 15 days before the hearing. I advised Applicant of his right
under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to receive the notice 15 days before the hearing.
Applicant affirmatively waived this right under the directive. (Tr. 9.)       
Evidentiary ruling
Department Counsel objected to the admission of AE C on the grounds that the
letter was not dated or signed. AE C was admitted conditioned upon Applicant obtaining
verification and authentication of the letter. Post-hearing, Applicant submitted
verification from the letter’s author that the letter was written in 2010 by him. The author
signed his verification, and Department Counsel has not objected to the verification. AE
C is admitted.1
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a,
1.b, 2.a, 2.b, and 2.d of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of
fact. He denied the factual allegations in ¶ 2.c of the SOR. After a complete and
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 56 years old, works as a certified welder and mechanical
technician for a DOD contractor. Applicant has worked for his employer continuously
since 1980. He has held a security clearance since 1988, without any violations of
security procedures. Because of the issues raised in this case, Applicant lost his
AE O; Tr. 14.2
AE F; AE J - AE L; AE Z.3
AE P - AE V; AE Y.4
GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 24.5
SOR; Tr. 26-27.6
3
sensitive compartmented information (SCI) clearance in December 2010. Applicant
acknowledged the loss of his SCI clearance on his e-QIP in January 2011.2
Applicant submitted a copy of his performance reviews for the years 2005
through 2007 and 2009 through July 2012. He received high marks for his work skills,
knowledge, and teamwork skills. His supervisors consider him the resident expert in all
welding matters.  He strives for exactness in his work and produces outstanding quality
and craftsmanship in his work. He takes ownership of his assignments and increases
his knowledge of the work. He mentors junior technicians and is sought by engineers
because of his work quality and ethic. Applicant received several awards, letters of
appreciation, and letters of recognition from his employer.3
Applicant submitted six letters of recommendation from supervisors, engineers,
and coworkers. None of the letters indicate any knowledge about the issues raised in
the SOR. However, the senior manager (AE R) knows about the issues in the SOR. (AE
Q) The individuals praise Applicant’s work skills, knowledge, expertise, reliability,
honesty, and dependability. They consider him a man of high integrity and trustworthy.
His excellent welding skills give his senior manager the flexibility to assign Applicant to a
variety of different jobs to meet program needs. One test engineer expressed being
stunned that Applicant lost his clearance because he views Applicant as a person with a
high moral fiber. He recommends Applicant without reservation for a security
clearance.   4
Applicant graduated from high school. He and his wife married in 1975. They
have two sons, ages 31 and 25. They also have two 19-year-old foster sons, who live
with them.  5
The issues raised in the SOR concern Applicant’s sexual behavior. Applicant
believes his problems with pornography and addiction to pornography are the result of
sexual abuse as a child and his introduction to pornography at the age of 9. His parents
separated several times and ultimately divorced when he was a child. The emotional
impact of his childhood resulted in issues of abandonment. He described his drugs of
choice to deal with these emotional issues as pornography and masturbation.6
From 1980 until 1997, Applicant had no access to a computer at work. Since
1997, he enters his work time on a desk top computer, including a laptop which is set up
as a desktop computer. His employer has not assigned him a laptop computer, nor has
he ever taken a laptop computer home. Human resources and his manager verified
AE A; AE C; AE Q; Tr. 28-32.7
There is no evidence Applicant ever hired prostitutes nor has he ever admitted to hiring prostitutes.8
I take administrative notice of the fact that the website for sales and personal services has been criticized for9
allowing prostitutes and other individuals to advertise for sexual services. 
AE I; Tr. 33, 42-43, 75-76, 81-85, 92.10
When asked by the polygraph operator about the number of times he viewed pornography, he indicated that11
he did view pornography many times in 1999 and 2000. He could not be specific, but agreed that his viewing
was more than 10 times, more than 100 times, less than 1000 times, and maybe up to 500 times. Tr. 39-42.
AE A; AE I; Tr. 36-42, 71-75, 81-82.12
4
that, as a hourly employee, he would not be, nor had he been, assigned a laptop
computer to use. His manager verified that he would have access to a common
computer in a kiosk. His employer provides laptops to engineers who travel and to
managers who work at home. His employer does not allow employees to bring
electronics, such as cell phones, recording devices, into the work building.  7
Applicant acknowledged that he accessed pornography websites on desktop
computer stations at work sporadically, not continually or regularly, and that he knew it
was against company rules to do so. He also frequented adult book stores, which is not
an issue here, when he needed to view pornography.  Applicant defined his8
pornography viewing as two types: 1) hard-core pornography, which involved sexual
acts, and 2) soft porn and inappropriate material. He described soft porn as nudity,
advertisements for a masseuse or prostitutes, and inappropriate material as suggestive
photographs which he found on a website for sales and personal services.  Applicant’s9
pornography viewing at work began around 1999. He last looked at hard-core
pornography at work or anywhere in 2002 after deciding he should not be doing this. His
sporadic review of soft porn and suggestive photographs on work desktop computers
continued until 2009.  10
Applicant submitted a summary page from his background investigation, which
discusses his pornography viewing habits. He disputed the information on the summary
page in a letter dated January 3, 2011 and at the hearing. Applicant specifically raised
this issue because the report from the background investigator stated that he viewed
and downloaded pornography on a weekly basis using a laptop computer he brought
home from work four or five years earlier. Applicant denied this information because he
did not have access to a company computer or laptop, and because he never brought a
company computer home. He also did not have access to his wife’s laptop computer at
home. He also denied that he accessed pornography on work computers between 2002
and 2009 and disagrees with the 500 times indicated in the report.  He again11
acknowledged accessing work computers until 2002 for hard-core pornography. After
that, he viewed suggestive pictures and advertisements on a website for sales and
personal services periodically. Applicant admitted that he wrongly engaged in this
activity at work, but disagreed with the dates and number of times.12
AE C; AE Q; Tr. 158.13
AE B; AE C; AE Q; Tr. 158-160. 14
Tr.  92, 108-112, 115-116, 160-163.15
5
Applicant acknowledged his conduct to his wife, who suggested he tell his boss
about his actions. In 2005, Applicant voluntarily reported to his managers that he
accessed various on-line sites, including pornography sites. Applicant also advised his
manager that he had ceased this activity. His manager counseled him verbally as he
considered Applicant’s conduct a first-time offense. Applicant’s second-line manager
agreed with the discipline. Applicant’s manager had no further problem with this
behavior by Applicant.13
In early 2010, an employee reported to management that Applicant viewed
pornography websites, mischarged his work time, and lacked interpersonal skills when
he refused to perform tasks as requested. Human Resources investigated the
allegations. His manager addressed this investigation in a 2010 letter. Applicant’s
manager advised that the hardware operations require monitoring and an individual
must be present at all times for the safety of the hardware, while only taking readings
every 30 or 60 minutes, which Applicant was assigned to perform. Applicant’s manager
described Applicant’s misuse of the computer as playing games and solitaire on the
computer in between recording the readings. After a two-month investigation, Human
Resources instructed Applicant’s manager to verbally counsel Applicant not to play
solitaire or other nonwork-related games, which was done. His manager has not
observed any further conduct. The investigation did not reveal any issues with
pornography sites on the work computers, as alleged. Human Resources closed its
case.     14
Applicant’s pornography activities created problems in his marriage. Applicant
and his wife agree that around their 25  wedding anniversary, they experienced severeth
problems in their marriage. His wife researched information and sought help. She
eventually contacted a Dr. W and spoke with him. Dr. W presented a program at their
church, which Applicant and his wife attended. During this presentation, Applicant
became aware that he might have a sexual addiction problem. Applicant and his wife
met with Dr. W for a time. She also counseled with Dr. W separately for several months.
Dr. W, whose professional credentials are unknown, eventually told her that Applicant
was a sex addict. The basis for his statement is not known, but it is appeared to be
based on his conversations with her. His wife indicated that she and her husband also
met with a family and marriage counselor, but the time frame for this meeting(s) is
unknown.15
In 1999 and 2000, when he started viewing pornography again after refraining for
a period of time, Applicant spoke with his church pastor and a brother deacon about his
conduct, both of whom responded “Don’t worry about it. That’s normal.” He doesn’t
believe they understood his problem, which contributed to his later decision to leave this
church. He discussed his issues with a pastor at his next church, who advised him to
Tr.  87-90.16
AE B; Tr. 92, 104-112.17
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR), 2000,18
does not list sex addiction as a mental or psychological disorder.
AE AA; Tr. 46-48, 110-115, 122-127.19
6
pray and the thoughts would go away. He attended a third church, which did not provide
any help. He stated that he began to flounder and returned to the adult bookstores.16
By 2000, he agreed to attend marriage counseling with his wife because he
believed that his pornography issues created problems in their marriage. He described
this time as when he began his recovery. Around this time, he attended the program
presented by Dr. W at his church. In 2001, he met once with a retired psychologist, who
recommended a recovery program operated by Christian churches. Applicant attended
this program from 2001 until July 2003. This recovery program employs an operational
format similar to Alcoholics Anonymous. Meetings are held once or twice a week and a
12-step recovery goal is set. He stopped attending this program because he believed
that his pornography and sexual addiction problems has been eradicated as suggested
to him.17
Applicant described a cycle of behavior. He views pornography, then tells his
wife. He attends counseling programs. He then stops attending counseling when he
thinks he can manage his addiction on his own. Eventually, an event occurs, triggering
his desire to view pornography. He views the pornography again. He recalls speaking
with three telephone counselors through Dr. W’s program over time. He and the first
counselor, J, talked for about six months about Applicant’s addiction to pornography.
Applicant stopped because of cost and his belief he could control his behavior. He
talked with a second associate of Dr. W at some point about his desires to view
pornography. This counselor eventually left the program. Applicant again tried to
manage on his own. In 2008, he slipped again. He sought help from a third counselor,
Mr. C. Mr. C is a LPC (licensed professional counselor) and SRT (sexual recovery
therapist). Applicant counseled with Mr. C over the telephone, twice individually, and ten
times in group counseling as recommended. Mr. C diagnosed Applicant with sex
addiction. Applicant does not remember being diagnosed with sex addiction  by anyone18
else, but acknowledges his addiction to pornography as the reason for his counseling.
Applicant ceased his contact with Mr. C in December 2008 because he found the
sessions ineffective.19
Applicant did not seek counseling with anyone for a year. On the
recommendation of his brother-in-law, he met with Ms. B, who discussed marriage and
parental issues with him for about four months. He no longer meets with her because he
does not have a need to revisit his childhood problems. He returned to the church-
based recovery program in the fall of 2012 and currently attends meetings twice a week.
Licensed counselors are not involved in this program. After participating in this program,
Applicant realizes that his recovery must be ongoing as he will always be a recovering
AE D; Tr. 129-132.20
AE AA.21
AE A; Tr. 45-46, 93, 97-99.22
Tr. 47, 102-104.23
GE 1; Tr. 53-55, 133-134, 137-138.24
7
sex addict. He admits that he needs to be in some type of recovery program for the rest
of his life.20
Applicant obtained a letter from Mr. C, dated March 7, 2013, which verified
Applicant’s counseling in 2008. Applicant provided a copy of the medical information
report generated during his background investigation. The investigator prepared this
one-page report of the interview of Mr. C on June 23, 2009. The report indicates an
initial diagnosis of sex addiction, lists the treatment prescribed, opines that Mr. C found
no illegal activity by Applicant, and notes continued counseling is recommended as
Applicant had an addiction to pornography.21
Applicant acknowledged that he masturbated at work in a work restroom. This
conduct last occurred in late 2000 or early 2001. He explained that sometimes he used
a single bathroom, where he locked the door to prevent anyone else from entering the
room, and that other times he used a stall in a bathroom with several stalls. He denied
masturbating in front of anyone, and he repeatedly denied any conduct between 2002
and 2009, as indicated in the background investigation report. In his recovery program,
he set parameters where he would not allow himself to view pornography or
masturbate. Work was a boundary, and he has not violated his boundary. He never
worried about being caught for masturbating at work because he did this conduct in
private.22
Applicant stated that he benefitted from the recovery programs and that the
programs helped him to control his behavior. He also indicated that he is being treated
for depression, low testosterone, erectile dysfunction, and has been for five or six
years.23
When Applicant completed his e-QIP on January 5, 2011, he answered “No” to
the question in Section 21 about emotional or mental health counseling in the last seven
years. He did not need to list counseling related to marriage, grief not related to violence
by him, or family. Applicant denied intentionally falsifying this answer and explained that
because his pornography viewing created problems in his marriage and his counseling
started because of his marital issues, he believed he did not need to answer the
question in the affirmative as he did not understand at that time his conduct was an
addiction. Throughout the hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he did receive
counseling for his sex addiction problem.24
GE 2; AE M; Tr. 55-62.25
AE W; Tr. 147-162.26
AE X.27
8
At a party before the 2008 election, Applicant and his brother-in-law talked about
general political topics. Because of commentary in the news media about weapons of
mass destruction and President Bush’s knowledge of the existence of these weapons,
conversation turned to this topic. In a private moment, Applicant mentioned to his
brother-in-law that at a work meeting, an analyst showed information that indicated that
something was going on in Iraq. Applicant said “You know it’s not true what you read in
the news. There was plenty of evidence that - - that certainly convinced everybody
where I work . . .” and “I’ve seen evidence that would convince the average person that
there was a reason to go in there.” Applicant denied discussing the specifics of the
information he saw. After the party, he told his wife he may have said too much. His
brother-in-law wrote a letter on April 10, 2011 stating that he did not recall a discussion
at a party about weapons of mass destruction. He indicated that he would have recalled
anything “shocking” or breaching national security. He also stated that Applicant has
never revealed any classified information to him. He trusts Applicant with our national
security.25
Applicant’s wife testified and submitted additional comments after the hearing.
She describes Applicant as “very good man” who is kind, honorable, loving, and caring
although not a model husband. He has a strong sense of duty and love of the United
States. She knows about his pornography habits, which she believes adversely
impacted their marriage. She caught him searching the home computer for pornography
on one occasion between 10 and 15 years ago. She attached a monitor to their
computer and has not noticed any additional pornography searches. Applicant knows
about the monitor. She advises that he feels a lot of guilt about his behavior. He will tell
her about any inappropriate conduct related to pornography because “his conscience
will bother him.” She strongly advocates that he is not nor will he ever be a threat to the
United States. She advises that he taken responsibility for his pornography activities
and for any other conduct. He has changed in the last 10 years. She confirms his
counseling for his sex addiction.  26
Applicant’s younger son wrote a letter on his behalf. He described his father as a
hard-working, dedicated employee with a tender heart. At times, his father’s long work
hours took away from his time with his family.  He is aware of Applicant’s addiction. He
does not “see his father setting aside his loyalty to God, family and country for the sake
of hiding himself form the consequences of his addiction.” He indicated that his father is
forthcoming about his conduct and accepts the consequences of his actions. He affirms
that his father is attending counseling sessions twice a week and accepts his illness.27
9
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
10
Analysis
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern as:
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.
AG ¶ 13 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and,
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion
or judgment.
Applicant visited pornography websites on his office computer from 1999 to 2002
and a  website for sales and personal services for suggestive advertisements on work
computers from 2002 until 2009. He also masturbated in work bathrooms a few times
ending by early 2001. AG ¶¶ 13(c) and 13(d) apply.
The Sexual behavior guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 14(a) through
14(d), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or
duress.
AG ¶¶ 14(b) and 14(c) apply. An employee’s use of an employer’s  computer is
controlled by the employer’s rules and restrictions, and an employer can lawfully
discipline an employee for violating computer-use rules and restrictions. Private viewing
of adult pornography on a personal laptop computer, on other privately-owned media, or
in adult bookstores is protected conduct under the First Amendment and the liberty
interest of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution. See Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003)(discussing right to engage in
11
private, consensual sexual behavior); United States v. Playboy Entertainment Group,
Inc., 529 U.S. 803 (2000) (discussing adult pornography and First Amendment).
Applicant’s self-claimed addiction to pornography raised a security concern after he
acknowledged to his employer around 2005 that he had viewed pornography websites
on office computers several years earlier and when he self-reported this conduct to the
Government. His employer orally counseled him not to access pornography websites,
but took no other disciplinary action based on Applicant’s conduct.
In 2000, Applicant realized his marriage had problems, and after viewing videos
prepared by Dr. W and after marital counseling with his wife, he understood that his
pornography viewing created a problem in his marriage. He contacted three ministers or
deacons to discuss his concerns about this conduct. None of them gave him any helpful
advice on managing his conduct. In 2001, Applicant began a counseling program, which
taught him to establish parameters for his conduct. He set viewing hard-core
pornography at work as unacceptable conduct for himself and has abided by this
parameter he established. He continued to search a website for sales and personal
services for suggestive and stimulating advertisements until 2009, when he decided not
to continue this behavior. A co-worker complained in late 2009 or early 2010 that,
among several issues, Applicant was accessing pornography websites at work. After an
investigation, his employer closed the case with the recommendation that his manager
orally counsel Applicant about not playing solitaire or games on the work computer.
There is no evidence that his employer  found that Applicant accessed pornography
websites, which supports his statement that he ceased viewing hard-core pornography
on the work computer. He has also received therapy and counseling. He recognizes
that he is addicted to pornography and that must be vigilant for the rest of his life. He
continues with a support group for assistance with maintaining his goal to stay away
from pornography.
Applicant’s last act of masturbating in the stall of a workplace bathroom occurred
by early 2001, about 12 years ago. He has voluntarily ceased this behavior in public
places, making it unlikely that he can be coerced or exploited for this conduct. His wife
is fully aware of his conduct, so there is no likelihood that he can be pressured to
disclose classified information because of it.
Applicant has personally established that viewing pornography and masturbating
at work are impermissible behaviors at work. He is unlikely to use his employer’s
computer to access pornography or to masturbate at work in the future. His sexual
behavior does not serve as a basis for coercion or duress. His sexual behavior involving
viewing adult pornography in the private places does not cast doubt on his current
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Sexual behavior security concerns are
mitigated. 
12
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule
violations; and,
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, . . . and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group. 
For AG ¶ 16(a) to apply, Applicant’s omission must be deliberate. The
Government established that Applicant omitted material facts from his January 2011 e-
QIP, when he failed to acknowledge his sex addiction counseling. This information is
material to the evaluation of Applicant’s trustworthiness and honesty. In his response
and at the hearing, he denied that he intentionally falsified this answer on his e-QIP with
an intent to hide his counseling from the Government. Applicant explained that because
his sexual problems created marital problems, he chose not to acknowledge his
counseling for sexual addiction because the counseling arose in the context of
counseling for his marital problems. Throughout the hearing, Applicant acknowledged
that he received counseling on several occasions for sex addiction and discussed the
See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17, 2004)(explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-2313328
at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).
13
impact of his behavior on his marriage. When the allegation of falsification is
controverted, the Government has the burden of proving it. Proof of an omission,
standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when
the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a
whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an
applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. Applicant
understood his pornography viewing created problems in his marriage. Throughout the
hearing, he intermixed counseling for his addiction to pornography, which he described
as a sexual addiction, and counseling for personal and marital issues. He acknowledged
his pornography addiction and his counseling for it. He was aware of this counseling
and a “yes” answer was more appropriate. Having said this, it is not clear from his
testimony that he deliberately and intentionally falsified his answer to this question, as
he admitted to the Government and his employer that his SCI clearance had been
revoked for sexual behavior and personal conduct. SOR allegation 2.c is found in favor
of Applicant.28
The Government established that Applicant violated workplace rules when he
accessed pornography websites on his employer’s computers between 1999 and 2002,
but not that he did so between 2002 and 2009. The Government also established that
Applicant sought suggestive advertisements on his employer’s computer between 2002
and 2009 and that he masturbated in his employer’s bathrooms between 1999 and
2001. AG ¶¶ 16(d)(3) and 16(e) are raised by SOR allegations 2.a and 2.b.
Applicant did not discuss classified information with his brother-in-law at a party.
During a conversation about weapons of mass destruction, Applicant mentioned a
meeting at work where he saw evidence which convinced him that there were weapons
of mass destruction in Iraq. He did not discuss the specifics of what he saw, such as the
type of weapons or the locations of these weapons, and his brother-in-law verified that
Applicant did not reveal anything “shocking” or a breach of national security. It is well-
known that Sadam Hussein used gas, a weapon of mass destruction, to murder
thousands of Kurds. Applicant’s conversation involved generic information known to the
general public and not classified. SOR allegation 2.d is found in favor of Applicant.
The Personal Conduct guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 17(a) through
17(g), and the following are potentially applicable:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
14
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
Applicant reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress for his
past pornography and masturbating conduct when he revealed his conduct to his wife,
the Government, and his employer, making it unlikely that anyone can pressure him to
reveal classified information for keeping silent about his past sexual behavior. He has
not viewed hard-core pornography websites or masturbated at work in more than ten
years. Likewise, he has not searched a website for sales and personal services for
about four years. Over the last approximately 12 years, Applicant has sought counseling
to manage his desires to view pornography. He has received inadequate and
sometimes inappropriate responses or guidance. When he realized that his need to
view pornography had not been “eradicated” after a resumption of his conduct, he again
sought counseling. His counseling sessions helped him to eventually accept and define
himself as a sex addict, which he states he will be for the rest of his life. He also
understands that he will need to participate in support groups into the future and plans
to continue his current support groups. He acknowledged that he has not always
remained in counseling, but it was reasonable because he ceased counseling in 2003
as he believed his pornography desires had been “eradicated” and in 2008, because he
found the counselor ineffective. He has sought help routinely, but not always got the
help he needed. At the present time, he has control over his behavior, and given the
many years since he acted inappropriately at work, he is not likely to engage in
inappropriate behavior at work in the future. He had mitigated the personal conduct
security concerns. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
15
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
The evidence in support of granting a security clearance to Applicant under the
whole-person concept is more substantial than the evidence in support of denial. In
reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
clearly acted inappropriately when he accessed pornography websites on office
computers and when he masturbated in bathrooms at work between 1999 and 2001.
Applicant recognized he had a problem, and he sought guidance and support from
several sources. While he did not always receive what he needed, he learned to set
parameters for himself. He honored these parameters, which included not accessing
pornographic websites at work and no masturbation at work. Over time, he has come to
describe himself as a sex addict because of his desire to view pornography, which is not
illegal and is protect by the First Amendment. He participates in a support group, which
helps him to manage his behavior. His employer, his wife,, and his sons are aware of
his conduct. The Government is aware because he told the Government about his
actions. In reviewing the evidence as a whole, there is little reason to believe that
Applicant can be coerced, exploited, pressured, or placed under duress and in a
position to reveal classified information based on his past conduct.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his sexual and personal conduct
under Guidelines D and E.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline D: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: For Applicant
16
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
