 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-13299 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 21, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 15, 2012, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on January 25, 2013. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
and he received it on January 31, 2013. Applicant was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
declined to submit any additional information. The case was assigned to me on March 
27, 2013.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of facts 
concerning the country of Pakistan.1 Department Counsel provided supporting 
documents that verify detail and provide context for these facts in the Administrative 
Notice request. See the Pakistan section of the Findings of Fact of this decision, infra, 
for the material facts from Department Counsel’s submissions on Pakistan.   
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.2 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. Those 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old. He was born in Karachi, Pakistan in 1951, and became 
a United States naturalized citizen in October 2010. Applicant came to the United States 
in 1997 and obtained resident alien status. He is married and has one adult child. Both 
his wife and child also became naturalized U.S. citizens in October 2010. He works for a 
government contractor. He has worked for this company since May 2011. From July 
2006 to May 2011, he worked for other private sector companies in the United States. 
From September 1979 to May 2006, he worked for a private company located in Saudi 
Arabia. He resided there during that time frame. He holds a bachelor’s degree. He has 
never held a security clearance and he has no history of military service.4   
  
  
  
 
                                                          
1 FORM p. 2. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization  Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). 
 
3 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
4 Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant has the following relatives who are residents and citizens of Pakistan:  
 
 1. One brother-in-law lives in Islamabad and works in the communications field. 
There is no information in the record concerning his age. He has contact with his 
brother-in-law by telephone about three to seven times a year.  
 
 2. One brother living in Lahore is an engineer. He is 51 years old. He sees his 
brother about every five years, but has phone contact with him about every three 
months.  
 
 3. His father-in-law and mother-in-law live in Quetta. They are 84 and 61 years 
old respectively. His father-in-law is retired and his mother-in-law is a homemaker. 
Neither have any government affiliation. He last spoke to his father-in-law in 2006. He 
has phone contact with his mother-in-law about one to two times a year.   
 
 4. One brother-in-law whose date and place of birth are unknown. He has a 
technology job somewhere in Pakistan. Applicant last saw him in 2006 and has 
telephone contact about once a year.  
 
 5. One brother-in-law whose date and place of birth are unknown. He has a 
telecommunications job somewhere in Pakistan. Applicant last saw him in 2006 and has 
telephone contact about three to seven times a year. 
 
Applicant visited last Pakistan in 2006 for 24 days. He visited family during his trip.5 
 
Pakistan 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic with a population of more than 167 
million people. After September 11, 2001, Pakistan supported the United States and an 
international coalition in Operation Enduring Freedom to remove the Taliban from 
power. Despite this support, members of the Taliban are known to be in the Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of Pakistan and in the Balochistan Province, which 
borders Iran and Afghanistan. The leaders of the Taliban operate openly in Pakistan, as 
do extremists from the Pakistani Taliban and Al Qaida. Taliban financing has been 
traced from Pakistan to Afghanistan, allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to 
strengthen its military and technical capabilities. Pakistan has intensified its 
counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for dealing with militants has been mixed. 
 
The U.S. Department of State has defined several areas of Pakistan to be 
terrorist safe havens. The security situation in Afghanistan worsened in 2008, driven in 
part by insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous 
Afghan-Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide vital 
sanctuary to Al Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups. 
Al-Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the Afghan 
                                                          
5 Item 5. 
 
 
4 
 
 
insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and Western interests 
in Pakistan and worldwide. Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremists 
groups, Al Qaida uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare 
regional and transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and 
supplies. Al Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of destabilizing suicide 
attacks throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high-profile government, military, and 
western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in 2008 due to such attacks. 
In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan conducted at least 40 
suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed about 600 Pakistani 
civilians and security force personnel.   
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to 
Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several American citizens present in 
Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other reasons. The human rights situation 
in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, and disappearances occur. 
Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is widespread, and the Pakistani 
government maintains several domestic intelligence agencies to monitor politicians, 
political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign intelligence 
agents. Credible reports indicate that authorities use wiretaps and monitor mail without 
the requisite court approval, and also monitor phones and electronic messages. In 
addition, Pakistan continues to develop its own nuclear infrastructure, expand nuclear 
weapon stockpiles, and seek more advanced warhead and delivery systems. In the 
aftermath of Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United States cut off 
military aid to Pakistan for several years.  
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the United States in 
counterterrorism methods. Pakistan committed to elimination of terrorist camps on the 
Pakistan-Afghanistan border and subsequently sent thousands of troops and sustained 
hundreds of casualties in this effort. Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency 
efforts, and demonstrated determination and persistence in combating militants. The 
United States is engaging in a substantial effort to bolster Pakistan’s military forces and 
security. In 2003, President Bush announced that the United States would provide 
Pakistan with $3 billion in economic and military aid over the next five years beginning 
in 2005. On May 1, 2011, U.S. Special Forces personnel raided a large al-Qaida 
compound located in Pakistan where they found and killed Osama bin Laden, the leader 
of al-Qaida. He was found in a residential neighborhood in Pakistan.   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
 
6 
 
 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply because of Applicant’s relationships with his brother, 
father-in-law, mother-in-law, and brothers-in-law, who are living in Pakistan.  
 
Applicant communicates with his brother every three months. His contacts with 
his other relatives are not as frequent; however, there is a rebuttable presumption that a 
person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, their immediate family members, 
including in-laws. Applicant has not attempted to rebut this presumption. Applicant’s 
relationships with his relatives living in Pakistan are sufficient to create “a heightened 
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” His 
relationships with residents of Pakistan create a concern about Applicant’s “obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to help his relatives who are 
in Pakistan. For example, if the Pakistan Government or terrorists in Pakistan wanted to 
expose Applicant to coercion, it could exert pressure on his relatives living there. 
Applicant would then be subject to indirect coercion through his relationship with his 
relatives and classified information could potentially be compromised. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in Pakistan 
is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant has 
a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
 
7 
 
 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of Pakistan with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his relatives living in Pakistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist his relatives living in Pakistan who might be coerced by 
terrorists or other governmental entities in Pakistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”6 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or his 
relatives living in Pakistan, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
Although Applicant’s communications with his relatives, other than his brother, living in 
Pakistan are infrequent, he continues to feel an obligation to them and affection for 
them. Applicant’s concern for his relatives is a positive character trait that increases his 
trustworthiness; however, it also increases the concern about potential foreign 
influence. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence to raise the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and 
further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
                                                          
6 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
8 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant traveled to 
Pakistan in 2006. Applicant has limited contact with his relatives, other than his brother, 
who live in Pakistan. The amount of contacts between an Applicant and relatives living 
in a foreign country is not the only test for determining whether someone could be 
coerced through their relatives. Because of his connections to his brother, father-in-law, 
mother-in-law, and brothers-in-law, Applicant is not able to fully meet his burden of 
showing there is little likelihood that he could create a risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation. It is evident that he feels an obligation to his relatives’ welfare.    
 
Applicant has not established “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties 
in the U.S.” He lived and worked in Saudi Arabia for over 26 years until 2006. He and 
his family did not become U.S. Citizens until 2010. Based upon the record evidence, I 
cannot determine that Applicant would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest.  
 
Applicant’s relationships in the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his relatives who live in 
Pakistan. There is no evidence that terrorists, criminals, the Pakistan Government, or 
those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his relatives in 
Pakistan to coerce Applicant or his relatives for classified or sensitive information. 
Applicant has not yet received access to classified information and as such, there is a 
reduced possibility that Applicant or his family would be specifically selected as targets 
for improper coercion or exploitation. While the Government does not have any burden 
to prove the presence of such evidence, if such record evidence was present, Applicant 
would have a heavy evidentiary burden to overcome to mitigate foreign influence 
security concerns. It is important to be mindful of the United States’ recent relationship 
with Pakistan, especially Pakistan’s systematic human rights violations and the ever 
present danger from terrorists and those who seek to damage U.S interests. The 
conduct of terrorists in Pakistan makes it more likely that terrorists would attempt to 
coerce Applicant through his relatives living in Pakistan, if the terrorists determined it 
was advantageous to do so.     
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d), 8(e), and 8(f) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not 
encouraged Applicant’s involvement with his relatives living in Pakistan. Applicant is not 
required to report his contacts with his relatives living in Pakistan and there is no 
evidence that he owns property in Pakistan. 
 
In sum, the primary security concern is Applicant’s relationships with his 
relatives, who live in Pakistan. These relatives are readily available for coercion. 
Although the Pakistan Government’s failure to follow the rule of law further increases 
the risk of coercion, the major cause of concern is the prevalence of terrorists in 
Pakistan.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support denial of Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards approval of his clearance at this time. Applicant’s relatives live in Pakistan. 
Terrorists have killed hundreds of Pakistani citizens in the last two years, and there is a 
heightened risk they could attempt to coerce Applicant through his relatives to obtain 
classified information. Therefore, he failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
