 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 11-10627 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Tuider, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges 10 delinquent debts, totaling 
$125,009. Applicant had unexpected medical expenses and insufficient income to 
support his large family. He had insufficient financial resources to pay his mortgage and 
student loans. All of his SOR debts are in established payment plans and he is current 
on his monthly expenses. Financial considerations are mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 8, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86) (GE 1). On 
September 24, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued an SOR to Applicant, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD was unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
with the national interest to continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it 
recommended that his case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether his clearance should be continued or revoked.  
 
On October 19, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR. On January 31, 2013, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On February 8, 2013, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. 
On February 15, 2013, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for March 6, 
2013. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered six exhibits, and Applicant offered three exhibits. (Tr. 11-13; GE 1-6; AE A-C) 
Applicant objected to admissibility of two credit reports because his financial information 
had changed, and they were not current. (Tr. 11; GE 2, 6) Applicant’s objections go to 
the weight to be accorded to the credit reports and not their admissibility. There were no 
other objections, and I admitted GE 1-6 and AE A-C. (Tr. 12-13) On March 14, 2013, 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing and the record was closed on March 15, 
2013. (Tr. 32-34, 37)      
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant accepted responsibility for the debts listed in 
the SOR. He also explained what he had done and was doing to resolve his delinquent 
debts. (HE 3) His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old customer service technician for a defense contractor. 
(Tr. 14; GE 1) He has worked continuously for the same defense contractor since 
February 2000. (Tr. 14) He graduated from high school in 1983, and he was awarded 
an associate’s degree in general studies in 1986. (Tr. 16) In June 2009, he received a 
bachelor’s of science degree in human resources management. (Tr. 17) He married in 
1990, and he has six children. (Tr. 17) Their ages are 10, 12, 14, 17, 18, and 20, and 
they all live at home. (Tr. 18) His spouse is not employed outside the home. (Tr. 19) He 
has never served in the military. (GE 1) He has never held a security clearance. (Tr. 14) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Four years ago, Applicant’s oldest son had problems with prescription drug 
abuse. Rehabilitation and treatment were very expensive. (Tr. 19-22) Applicant was 
also underemployed and having difficulty supporting a large family on an annual income 
of $35,000. (Tr. 20-21) 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges 10 delinquent debts, totaling $125,009. Those 10 
delinquent debts are described and discussed in his SF 86, December 9, 2010 Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), responses to DOHA 
interrogatories, SOR response, and at his hearing. All the documentation consistently 
and credibly discusses his finances. (GE 1-6) Those 10 SOR debts are described as 
follows: 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a delinquent mortgage account with an approximate balance 
of $92,891. Applicant purchased his residence in 1996. (Tr. 31) He stopped making 
payments on his mortgage in 2009. (Tr. 23) He recently obtained a loan modification, 
and his monthly payment is now $1,412. (Tr. 23) He made his first payment under the 
new agreement on February 25, 2013. (Tr. 23; AE M) He intends to continue making his 
modified mortgage payments using a direct debit from his bank account. (Tr. 24-25, 28)  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b to 1.j allege nine delinquent student loan debts totaling $32,118. 
Applicant made seven payments in 2011, 13 payments in 2012, and five payments in 
2013. (Tr. 26; AE A, R) He is paying $451 monthly to address his student loans. (AE L, 
N) The current total balance owed on the nine student loans is $36,160. (AE O, P, Q) 
He intends to pay his student loan debts. (Tr. 26) 
 
Applicant did not describe any credit counseling; however, he did provide a 
personal financial statement (PFS) and a post-hearing budget. (Tr. 27; GE 5, AE L) 
Applicant’s current annual income is $56,474, and his income will increase to $61,556 in 
April 2013. (Tr. 21, 24; AE H) His net monthly income is $4,000, and his net monthly 
remainder is $357. (Tr. 24; AE L) He believes he can maintain all of his accounts in a 
current status. He has $15,000 in his 401(k) account. (Tr. 27)  
 
Character evidence 
 
Applicant’s employee performance evaluations describe excellent 
accomplishment of goals, well-prepared plans to accomplish goals, and good 
relationships with other employees. (AE D-G) He showed professionalism and provided 
great leadership. (AE D-G) Applicant’s senior manager writes that Applicant is 
intelligent, friendly, thoughtful, mature, “professional, motivated, trustworthy and hard 
working.” (AE I)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, his 
OPM interview, his SOR response, and his statement at his hearing. His debts became 
delinquent in 2009 and some of them continued to be delinquent until February 2013. 
Applicant’s SOR alleges 10 delinquent debts, totaling $125,009. The Government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants full application of AG ¶¶ 20(a) 
and 20(b). Unexpected medical bills and insufficient income to support a large family 
caused Applicant to have debts he could not afford to pay. His financial problems were 
affected by circumstances largely beyond his control. He made numerous payments on 
his student loan debts over the last three years. He recently obtained a modified 
mortgage agreement, and his mortgage is now current. 
 
Two recent Appeal Board decisions illustrate the analysis for applying AG ¶¶ 
20(a) and 20(b). In ISCR Case No. 09-08533, the applicant had $41,000 in delinquent 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
credit card debt and defaulted on a home loan generating a $162,000 delinquent debt. 
Id. at 2. That applicant filed for bankruptcy the same month the Administrative Judge 
issued her decision. Id. at 1-2. The applicant in ISCR Case No. 09-08533 was recently 
divorced, had been unemployed for 10 months, and had childcare responsibilities. Her 
former husband was inconsistent in his payment of child support to her. The Appeal 
Board determined that AG ¶ 20(a) was “clearly applicable (debt occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and [the debt] does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment)” even though that 
applicant’s debts were unresolved at the time the Administrative Judge’s decision was 
issued. The Appeal Board also decided that the record evidence raised the applicability 
of AG ¶ 20(b) because of the absence of evidence of irresponsible behavior, poor 
judgment, unreliability, or lack of trustworthiness. Id. at 4.   
  
Similarly, in ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009) the Appeal 
Board addressed a situation where an applicant, who had been sporadically 
unemployed and lacked the ability to pay her creditors, noting that “it will be a long time 
at best before he has paid” all of her creditors. The applicant was living on 
unemployment compensation at the time of her hearing. The Appeal Board explained 
that such a circumstance was not necessarily a bar to having access to classified 
information stating: 
 
However, the Board has previously noted that an applicant is not required 
to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for paying off all debts immediately or 
simultaneously. All that is required is that an applicant act responsibly 
given his [or her] circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for 
repayment, accompanied by “concomitant conduct,” that is, actions which 
evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-
06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 29, 2009). The applicant in ISCR Case 
No. 08-06567 used his limited resources to (1) resolve some of his debts; (2) had a 
repayment plan for the remaining debts; and (3) took “reasonable actions to effectuate 
that plan.” Id. The Appeal Board remanded the Administrative Judge’s decision because 
it did not “articulate a satisfactory explanation for his conclusions,” emphasizing the 
Administrative Judge did “not explain[] what he believes that applicant could or should 
have done under the circumstances that he has not already done to rectify his poor 
financial condition, or why the approach taken by applicant was not ‘responsible’ in light 
of his limited circumstances.” Id.   
 
 Partial application of AG ¶ 20(c) is warranted. Applicant did not complete 
financial counseling, and he cannot be credited with full application of AG ¶ 20(c). 
However, he generated a PFS and budget. Applicant’s financial situation was damaged 
by underemployment and medical expenses. Although there is limited evidence of 
record that he established and maintained contact with his creditors,1 his financial 
                                            
1
“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
problem is being resolved and is under control. He established payment plans on his 
student loans over the last three years, and in February 2013, he established a modified 
payment plan on his mortgage debt.   
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is partially applicable. Applicant admitted responsibility for and took 
reasonable and responsible actions to resolve his SOR debts, establishing some good 
faith.2 AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. Applicant did not dispute any of his delinquent SOR 
debts.    
 
In sum, Applicant fell behind on his debts primarily because of insufficient income 
and to a lesser extent because of medical debts. He made numerous debt payments 
and has established payment plans on all of his SOR debts. Applicant has a sufficient 
monthly remainder as shown by his PFS and budget to maintain his financial 
responsibility. It is unlikely that financial problems will recur. His efforts are sufficient to 
fully mitigate financial considerations security concerns. Assuming, financial 
considerations concerns are not mitigated under AG ¶ 20, security concerns are 
mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                                                                                                            
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
2
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 47-year-old customer service technician for a defense contractor, 
who has worked continuously for the same defense contractor since February 2000. In 
June 2009, he was awarded a bachelor’s of science degree in human resources 
management. Applicant’s decision to spend funds to improve his educational 
credentials was a prudent investment of his time and money. He married in 1990, and 
he has six children, who are ages 10, 12, 14, 17, 18, and 20. All six children still live at 
home, and his spouse is not employed outside the home. He is sufficiently mature to 
understand and comply with his security responsibilities. He deserves substantial credit 
for supporting the U.S. Government as an employee of a contractor. There is every 
indication that he is loyal to the United States and his employer. Medical expenses and 
underemployment contributed to his financial woes. I give Applicant substantial credit 
for admitting responsibility for his delinquent debts in his SF 86, OPM PSI, responses to 
DOHA interrogatories, SOR response, and at his hearing. He received a strong 
endorsement from a supervisor and has excellent performance evaluations. He recently 
received a substantial increase in his income, and he now has additional financial 
resources to ensure he can pay his debts.  
 
Even though he lacked financial resources because of the large size of his family 
and medical debts, Applicant made numerous payments to address his student loans 
over the last three years. In February 2013, he established a modified payment plan 
and made his first payment to address his mortgage debt. The Appeal Board has 
addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination). There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted).  
 
Applicant is an intelligent person, and he understands how to budget and what 
he needs to do to establish and maintain his financial responsibility. There is simply no 
reason not to trust him. Moreover, he established a “meaningful track record” of debt re-
payment. I am confident he will maintain his financial responsibility.   
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are mitigated, and eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.j:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
