 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-10823 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher N. Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems dating back to 2007. The evidence 
fails to establish Applicant’s financial responsibility in the resolution of his delinquent 
debts. He does not have a viable plan to resolve his delinquent debt, and he is not in 
control of his financial situation. At this time, the record evidence fails to convince me of 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 15, 2010. On 
October 3, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 9, 2012, and requested a decision based on 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
the record. On December 3, 2012, the Government requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. (Appellate Exhibit 1) 
 
The case was assigned to me on January 7, 2013. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 15, 2013, 
scheduling a hearing for February 6, 2013. At the hearing, the Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) 1 through 9. All 
exhibits were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
February 14, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR, except 
for ¶¶ 1.f and 1.i, which he denied. At his hearing, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.f, and 
reiterated his denial of SOR ¶ 1.i. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of all the evidence, including his testimony and demeanor while 
testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old physical security officer employed by a government 
contractor. He is a high school graduate. Applicant joined the police force in his state in 
1985. The following year, he was shot while on duty, and after seven different 
operations, he was medically retired in 1989. He receives approximately $1,800 per 
month in retired pay. (Tr. 87) 
 
Applicant married his first wife in September 1994, and they were divorced in 
September 2008. He has a 16-year-old daughter of this marriage for whom he provides 
$620 monthly in support. He married his current wife in April 2009. They have two 
children, ages two and one.  
 
From October 1990 until February 2009, Applicant worked full-time as a security 
officer for numerous government contractors. In 2009, he resigned from his job looking 
for a better job opportunity; however, he failed some qualifications tests required for his 
new job and he was laid off. He was unemployed from February 2009 until September 
2009. He was employed from September 2009 until February 2010, but resigned his 
position because it was not a full-time job and he did not have enough working hours. 
(Tr. 47-48, 93) He was unemployed from February 2010 until June 2010. He has been 
working for his current employer, a government contractor, since June 2010. Applicant’s 
2011 net earnings were approximately $53,000, including his $1,800 per month retired 
pay he receives from the police force. In 2012, he earned approximately $56,500. After 
paying his monthly expenses, he is left over with close to $200 a month. (Tr. 78-79) 
 
Applicant was granted access to classified information at the top secret level in 
1998. (GE 1) There is no evidence to show that he has compromised or caused others 
to compromise classified information. Outside of the security concerns alleged in the 
current SOR, there is no evidence that Applicant had any other security issues of 
concern.  
 
3 
 
 
In his June 2010 SCA, Applicant disclosed he had financial problems. He 
revealed that he had a vehicle repossessed in April 2010, and debts turned over to 
collection agencies. He did not disclose the full extent of his delinquent debts. In July 
2010, Applicant was interviewed by a Government investigator and disclosed delinquent 
accounts, including his mortgage that was delinquent since January 2009. He also 
discussed numerous consumer accounts, credit cards, and loans that were delinquent 
since late 2007 or early 2008. During the interview, Applicant told the investigator that in 
the past, he had retained the services of a company to help him consolidate and pay his 
debts, and recently retained the services of a law firm (LF 1) to help him consolidate 
and pay his delinquent debts. 
 
The subsequent background investigation revealed the 10 delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR, totaling approximately $631,000. Applicant admitted all SOR 
allegations, but denied SOR ¶ 1.i (alleging a $560,000 delinquent mortgage) because it 
is not his mortgage. After his interview, Applicant contacted the mortgage creditor to 
dispute the debt, and retained the services of a law firm (LF 2) to help him dispute the 
debt. The status of the alleged SOR debts is as follow: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a – Applicant acquired this medical debt in 2011. Although Applicant 
was fully employed, he had no medical insurance because he claimed he could not 
afford it. After receiving the medical services, he claimed he did not have the money to 
pay the debt. Applicant referred the debt to LF 1. He presented no evidence of contacts 
with the creditor or of any payments made. (Tr. 50, 82-83, AE 6) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.e, and 1.j – Applicant admitted these are his delinquent 
debts. He referred these debts to LF 1 for consolidation, settlement, and payment. LF 1 
documents identified these debts as being “in progress,” which means that Applicant 
does not have sufficient funds in escrow for LF 1 to contact the creditors and attempt a 
settlement. The accounts are in a holding pattern. Applicant presented no evidence of 
contacts with the creditors alleged in the SOR, or of any payments made (except for 
those mentioned in the decision). (AE 7, Tr. 56-58) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c concerns a delinquent credit card. SOR ¶ 1.d is a loan Applicant took 
in 2007 to pay delinquent debts. He defaulted on the loan in 2008. SOR ¶ 1.e is a 
delinquent car loan for a new car Applicant purchased in 2007. He voluntarily returned it 
to the dealer in April 2010 when he could not make the payments. After receipt of the 
SOR, Applicant turned over the $12,553 delinquent debt to LF 1 to be consolidated with 
his other delinquent debts. In February 2013, Applicant received a settlement offer for 
him to pay $2,510 and the debt will be considered settled in full. There is no evidence 
as to whether Applicant was able to take the settlement offer. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f – Applicant purchased a used car in 2010, and he defaulted shortly 
thereafter because he resigned from his job. He is waiting for the creditor to provide him 
with the final bill. Applicant intends to refer this account to LF 1 for consolidation with his 
other debts. 
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g – Applicant acknowledged this is his delinquent medical debt. In May 
2012, he made a $60 payment to show he was making an effort to pay the debt. He 
presented no evidence of contacts with the creditor before May 2012, or after that date. 
Applicant referred the debt to LF 1 for consolidation with his other delinquent debts. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h – Applicant purchased a home in April 2007. He became delinquent in 
his mortgage payments in 2009, because he was unemployed. In 2011, he hired a 
mortgage negotiator to help him modify the terms of the mortgage. In 2012, he started 
his own mortgage negotiations with the bank. On February 15, 2013, the bank denied 
Applicant’s request for a mortgage modification. Applicant plans to sell the property on a 
short sale. If that does not work, he plans to transfer the property to the lender through a 
deed-in-lieu of foreclosure. He believes that either way he will be release of financial 
responsibility for the property. Applicant is 28 payments past due. (AE 10) 
 
Applicant explained that his financial problems were the result of periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. After his divorce, he was left with a child support 
obligation ($620 a month). While unemployed, he did not have sufficient income to pay 
for his family’s day-to-day living expenses, child support obligations, and his delinquent 
debts. Applicant believes he has been diligently working on paying his debts and 
repairing his credit. He hired LF 1 to help him consolidate, settle, and pay some of his 
debts, and he hired LF 2 to help him improve his credit score and dispute other debts. 
Applicant’s credit reports show that he paid eight delinquent accounts (not alleged in the 
SOR) since he retained LF 1’s services. 
 
Applicant testified that he takes his job and his obligations to the Government 
seriously. He admits responsibility for his financial mistakes. He acknowledged that he 
has had financial problems, but believes that his financial problems were caused by 
circumstances beyond his control. Applicant is aware that he needs to improve his 
financial situation. He would like to resolve his debts, but it will take time to do so. He 
promised that as long as he is employed he will continue his efforts to resolve his debts. 
Although he has two young children, his wife is considering taking a job to help expedite 
the payment of the debts. 
 
Applicant considers himself to be honest, trustworthy, and a dedicated employee. 
He is punctual and knowledgeable. He also considers himself to be a loyal American 
and a good worker. He noted his service as a police officer. He would like to continue 
working for government contractors and to resolve his delinquent financial obligations. 
He needs his security clearance to retain his job, and more importantly to find a better-
paying job that will give him the ability to pay all of his delinquent debts and support his 
family. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
5 
 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems that date back to 2007. His financial 
problems continue to present as evidenced by the nine delinquent debts alleged in the 
 
6 
 
 
SOR, totaling about $71,000. (Applicant is disputing SOR ¶ 1.i.) Two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions apply: AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts, and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s evidence fails to fully establish the applicability of any mitigating 
condition. His financial problems are ongoing, he has extensive delinquent debt, and the 
evidence fails to show that he acted responsibly in the resolution of the debts or that he 
acquired the debt under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant’s divorce and his periods of unemployment and underemployment (to 
some extent) may be considered as circumstances beyond his control that contributed 
to, or aggravated, his financial problems. Applicant resigned his full-time job in February 
2009, seeking a better job, but failed to qualify for the new position and was laid off. 
Then, in February 2010, he resigned his job because he was not working sufficient 
hours, but he did not have a job lined up. Under these circumstances, I do not find 
Applicant’s two periods of unemployment following his resignations occurred due to 
circumstances beyond his control.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Even assuming that his periods of unemployment were caused by circumstances 
beyond his control, I find Applicant’s evidence failed to show that he acted responsibly 
in his efforts to resolve his SOR debts. I gave Applicant credit for retaining the services 
of LF 1 and LF 2 to help him resolve his financial problems. I also gave him credit for 
paying eight delinquent debts not alleged in the SOR. Notwithstanding, considering the 
evidence as a whole, he presented little documentary evidence of payments made, 
contacts with creditors, or of any efforts to resolve his delinquent debts before he was 
questioned about them during his July 2010 interview with a government investigator. 
AG ¶ 20(b) applies, in part, but does not mitigate the financial considerations concerns. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) applies in part. Applicant did not participate in financial counseling. 
However, Applicant receives credit because he retained the services of LF 1 and LF 2 
to help him resolve his delinquent debts. Notwithstanding, AG ¶ 20(c) does not fully 
mitigate the financial considerations concerns. Considering the number of debts, the 
small value of some of the debts, the aggregate total of the debts, and his lack of efforts 
to resolve even his smaller debts, I cannot find that there are clear indications that his 
financial problems are being resolved or under control.  
 
 Questions remain about Applicant’s current financial situation and his ability and 
willingness to resolve his delinquent debts. Considering that Applicant has been 
employed since June 2010, and that he receives retirement payments, he failed to 
provide a reasonable explanation for his failure to address even his smallest debts. On 
balance, the evidence available is not sufficient to establish that Applicant has a track 
record of financial responsibility, or that he has a viable plan to resolve his financial 
problems. AG ¶¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) applies because Applicant submitted documentary evidence of efforts 
to dispute the legitimacy of SOR ¶ 1.i. The remaining mitigating condition (AG ¶ 20(f)) is 
not applicable to the facts of this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant honorably served over four years in a state police force until he was 
medically retired because of duty-related injuries. Apparently, he is a technically 
proficient, punctual, and dedicated employee. He has significant experience working as 
a security officer for government contractors while possessing a security clearance. 
Except for the current security concerns, there is no evidence of any problems or 
concerns while he possessed a security clearance.  
 
Applicant’s credit reports showed he paid eight delinquent accounts not alleged 
in the SOR. He retained the services of two law firms to help him consolidate, negotiate, 
 
8 
 
 
pay some debts, dispute some debts, and reestablish his credit. Notwithstanding, the 
record evidence fails to establish that Applicant showed financial responsibility in the 
resolution of his delinquent debts. Because of his extensive experience working for 
federal contractors and years holding a security clearance, Applicant knew or should 
have known about the importance of maintaining financial responsibility. He failed to 
pay small medical debts he incurred after he started working full-time in 2010. 
Considering the record as a whole, Applicant does not have a viable plan to resolve his 
delinquent debt, he is not in control of his financial situation, and his finances remain a 
security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h, 1.j:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.i:       For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
