 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-06046 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 7, 2012, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On October 25, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 6, 2012. He answered 
the SOR in writing on November 12, 2012, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received the 
request on November 19, 2012. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
December 31, 2012, and I received the case assignment on January 7, 2013. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on February 14, 2013, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on March 5, 2013. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 7, which were 
 
2 
 
 
received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A and B, without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 14, 2013. I 
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until March 19, 2013, to submit 
additional matters. On March 19, 2013, he submitted Exhibits C to E, without objection. 
The record closed on March 19, 2013. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR contained in ¶¶ 1.a, through 1.x of the SOR, with explanations. He also provided 
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 47 years old, married, and has three children between the ages of 18 
and 25. He is a vice-president of a family owned electrical contracting company, earning 
slightly less than $100,000 annually. Applicant is in charge of the services division of the 
company. He is a licensed electrical contractor who has done work for the government 
previously through his family company. His wife was a real estate agent. When the 
property market declined in 2007 she sought other employment that Applicant claimed 
paid her 25% of her former income. (Tr. 14, 17, 18, 21; Exhibit 1) 
 
 Applicant and his wife purchased a home in 2006. He did not make a down 
payment on the house. His monthly mortgage payments were $1,900 until December 
2012 when a renegotiation dropped them to $1,600 monthly starting in March 2013. He 
owes $238,000 on the house at present. He purchased it for $230,000. Applicant pays 
about $500 monthly to send his youngest child to a private high school. That child will 
graduate in May 2013 but will not attend college. Applicant will only have his middle 
child in college at that time. (Tr. 21, 31, 36, 45; Exhibits 1, C, D) 
 
 Applicant claimed not to have any credit cards at the present time. He took a 
financial counseling course about 15 years ago. Since then he has not had any type of 
training or education in the investment and spending of his annual income. He does 
have a Section 401(k) retirement account through his company. (Tr. 14, 38, 40, 41; 
Exhibit 1) 
 
Applicant attributes much of his financial difficulties to his rare kidney disease 
that resulted in a transplant about one year ago. Applicant first felt the effects of the 
kidney problem in 2007. He traveled frequently to the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota for 
several years after deciding the local medical services in his hometown were not able to 
diagnose and treat him properly. Applicant takes numerous medicines to prevent 
rejection of the kidney by his body and to increase his immune system to avoid illness. 
Until he had the transplant he worked half days and slept frequently each day. He was 
very tired. He had little energy to spend on everyday tasks. He took about six months to 
recover from the transplant operation. His personal financial statement contained in the 
exhibits showed monthly medical expenses of $900 to $1,200. His friends had 
fundraisers for him to help him pay for travel expenses to the Mayo Clinic and monthly 
 
3 
 
 
expenses, but he still incurred the delinquent accounts contained in the SOR. (Tr. 15, 
30, 34-36; 49; Exhibits 1, 2, A)  
 
 The SOR contains 24 allegations of delinquent debts, totaling $28,387. Of those 
debts, 23 are owed to medical creditors and total $5,104. The small amounts on each of 
the debts indicate they are the copays on the medical insurance Applicant had during 
his illness. The earliest debt shown on the credit reports is 2007. The remaining 
allegation is in Subparagraph 1.k and pertains to Applicant’s delinquent mortgage 
payments. The amount listed is $23,283 as past due. Applicant admitted he had not 
paid any of the delinquent debts at the time of the hearing. His financial interrogatory 
signed in October 2012 states he will make payments on the delinquent debts after his 
wife obtains employment. Applicant declared in that document there was insufficient 
household income to pay monthly bills, medical expenses, and make payments on the 
delinquent accounts. He did renegotiate his mortgage payments to lower them starting 
in March 2013. (Tr. 27-30; Exhibits 2-5, 7) 
 
 Applicant stated he was withdrawing $6,000 from his Section 401(k) account to 
pay his delinquent accounts. He was waiting for the money at the time of the hearing. 
(Tr. 16, 43) 
 
 Subsequent to the hearing, Applicant submitted a document showing his 
mortgage renegotiation was effective in March 2013. The arrearages were added to the 
outstanding mortgage balance, increasing it to $265,252.87. The maturity date of the 
mortgage was extended from April 2041 to February 1, 2053. He submitted a copy of 
the check he sent to the bank for the mortgage payment on February 24, 2013.  
Applicant also paid seven delinquent medical debts listed in the SOR, although two 
debts were duplicates. He paid the amounts owed in Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.p 
(duplicates) in the amount of $85, Subparagraph 1.h for $85, Subparagraph 1.q for $58, 
Subparagraph 1.t for $162, Subparagraph 1.u for $30, and Subparagraph 1.v for $35. 
The total of these payments is $455 out of $5,104 owed on the medical debts. (Exhibits 
2-5, 7, C to E)  
 
 Applicant submitted two character letters from Army officers he knows from 
coaching youth sports and high school. These two officers consider Applicant 
trustworthy and honest. (Exhibits A, B)   
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
5 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated $5,104 in delinquent debt from 2007 to the present time 
that remains unpaid for medical expenses. Applicant has one delinquent debt listed in 
the SOR concerning his past due payments on his mortgage totaling $23,283. He had 
not repaid these monies or arranged mechanisms to resolve them at the time of the 
hearing.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Two conditions may be applicable:   
 
 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
 beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
 or separation), and the individual acted  responsibly under the 
 circumstances; and 
 
 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to the expenses and time he spent 
battling his kidney disease. That serious illness resulted in a kidney transplant one year 
ago in 2012. That medical condition was beyond Applicant’s control. At the same time 
or earlier his wife stopped earning an income as a realtor and took jobs that paid her 
75% less than she earned selling real estate. The second part of the mitigating 
condition requires Applicant to have acted responsibly under the circumstances. His 
medical debts are such low amounts individually that they must be the medical 
insurance co-pays to which he did not attend immediately when billed. His mortgage 
payments became delinquent during his illness. His serious kidney ailment was the 
prime cause of his financial problems because of the travel and medical expenses 
involved. Three fundraisers were held by family and friends to obtain money for 
Applicant to use for his ordinary expenses during the time of his illness. His plan to 
borrow from his retirement account sufficient money to repay the medical debts shows 
that with his improved health he is now acting responsibly. Further, he responsibly 
renegotiated his delinquent mortgage. AG ¶ 20 (b) applies. 
  
 
6 
 
 
Applicant paid six delinquent medical debts totaling $455 of the $5,104 
unresolved financial obligations, leaving him with $4,649 remaining to pay. He also did 
renegotiate his mortgage payments to lower them by $300 monthly. In other words, he 
has resolved or made payment arrangements to resolve 80% of his debts. He plans to 
borrow $6,000 from his Section 401(k) account to repay the remaining medical 
accounts. His son will graduate from a private high school in May 2013 providing 
Applicant an additional $500 with which to resolve his delinquent accounts. AG ¶ 20 (d) 
applies because of Applicant’s good-faith efforts to repay some of his delinquent debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits. Under AG ¶ 2(c), 
the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant spent several years 
dealing with a life-threatening kidney disease. He was tired each day as his body 
reacted to the declining function of his kidney. During that time his wife had to take 
lesser paying jobs than she had previously as a realtor. Meanwhile, with his medical 
and travel expenses to the Mayo Clinic increasing, his ordinary monthly expenses 
remained the same. Applicant made decisions regarding payments of all debts that 
resulted in the 24 delinquent debts listed in the SOR. Now Applicant has renegotiated 
his mortgage and is bringing it current. He paid six of the 23 medical debts and can 
repay all of them with the money he borrows from his retirement account. The amount 
remaining to be paid is less than $4,700. His kidney problem is resolved and Applicant 
can now devote his energies to his work, family, and repaying his delinquent debts, as 
he declared he was interested in doing.  
 
Applicant resolved his mortgage problems by negotiating a new agreement with 
his mortgage lender. That problem also resulted from his kidney problem and the 
 
7 
 
 
expense involved in that procedure, including travel to the Mayo Clinic and other 
financial obligations. Now that the kidney problem is resolved, the mortgage deficiency 
is also. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.x:   For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
