KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence is not sufficient to
demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 12-00058.a1
DATE: 04/09/2013
DATE: April 9, 2013
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-00058
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 5, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On January 23, 2013, after the close of the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Joan Caton Anthony denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
2
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
The Judge found: Applicant is 59 years old.  He was born and raised in the People’s Republic
of China (China).  In the mid-1980s, he immigrated to the United States.  He became a naturalized
U.S. citizen in the late 1990s.  Applicant has been married three times.  The first two wives were
citizens of China.  He and his first wife divorced in China.  Applicant’s second wife remained in
China. They divorced in the late 1990s.  Applicant married his third wife in 2001.  She was also born
in China. The couple has a daughter who was born in the United States and is a U .S. citizen.  
Applicant’s father is deceased.  Applicant’s mother is a citizen and resident of China.  She
is suffering from poor health, including dementia.  Twice in the last decade, Applicant traveled to
China to visit his mother when her failing health required hospitalization.  Before his mother began
to suffer from dementia, he spoke with her on the telephone about three times a year.  Since his last
visit, Applicant has had little contact with his mother.  Applicant surmises that his mother receives
a private pension from the hospital that employed her.
Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of China.  Applicant believes his brother works
as a salesman for companies in China.  When Applicant’s mother was in better health, Applicant
spoke with his brother about three times a year.  Sometimes his brother calls Applicant to inform
him of their mother’s health condition.  Applicant’s last telephone contact with his brother was in
early 2012.  Applicant’s brother has not served in the Chinese military. 
Applicant’s sister is a citizen and resident of China.  She worked in a technical profession.
Applicant believes his sister and her husband may have worked for an entity of the Chinese
government.  Applicant’s sister has immigrated to the United States with her husband and son.
Applicant’s sister is a citizen of China and now has legal resident status in the United States.  She
continues to hold a Chinese passport, and she is working as a nanny for a Chinese family.  Before
she moved to the United States, Applicant spoke on the telephone with his sister about three times
a year.  
Applicant does not own any property in China.  He owns a home in the United States with
a value of $850,000.  He feels that his loyalties are to the United States and not China.
Between 1994 and 2000, Applicant traveled to China five times. China has an authoritarian,
Communist government and powerful military forces.  It has significant resources and a rapidly
expanding economy.  China aggressively competes with the United States in many areas.  China’s
competitive relationship with the United States exacerbates the risk posed by Applicant’s
connections to family members living in China.  China has a history of human rights problems,
including suppression of political dissent, arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, torture,
and mistreatment of prisoners.  The Chinese government also monitors communications devices.
3
China actively collects military, economic, and proprietary industrial information about the United
States.  China’s active intelligence-gathering programs focus on sensitive and protected U.S.
technologies.  Chinese intelligence services and private companies frequently try to target Chinese
citizens or individuals with family ties to China who can use their insider access to corporate
networks to steal secrets using removable media devices or e-mail.  Attempts to collect U.S.
technological and economic information will continue at a high level and will represent a growing
and persistent threat to U.S. economic interests.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded: Applicant’s sister and her family do not live with Applicant and his
family, and her presence in the United States diminishes but does not extinguish the possibility of
foreign exploitation or coercion.  However, Applicant’s relationship with his mother and his brother
in China is sufficient to create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure or coercion.  These relationships with residents and citizens of China create a potential
conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and
his desire to help family members who are in China.  The relationship of China with the United
States places a significant, but not insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to
demonstrate that his contacts with his family members living in China do not pose a heightened risk
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  While there is no evidence
that intelligence operatives from China seek or have sought classified or economic information from
or through Applicant and his family members living in China, it is not possible to rule out such a
possibility in the future.  
Although his connections to his mother and brother in China are infrequent, Applicant is not
able to fully meet his burden of showing there is little likelihood that his relationships with relatives
who are Chinese citizens could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation because of China’s
aggressive pursuit of classified and sensitive U.S. information.  Applicant has strong family
connections to the United States.  Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed
against the potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family members who
live in China.  China’s conduct makes it more likely that it would attempt to coerce Applicant
through his family living in China, if it determined it was advantageous to do so.  Applicant has
failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the Foreign Influence adjudicative guideline.
Discussion
Applicant asserts that he does not have close ties with his brother and mother, as evidenced
by his contacting them once, twice, or three times a year, or not at all.  He states that his brother and
mother do not know what he is doing, and he has not been approached by any Chinese or foreign
agents.  He asserts that he would report any such contacts immediately.  He emphasizes that he has
a long and solid record as a government contractor.
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
4
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Applicant’s appeal brief essentially argues for an alternate interpretation of the record evidence.  A
review of the Judge’s decision reveals that the Judge listed the potentially applicable mitigating
conditions and then discussed several components of those factors in her analysis in some detail.
After a review of the evidence and the Judge’s decision, the Board concludes that the Judge’s
findings and conclusions are reasonably supported by the record.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields             
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
5
Member, Appeal Board
