 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 12-04926 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark S. Zaid, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the concerns arising from his connections to India. He has 
continuously resided in the United States for over 15 years, and became a U.S. citizen 
in 2004. He completed his doctorate degree, started a family, and worked his entire 
adult life in the United States. He has close friends, family, and other substantial ties to 
the United States. Applicant established that he will resolve any potential conflict of 
interest arising from his ties to India in favor of the United States. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 24, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), Guideline C 
(Foreign Preference), and Guideline L (Outside Activities). Applicant timely answered 
the SOR and requested a hearing (Answer). Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was ready to proceed with a hearing on February 4, 2013. I was assigned 
Applicant’s case on February 11, 2013 and, after coordinating with the parties, 
scheduled the hearing for March 21, 2013. 
 
2 
 
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel withdrew the Guideline C and L allegations 
based on evidence that Applicant’s counsel provided outside the record, which 
mitigated the security concerns associated with said allegations. Based on said 
withdrawal, the Guideline C and L allegations will not be further discussed. Department 
Counsel then proceeded to offer Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 and 2 in support of the 
Government’s case for disqualification under Guideline B. Both exhibits were admitted 
into evidence without objection. Department Counsel also submitted Hearing Exhibit 
(Hx.) I, a proposed summary of facts regarding India. The official, unclassified source 
documents Department Counsel relied on in preparing HE I were marked as exhibits for 
administrative notice (An.) I – XIV, and I have considered them in assessing the security 
concerns at issue. Applicant appeared at the hearing with counsel, called three 
witnesses, and testified. He also offered Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A – B and D – J, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. (Ax. C was withdrawn by 
Applicant’s counsel and not offered.) DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
March 28, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old and was born in India. He came to the United States in 
1995 to pursue his doctorate degree. While going to school, Applicant met his future 
wife, who was born and raised in the United States. They married in 1999. Applicant 
earned his PhD in 2002, receiving high honors for his dissertation. Applicant did not 
return to India after receiving his PhD, and decided to settle in the United States. He 
and his wife have one child, who was born in the United States and is now 10 years old. 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2004 and lost his Indian citizenship upon taking the 
U.S. oath of allegiance. Since becoming a U.S. citizen, he has only used his U.S. 
passport on his foreign travel, including to India. He has not applied for and does not 
intend to apply for an Overseas Citizens of India (OCI) card.1  
 
 Applicant has principally worked in U.S. academia since attaining his PhD in 
2002. During his summer breaks from 2004 through 2006, he worked as a research 
fellow for the U.S. military and another U.S. Government agency. He authored or co-
authored several publications as a result of his work for the U.S. Government, and prior 
to publication made certain to submit his papers for review by the proper U.S. 
authorities.2 A former research assistant writes that Applicant “made me understand 
why it was so important from a preventive security standpoint to have the papers 
screened through the pre-publication review process.”3 Applicant’s current site 
manager, who is a retired U.S. military officer and has held a security clearance for 30 
years, writes that Applicant “appears to be cognizant about security issues and 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 40-42, 56-58, 63-69; Gx. 1 - 2; Ax. A; An. XIII at 11 (An OCI card is similar to a U.S. green 
card, and allows its holder unlimited travel to India and other benefits short of Indian citizenship).  
 
2 Tr. at 63-64, 90-94; Gx. 1 - 2; Ax. A. 
 
3 Ax. G. 
 
 
3 
 
 
scrupulous about getting work cleared through the screening process at [X 
installation].”4 
 
In late 2010, Applicant was not offered tenure at the prestigious U.S. school he 
had been teaching at since 2005 and decided to look for other employment. After a 
year-long job search, Applicant secured employment with a research lab that does work 
for the U.S. military. He has been working as a research scientist for the U.S. military 
since 2012, and recently received a favorable job evaluation recommending his 
continued employment.5 A fellow research scientist, who has been employed by the 
U.S. military for over 15 years and has co-authored numerous publications with 
Applicant, writes that the publications they co-authored have directly contributed to the 
efforts of the U.S. military.6 Several co-workers, supervisors, and the facility security 
manager, who are aware of Applicant’s connections to India and have worked with him 
over the past year, strongly recommend him for a security clearance.7 Applicant’s 
former co-worker and friend, who has known Applicant for over eight years, testified that 
after Applicant decided to leave his old teaching post he only wanted jobs located in the 
United States, because “this is where he wanted to raise his family.”8 He also vouched 
for Applicant’s competence, trustworthiness, and reliability.9 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a doctor and owns her own medical practice in the United 
States. Her practice generates between $125,000 and $150,000 in income on a yearly 
basis. She described Applicant as a genuine person, who votes in every election, is law 
abiding, and does all the right things. She testified that Applicant is deeply immersed 
and fully assimilated in U.S. culture and society. She described their household as a 
typical mid-western American household. Their daughter goes to school in the United 
States and is involved in the Girl Scouts.10 Their neighbor testified that she has had 
frequent interaction with Applicant over the past six years, as their daughters have been 
best friends since their time in daycare. She opined that based on her interaction with 
Applicant, he is a trustworthy, good person, who is loyal to the United States.11 
 
                                                          
4 Ax. J. See also Ax. I (senior research scientist, who is a retired U.S. military officer and held a 
clearance for over 35 years, writes that Applicant “always followed the proper procedures for submitting 
manuscripts for review for public clearance.”) 
 
5 Ax. B.  
 
6 Ax. H. 
 
7 Ax. D – F, H – J. 
 
8 Tr. at 37. 
 
9 Tr. at 31-37. 
 
10 Ax. D – F, H – J. 
 
11 Tr. at 52-55. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s parents and his sister are citizens and residents of India. His father 
was a teacher, while his mother never worked outside the home. His father is now 
retired and they support themselves from his pension. Applicant has provided some 
financial support over the years to his parents, primarily when his mother needed an 
operation a few years ago and to cover the cost of their past travel to the United States. 
His sister and her husband are teachers. Applicant speaks with his parents and sister 
on a somewhat frequent basis, and has visited them when he has traveled to India in 
the past. None of Applicant’s family members in India have any connection to the Indian 
government or military. Applicant and his wife testified about the rift between Applicant 
and his family in India due to his decision to marry an American and to raise their child 
as an American. Applicant’s parents did not come to his wedding. Due to this familial rift 
and to protect his young daughter from undue familial pressure to conform to Indian 
customs, speech, and clothing, he has not traveled to India since 2008 and does not 
plan to travel back to India until his daughter is older.12 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.b) 
 
 Applicant’s cousin, who is originally from India and is a U.S. citizen, was listed in 
the SOR as a potential foreign influence concern. Applicant has not seen his cousin in 
about 20 years and only reconnected with him in 2011 via Facebook. Applicant has not 
communicated with his cousin since deleting his Facebook account and does not have 
his cousin’s contact information.13 (SOR 1.c)  
 
Applicant was offered a teaching position at a university in India, but turned it 
down.14 He voluntarily disclosed his foreign family members, offer of employment from a 
university in India, and other inconsequential ties to India on his application for a 
security clearance. He also fully discussed these foreign connections during the ensuing 
background interview.15 His family in India is not aware of the work he does for the U.S. 
Government or that he is being considered for a security clearance.16 
 
 Applicant and his wife purchased their home in the United States in 2005. Aside 
from the value of his wife’s medical practice, Applicant estimated that their net worth in 
the United States is approximately $300,000 to $350,000. He does not have any 
investments or property in India or any foreign country.17  
                                                          
12 Tr. at 44-52, 58-60, 67-71, 74-79, 81-87. 
 
13 Tr. at 72-74. 
 
14 Tr. at 72-74. See also, Ax. E (security manager writes that Applicant informed him of this 
potential job offer and that it was “common for academics to teach at foreign universities for a year or two, 
so I saw nothing unusual . . .”) 
 
15 Gx. 1 – 2; Tr. at 83-84. 
 
16 Tr. at 79-81. 
 
17 Tr. at 81-84; Gx. 1. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Concerning Applicant’s country of birth,18 India is a multiparty, federal, 
parliamentary democracy with a population of approximately 1.2 billion. Its political 
history, since gaining independence from Great Britain in 1947, has included several 
armed conflicts with Pakistan, assassinations of two prime ministers, sporadic 
outbreaks of religious riots, and violent attacks by several separatist and terrorist 
groups. There is a continuing threat from terrorism throughout the country, including 
attacks on targets where U.S. citizens or Westerners are known to congregate or visit. 
Despite the growth of a large urban middle-class, India remains a largely rural and 
agriculture-based society, and is home to some 500-600 million people living in poverty. 
U.S.-Indian relations are grounded on the two countries shared values of 
democracy, pluralism, and rule of law. Furthermore, the United States is one of India’s 
largest trading and investment partners. The two countries have a common interest in 
the free flow of commerce and resources, including through the vital sea lanes of the 
Indian Ocean. Both countries also share a common interest in fighting terrorism and in 
creating a strategically-stable Asia. Recognizing India’s key strategic position, the 
United States has sought to strengthen its relationship with India. The countries are 
collaborating in a number of areas, to include energy, climate change, trade, education, 
and counterterrorism.  
Despite the two countries strategic alliance, differences exist. The United States 
remains concerned about India’s nuclear weapons programs, pace of economic 
reforms, protection of intellectual property rights, and trade in dual-use technology. 
Historically, India has been one of several countries that engaged in economic 
intelligence collection and industrial espionage targeting the United States. Between 
2004 and 2008, several individuals and companies were convicted or subjected to 
regulatory fines for their roles in illegal exporting or attempting to illegaly export 
restricted technology to India.  
The U.S. State Department notes a number of significant human rights problems 
in India, notably abuses committed by police and security forces. Another significant 
problem is corruption, which remains at significant levels throughout the Indian 
government and contributes to widespread impunity at all levels of government.  
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
                                                          
18 The facts about India are taken from An. I – XIV.  
 
6 
 
 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence concern is set forth at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
7 
 
 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
An individual’s familial ties to a foreign country can raise the foreign influence 
concern. However, there is no per se rule against applicants for a security clearance 
who have familial ties to a foreign country. Instead, in addressing the foreign influence 
concern, an administrative judge must consider the foreign government involved; the 
intelligence gathering history of that government; the country’s human rights record; and 
the presence of terrorist activity in that country.19  
 
 Applicant’s ties to his family members in India raise the foreign influence 
concern. These foreign connections, in light of the threat of terrorism in India and history 
of unauthorized U.S. technology transfers to India, establish the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 7:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;20 and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant’s foreign connections and finding of heightened risk does not end the 
analysis, because AG ¶ 8 lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are relevant to the case at hand: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
                                                          
19 See ISCR Case No. 11-04980 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2012).  
 
20 See ISCR Case No. 09-08512 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (judge’s finding that “heightened 
risk” existed was sustained on appeal, because Applicant and his wife had close familial ties to India and 
the risk of terrorism in India).  
 
8 
 
 
 AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply. Applicant has been in this country for more than 15 
years, and he has been a U.S. citizen since 2004. He decided to settle and make his life 
in the United States. He started a family in the United States, and his entire professional 
career has been in the United States. Beyond his immediate family members, Applicant 
has several close friends in the United States. Despite the familial strain that exists with 
his family in India, Applicant still deeply cares for his family in India, which could be 
used to unduly influence him. However, Applicant’s life and future are clearly in the 
United States. Furthermore, India is a democracy and strategic partner of the United 
States. Although technology has been illegally exported to India, the documents 
provided for administrative notice do not show that coercion was utilized. Accordingly, I 
find that it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between 
the interests of the Indian government or his family members in India and the interests 
of the United States. More importantly, I further find that there is no conflict of interest, 
because Applicant established through his deep ties to the United States that he can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
 
 As for Applicant’s cousin, he does not raise a foreign influence concern, as he is 
a U.S. citizen, residing and working in the United States. Furthermore, Applicant and his 
cousin are quite distant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).21 I incorporate my comments under Guideline B and 
note some additional whole-person factors. Although this is Applicant’s first application 
for a security clearance, he has in the past followed U.S. security protocols regarding 
pre-publication review. His current security manager writes that Applicant is 
conscientious about security and continues to scrupulously honor his obligation to 
submit his work for pre-publication review. Security clearance adjudications entail a 
certain degree of predictive judgment, where an applicant’s past history is the best 
indicator of future conduct. Applicant established that he has a history of following U.S. 
Government regulations for the protection of potentially sensitive information and there 
is no reason to doubt his ability to do so going forward.  
 
 Additionally, Applicant’s personal character and integrity, which are vital matters 
to be considered in assessing an individual’s suitability for a security clearance, are 
unassailable. Applicant has been candid about his foreign connections from the start of 
his background investigation. Furthermore, I had an opportunity to observe him and his 
                                                          
21 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of 
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) 
the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; 
(5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 
 
wife’s demeanors while they testified. I found them forthcoming with details regarding 
their family dynamic and wholly credible when they testified about their deep 
connections to the United States. These favorable whole-person factors, in conjunction 
with the mitigating conditions noted above, mitigate the foreign influence concerns. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:         For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):      WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:          Withdrawn 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline L (Outside Activities):       WITHDRAWN 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:          Withdrawn 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
