1
 
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-09359
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
In a Statement of Reasons (SOR) dated November 14, 2012, the Department of
Defense (DOD) enumerated security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations)and Guideline B (Foreign Influence) regarding Applicant’s finances and
family living abroad. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by
the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
On December 8, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR. He admitted eight
allegations and denied one allegation under Guideline F, admitted half of the four
allegations raised under Guideline B, and requested a decision without a hearing. On
February 28, 2013, Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM),
which included 15 attached items. Applicant timely responded in a letter dated March
19, 2013. The case was assigned to me on April 4, 2013. Based on a review of the
case file, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden regarding the security concerns
raised in the SOR. Security clearance is denied.
 The sum noted includes the past-due balances for the accounts set forth in the SOR only; it does not      1
include the total balance owed on the accounts. In total sum, the amount is closer to $15,535.
 Most of the accounts at issue in the SOR have the same names as the accounts noted by Applicant, and      2
the connection is apparent. The nexus between those accounts noted at SOR 1.d, 1.e, and 1.h and those
mentioned in Applicant’s letter are less easily connected.
 Ex. 6 (Credit report).      3
 The Government conceded that the allegation was meant to to reference Applicant’s sister’s husbands,      4
not Applicant’s spouse. In the absence of objection by Applicant, the 1.c. allegation is amended to reference
Applicant’s brothers-in-law.  See FORM at 11.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 47-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor. He was
granted political asylum to enter the United States in 2001 after receiving death threats
from the Taliban because of his promotion of human rights and his relation to a former
member of the government. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008. For many
years he worked as a taxicab driver, before he considered a career as a linguist.
Applicant is very patriotic and highly supportive of the United States. He has worked
with the U.S. military as a specialist on Afghanistan since early 2012. Applicant is single
and has no children. He completed a security clearance application (SCA) on April 12,
2012. An SOR was issued in response to certain facts in the SCA that raised security
concerns. Those facts concerned several delinquent debts and foreign contacts.
The Government’s evidence indicates that Applicant has eight delinquent debts,
amounting to at least $8,000, and alleges that he continues “to gamble and incur
gambling debt, although [he does] not have the funds to pay off [his] existing credit
debts.”   In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts at issue and included1
comments such as “I have a plan to pay off the balance” and “I will pay very soon.” In
his handwritten, March 19, 2013, response to the FORM, Applicant listed eight
accounts, wrote that the accounts were paid on March 18, 2013, and indicated contact
information with the various account holders (i.e. name and phone number of a
merchant representative).  No substantiating evidence of payment was submitted.2
Applicant explained that he got behind on his bills because he has been busy with his
work. Some of the debts at issue have been delinquent since the 2008-2011 time
period.   He has a net monthly remainder of about $175. In his SOR response to the3
allegation stating he continues to gamble and incur gambling debt,” Applicant wrote
only “I deny. No gambling.” 
In his April 2012 SCA, Applicant certified that he has never been married and
that he does not reside with a cohabitant. In denying an allegation that “his wife’s
siblings are citizens and residents of Afghanistan,” Applicant wrote in his December
2012 response to the SOR that he denied the allegation, noting that he is single. (SOR
allegation 2.c).4
 FORM, Item 15.      5
3
Applicant denied that he has a brother who is a citizen and resident of
Afghanistan (SOR allegation 2.a). He explained that he has brothers who were born in
Afghanistan, as reflected in the SCA. Today, however, three of his four brothers are
citizens of Germany, while the fourth is a citizen in Canada. There is scant additional
information about these siblings.
Applicant has two sisters who are residents and citizens of Afghanistan. They
are housewives who are both supportive of Coalition forces presently in that country.
They find the presence has made their daily lives safer. Their neighborhood is
described as safe and commercial, with most locals in work related to the Afghan
government or the Coalition force. Both sisters are educated and grateful for their
current freedoms. Their husbands are engineers with master’s degrees who are “free
minded and Democrat people.” They hope to someday send their children to the United
States. Applicant speaks with his sisters by telephone weekly, and with his brothers-in-
law once or twice a month. Applicant provides his sisters with about $150 a month.
There is scant additional information about these relations, e.g., there is no clear
information as to the extent of their relationship with Applicant or their contact.
The Government requested I take administrative notice of certain facts regarding
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.  Applicant did not object to this request. On May 2,5
2012, the United States and Afghanistan signed an agreement constituting a ten-year
partnership that demonstrates the United States’ enduring commitment to strengthen
Afghanistan’s sovereignty, stability, and prosperity as it continues to cooperate to defeat
al-Quaida and its affiliates. That partnership is consistent with the United States’
commitment to Afghanistan, past and present. Despite this agreement and the current
coalition forces present in that country, helping to maintain security and stability,
violence continues in almost all parts of the country. Significant human rights violations
continue in that country. While the Taliban-led insurgency in Afghanistan has lost
ground in some areas, it remains resilient and capable of challenging U.S. and
international goals. The Department of State warns U.S. citizens against travel to
Afghanistan, noring that the security threat remains critical.  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. The AG lists potentially disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under
AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-
person concept. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      6
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 See also EO 12968, § 3.1(b)  and EO 10865 § 7.      8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      9
 Id.      10
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. It is an applicant’s responsibility to
present  “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is6
something less than a preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion
is on the applicant.  7
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance8
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt9
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  A security clearance denial does not10
necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is merely an indication that the
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
Under Guideline F, failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
 AG ¶ 18.      11
5
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.11
The burden in these proceedings is placed squarely on an applicant. Here, Applicant
admitted responsibility for a sum of at least $8,000 in delinquent debt. That overall debt
includes individual account obligations dating back several years. Consequently,
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply.
With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to mitigate security concerns. 
Little is known about the debts at issue. For example, there is no evidence
explaining how or why these debts were accrued – whether from gambling, medical
emergencies, or any other specific reason – or the reasons they became delinquent.
Moreover, while Applicant wrote that he paid off all of his debts on the day before his
response to the FORM, he provided no documentary evidence substantiating that
claim. Appellant also provided no evidence showing he received financial counseling
that has resulted in progress on his debts. While there is no reason to question his
veracity with regard to his handwritten notes regarding his debts, the burden is on an
applicant to provide evidence in mitigation; the burden is not on this process to initiate
contact with an applicant’s creditors and confirm debt status directly. Without
corroborating evidence that these debts have been paid, Applicant’s affirmations must
be viewed as unsubstantiated. In light of the scant evidence provided, none of the
mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 20 apply.  
Guideline B – Foreign Influence
The concern under Guideline B is that foreign contacts and interests may be a
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest. Consideration should be given to the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to,
such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target U.S. citizens to
obtain protected information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. Conditions
pertaining to this adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate security concerns, are discussed in
the conclusions below. 
Applicant’s relatives of issue are his sisters and brothers-in-law, who are citizens
and residents of Afghanistan, and his brothers. The presence of al-Quaida and the
Taliban in Afghanistan warrant heightened scrutiny in the examination of those family
members residing in that country. Under these facts, Foreign Influence Disqualifying
Conditions AG ¶ 7(a) (contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if
that contact creates a heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
6
pressure, or coercion) and AG ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group,
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information) apply.
With disqualifying conditions thus raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate
security concerns
In declining an administrative hearing and relying on the administrative record,
Applicant’s case rests on limited facts. Applicant provided information about his sisters’
neighborhoods, the professions of his siblings, and the frequency of their telephonic
conversation, but gave scant information as to how close he is to his sisters and in-
laws. Meanwhile, Applicant provided few facts about himself. Consequently, there are
insufficient facts available to properly analyze whether Foreign Influence Mitigating
Conditions such as AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group,
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.) or AG ¶ 8(b) (there is no
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the there is no conflict
of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty to or obligation  individual
has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest). Further, while¶ 8(c) (contact or communication with foreign citizens is so
casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation) may seem applicable, Applicant’s information only shows that
his communication with his siblings and in-laws is infrequent. Infrequent, however, does
not necessarily mean casual. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden of persuasion is on the
applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
In choosing a decision without a hearing, however, there are scant facts of record. It is
noted that Applicant is in his 40s. He received immunity to enter the United States
because of steadfast hopes for a freer Afghanistan, hopes shared by the United States.
Once in the United States, he worked as a taxi driver before sharing his unique cultural
and linguistic expertise with the defense industry.
7
There is nothing to suggest Applicant is not loyal to the United States, nor is
there anything intimating he or his family are necessarily at risk at this moment. In
foregoing a live hearing, however, Applicant’s burden must be judged solely on his
submissions. Here, those submissions were deficient. Consequently, security concerns
remain under both guidelines. In so concluding, I further note that the denial of a
security clearance does not indicate that an applicant is disloyal or of poor character. It
merely means that he failed to provide information sufficient to mitigate the security
concerns raised. Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:  Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.c-2.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
