1 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-01520 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The seven charged-off or 
collection accounts alleged in the Statement of Reasons (SOR), totaling more than 
$17,000, have not been resolved. The financial considerations and personal conduct 
security concerns were not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on November 7, 
2012, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance. On December 3, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
2 
 
a hearing. On February 5, 2013, I was assigned the case and on the same day, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the 
hearing convened on February 28, 2013. I admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 
through 4, without objection. Applicant testified at the hearing. On March 12, 2013, 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied owing unpaid traffic violations (SOR 
1.d), denied owing federal income tax for 2009 and 2010, (SOR 1.e and 1.f) and denied 
the personal conduct security concerns regarding outstanding warrants for his arrest 
due to unresolved traffic violations (SOR 2.a). He admitted the remaining factual 
allegations in the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review 
of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old who has worked for a defense contractor mailing 
equipment to the military. He was employed with the contractor for four years before 
being laid off eight months ago. (Tr. 17, 19) When employed, he made $1,300 every two 
weeks. (Tr. 23) He currently receives $500 every two weeks in unemployment 
compensation. (Tr. 48) From June 2008 through March 2009, Applicant was 
unemployed and received unemployment compensation. (Ex. 2) Applicant called no 
witnesses other than himself, and produced no work or character references.  
 
 Applicant is very anxious to get his clearance restored. He made numerous 
statements that he “just wanted to go back to work.” (Tr. 14) He has unpaid taxes and 
unpaid traffic tickets. He currently supports three children, ages 8, 10, and 17, on his 
monthly unemployment. (Tr. 15) His wife is a part-time home health care provider. (Tr. 
16)  
 
 In May 2009, Applicant was stopped for a traffic infraction during his lunch break. 
He was arrested on a warrant for numerous unpaid traffic tickets. (Ex. 2) The tickets 
were for speeding, driving without proper insurance, driving on the shoulder of the road, 
and not having a valid driver’s license. Not having funds to pay the tickets, he chose to 
simply ignore them. (Ex. 2) Following his arrest, he spent four days in jail. He was 
terminated from his employment for failing to return from lunch. He has not received any 
new traffic citations since his 2009 arrest. (Tr. 39) During his December 2011 personal 
subject interview, he stated he intended to pay his fines in January 2012. (Ex. 2)  
 
 Applicant asserted that when he was employed, he was paying $100 monthly on 
his tickets. (Tr. 20) He provided no documentation supporting his claim of payment. He 
also asserted the outstanding arrest warrants should have been dismissed. (Tr. 21) 
Again he provided no documents to support this assertion. He had been working with an 
attorney to address his outstanding tickets. He believes he owes between $1,500 and 
$1,800 on the tickets. (Tr. 52) He claims he is required to pay $25 per month on this 
obligation and has made his two most recent payments. (Tr. 35) These two payments 
are the only ones he has made since being laid off. (Tr. 37) After one year, the monthly 
3 
 
amount will rise to $75. (Tr. 35) Additionally, he claimed he was paying a company $120 
monthly for three or four months to help him correct his credit. (Tr. 23) 
 
 During his December 2011 subject interview, Applicant stated he owed 
approximately $5,000 in federal income tax for tax years 2009 and 2010. (Ex. 2) He said 
he had failed to have the proper amount of tax withheld from his pay. He failed to file his 
returns because his mother, sister, and brother-in-law were involved in a vehicle 
accident when their car was struck by a truck. (Tr. 24) He received a letter from the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) stating he owed taxes, at which time he increased the 
amount of withholding on his pay. He has not contacted the IRS concerning what he 
owes. During his December 2011 interview, he state he hoped the filing of his current 
tax return would pay any delinquency owed. (Ex. 2) However, his 2011 return did not 
pay his past due tax obligation and he owed additional tax for tax year 2011. (Ex. 2)  
 
 Applicant’s tax delinquencies are listed at SOR 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g. His wages for 
2009 were $22,145 and he owed $1,385 taxes for the year. He had $305 withheld and 
owed $680 in additional tax. (Ex. 2) His wages for 2010 were $36,497 and he owed 
$3,268 taxes for the year. He had $415 withheld and owed additional taxes of $3,650. 
For 2011, his wages were $39,201 and he owed $2,751 taxes for the year. He had 
$1,283 withheld and owed additional taxes of $4,034. (Ex. 2) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant asserted he had the tax forms at his home and would 
be filing them shortly. (Tr. 24) Any refund he might be entitled to will be intercepted and 
used to address his child support obligation. (Tr. 24) He pays $300 monthly child 
support for one child age 13. (Tr. 25) He asserted, but provided no documentation, that 
he had made two payments of $25 each for a total of $50 to the IRS. (Tr. 43, 47)  
 
 Applicant suffers from diabetes and has a network health card entitling him to 
health services. The network strives to provide quality goods and services at a low 
equitable cost to individuals and the community. He owes more than $6,700 on two 
delinquent medical bills (SOR 1.a and 1.b). At the hearing, he asserted he was going to 
pay off his past-due electric bill in the amount of $1,272 (SOR 1.c). (Tr. 50)  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
4 
 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
5 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. He owes approximately $6,800 on 
two medical collection accounts, $3,700 for unpaid traffic fines and an electric utility bill, 
and owes approximately $6,700 in tax for tax years 2009, 2010, and 2011. Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His 
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He was unemployed for the past eight 
months receiving $500 every two weeks in unemployment compensation on which he is 
raising three children. Before being laid off, he was a full-time employee. His salary for 
2009 was $22,145, for 2010 $36,497, and $39,201 for 2011. Even when he was making 
this amount of money, his payment on his past-due obligations was minimal. He was 
making some payment on his traffic tickets and no payment on his other obligations. 
From June 2008 through March 2009, Applicant was unemployed and received 
unemployment compensation. 
 
  Applicant has received no credit or financial counseling. He has not 
demonstrated that his financial problems are under control, or that he has a plan to 
bring them under control. He has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts. I 
conclude Guideline F against Applicant.  
 
Applicant asserted that when he was employed, he was paying $100 monthly on 
his traffic tickets. The remaining balance on the tickets is between $1,500 and $1,800. 
He has made two $25 monthly payments on the tickets since being laid off. Two 
payments is a start, but not enough time has passed to give assurance he will be able 
to continue making his payments. Two payments is not a meaningful track record. 
 
The concept of “meaningful track record” includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required to establish 
that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is for him 
to demonstrate he has established a plan to resolve his delinquent debt and has taken 
significant action to implement that plan. I must reasonably consider the entirety of 
Applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that plan 
is credible and realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all 
6 
 
outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for payment 
on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. In 
this case, Applicant plans on paying $25 monthly on his traffic fines. He has made no 
arrangement concerning his other collection accounts.  
 
Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to 
circumstances outside his control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has 
since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties. ISCR 
Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. January 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. November 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 
25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. December 1, 1999). Applicant was 
unemployed nine months before obtaining his current job in 2009. While employed, he 
made minimal payment on his past-due obligations.  
 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 15 articulates the security concerns relating to 
personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions under AG ¶ 16 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
7 
 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
. . . 
 
 (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations 
 
Applicant had numerous arrest warrants for failing to pay his fines for traffic 
violations. In 2009, he was arrested due to his outstanding warrants and spent four days 
in jail. Even with jail time, he still has unresolved tickets. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) apply to 
his conduct because it demonstrated questionable judgment and an unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations.  None of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is very anxious to get his clearance 
restored. He made numerous statements that he “just wanted to go back to work.” For 
the past eight months he has supported himself, his wife, and three children on his 
monthly unemployment compensation. He has not documented any payments on his 
SOR debts. 
 
The only evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct is his claim to have 
made two $25 payments on his traffic fines and tax debts during the past eight months. 
He has failed to document any payments on his delinquent accounts. His long-standing 
failure to repay his creditors, at least in reasonable amounts, or to arrange payment 
plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
8 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid, but whether 
his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
(See AG & 2(a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the personal conduct and financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
