 
1 
 
 
                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
       
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-06729 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
  
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James Y. Boland, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony in this case, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
L, Outside Activities, and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. Clearance is granted. 
 
                                                   Statement of the Case 
  
On October 3, 2011, Applicant signed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 17, 2012, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline L, Outside Activities, and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. 
DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On October 16, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR, provided additional 
information, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on January 23, 
2013. I convened a hearing on February 25, 2013, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant.   
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced five exhibits. I marked the 
exhibits as (Ex.) 1 through Ex. 5 and entered them in the record without objection. The 
Government also offered for administrative notice a summary memorandum containing 
facts about India which were drawn from 14 official U.S. Government documents. The 
Government provided, for the record, the source documents from which the facts in the 
summary memorandum were derived. I marked the Government’s summary 
memorandum and accompanying source documents about India as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) 1. Applicant did not object to my taking notice of the facts in the summary 
memorandum or in the source documents. 
 
Applicant testified and called no witnesses. At the hearing, he introduced two 
exhibits, which were identified as Ex. A-1 and Ex. A-2. Applicant’s exhibits were entered 
in the record without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open 
until the close of business on March 11, 2013, so that Applicant could, if he wished, 
provide additional information for the record. Applicant timely filed a motion to 
supplement the record and eleven post-hearing evidentiary exhibits. The Government 
filed a response to Applicant’s motion and post-hearing submissions and did not object 
to them. I marked Applicant’s motion to supplement the record as HE 2. I marked the 
Government’s response as HE 3. I marked Applicant’s post-hearing submissions as 
follows: Exs. B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, C, C-1, D, D-1, D-2, E, and E-1. All were entered in the 
record. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on March 5, 2013. 
                                                    
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains one allegation under Guideline L, Outside Activities (SOR 
¶1.a.), and two allegations under Guideline B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.). 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegation under Guideline L, but he 
denied that a conflict of interest or an increased risk of unauthorized disclosure had 
been created. He admitted both Guideline B allegations, with explanation. Applicant’s 
admissions are admitted as findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including Applicant’s testimony, 
all exhibits, all relevant policies, and the applicable adjudicative guidelines, I make the 
following additional findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 62 years old, married, and the father of one adult child. He was born 
and raised in India. He earned two postsecondary degrees in India: a Bachelor of 
Science degree in 1970 and a Bachelor of Engineering degree in 1974. He then studied 
 
3 
 
 
in the United Kingdom from 1975 to 1977 and earned a Master of Science degree. (Ex. 
1; Ex. 2.) 
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 1977 and studied for three years at a U.S. 
university, but he did not take a degree. In 1977, he married his wife, a native-born U.S. 
citizen. He became a U.S. citizen in November 1982. Applicant’s mother, who was born 
and raised in India, is 91 years old. She is a U.S. citizen and resides with Applicant and 
his family. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2: Tr. 32.) 
 
 Applicant stated that he was first awarded a security clearance in 1978, before 
he became a U.S. citizen. On his e-QIP, he stated that he was also awarded a security 
clearance in 1989. In about 1985, Applicant founded his own company. He has served 
as president and general manager of the company since 1993. The company, a 
government contractor, specializes in logistics, internet technology, and aircraft 
maintenance programs. It has approximately 166 employees. Applicant served as his 
company’s facility security officer (FSO) until October or November of 2012.  (Tr. 37, 40, 
53-55.) 
 
 Applicant’s company has prospered. In 2012, the company’s annual revenue was 
$18 million. Applicant estimated his own net worth at $8 million. Applicant testified that 
the company carries no debt, and he has no outstanding debts. (Ex. 3; Ex. 5; Tr. 39-41.)   
 
 In 2005, however, Applicant’s business experienced a financial downturn. At 
about that time, Applicant established a business organization in India. Because skilled 
technical labor was cheap in India, Applicant wanted to establish an independent 
business that would provide “back support” software engineering services at a lower 
cost to his company in the United States. He delegated responsibility for establishing 
and managing the new company to two employees, who were tasked to travel to India, 
find a suitable location, and hire and manage Indian software engineers in carrying out 
general engineering work and a specific non-classified software development project.1 
(Answer to SOR; Tr. 59-65.) 
 
   Applicant was the majority owner and one of four directors of the Indian 
company. He was not an employee of the company. He was not a part of the 
management or financial team and was not involved in day-to-day activities. He spoke 
on the telephone with the individuals at the Indian office two or three times a week to 
                                            
1
 Public information about this non-classified project appears in a 2012 news release on the web site of 
Applicant’s U.S. company. The program is generally defined as the application of cost-benefit analysis to 
facilities management. The news release quotes Applicant as saying that the software program is 
“available now.” However, at his hearing, Applicant asserted that, since its inception in 2005, the program 
has never been finalized, has never been used, and does not work. He further stated that he stopped 
advertising the product because to date he considers the money invested in its development to be a “lost 
cause.” (Ex. 3; Tr. 65-71, 77-78.) 
 
 
 
  
 
4 
 
 
provide technical guidance on the non-classified project. Applicant had no other 
property or financial interests in India. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 64-65.)   
 
Guideline L 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶1.a. that the company Applicant established in India posed 
“a conflict of interest with the security responsibilities of your U.S. clients and 
customers, and/or create[d] an increased risk of unauthorized disclosure of classified 
and/or protected information.” 
 
 Applicant testified that when he received the SOR in September 2012 and 
learned that his affiliation with the Indian company had been identified as a possible 
security issue, he took steps to resign as a director of the Indian company and divest 
himself of the Indian business. In response to the SOR, Applicant provided two 
documents. The first document was a letter, addressed to the directors of the Indian 
company, and signed by Applicant, stating that he resigned from his position as 
managing director, effective September 28, 2012. The second document was a 
notarized agreement for the purchase and sale of a business, which the purchaser of 
the business signed before a notary on October 10, 2012, and which Applicant signed 
before a notary on October 15, 2012. (Ex. A-1; Ex. A-2; Ex. B-1; Ex. C; Tr. 46-50.)2 
 
 In post-hearing submissions, Applicant provided additional information related to 
his role in the Indian company and its purchase and sale. The operation head of the 
Indian company provided a sworn statement, dated February 28, 2013, in which he 
recounted receiving, from an internet technology specialist in Applicant’s U.S. company, 
a letter signed by Applicant announcing his resignation, effective September 28, 2012, 
as a director of the Indian company. The operation head also provided the following: a 
copy of the resolution passed by the board of directors removing Applicant from the 
board and authorizing the operation head to give notice to the appropriate Indian 
government entity that Applicant had been removed as a director; and a receipt, dated 
October 27, 2012, showing payment of 300 rupees, issued by the Indian Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs, establishing that the Indian company had complied with requirements 
to give notice of Applicant’s removal as a director. (Ex. B-1; Ex. B-2; Ex. B-3; Ex. B-4.) 
 
 Applicant also provided post-hearing documentation which included a sworn 
statement from the individual who purchased the Indian company from Applicant. In his 
statement the individual asserted that he had executed a purchase and sale agreement 
to acquire Applicant’s total interest in the Indian company on October 10, 2012, for 
$7,000. He provided a copy of the sales contract and a list (Schedule “A”) of the 
company assets that were transferred in the sale. The new owner also stated that the 
only work performed by the company was the development of a proprietary non-
classified commercial software product under the exclusive control of Applicant’s U.S. 
company. (Ex. C; Ex. C-1.) 
 
                                            
2 Applicant’s Ex. A-1 and Ex. B-2 are copies of the same document. 
 
5 
 
 
 Also as a post-hearing submission, Applicant provided a sworn statement which 
further identified the non-classified commercial software product as: 
 
a private, commercial product that I originally envisioned and has never 
been sold to the United States or elsewhere and was never developed as 
part of a government contract, never funded by the U.S. Government, and 
never utilized on Government equipment, servers, etc. It is a side project 
that has nothing to do with [Applicant’s U.S. company’s] work as a 
government contractor, and certainly nothing to do with our classified 
contracts, which are exclusively performed onsite at secured DoD and 
government facilities only. (Ex. D.) 
 
 In support of his description of the commercial project, Applicant included the 
original task order that his U.S. company issued to the Indian company in 2005. The 
task order specified the following actions: “Software program management support, 
operational analysis, requirements/capability development, training, oracle database 
support, software development, data mining data recovery & Backup, Webmaster, 
Graphic Designing Service and Software Testing.” He provided invoices from the Indian 
company for 2012 showing that the work done was consistent with the task order. The 
task order specified that Applicant’s U.S. company would “provide unclassified 
documents and other support necessary for [the Indian company contractor] to develop 
the [project software].”  (Ex. D; Ex. D-1; Ex. D-2.) 
 
 Applicant further asserted that there was no cyber-security risk with the 
development of the commercial project in India and the delivery of research results to 
the U.S. company. He provided a detailed declaration from the Lead Internet 
Technology (IT) professional at the U.S. company stating that the U.S. company 
“complies with all guidelines provided by DOD IT security management procedure in 
accordance with the DOD 5220-22-M and [the U.S. company] vendor security policy.” 
The IT professional further stated that the U.S. company “follows all security procedures 
to protect networks, servers and workstations,” “does not permit vendors or consultants 
to access its computer network,” and stored all commercial project codes and 
information on a stand-alone laptop that is never connected to the company network. 
(Ex. D; Ex. E; Ex. E-1.) 
 
Guideline B 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.a. cross-alleges Applicant’s ownership of a company in India as a 
security concern under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. Additionally, the SOR alleges at 
¶ 2.b. that Applicant’s brother-in-law and two sisters are citizens and residents of India. 
 
 One of Applicant’s sisters is a university professor in India. Her husband is also a 
university professor. Applicant’s other sister was employed as a teacher in India. Her 
husband was employed by the forest service. Both are now retired and reside in India. 
Applicant testified that neither his sisters nor his brothers-in-law have any ties to the 
Indian government. He also testified that the university that employs his sister and 
 
6 
 
 
brother-in-law has no ties to the Indian government. Applicant has a third sister who is a 
citizen of the United Kingdom (UK). She has retired from a position in the UK 
Department of Agriculture. (Tr. 34-37, 95-96.) 
 
 Applicant’s last visit to India occurred in 1984. Other than the Indian company he 
founded in 2005 and sold in October 2012, Applicant has no other business, financial or 
property interests in India. His contact with his two sisters and their husbands in India is 
occasional. He testified that during the last six months, he has spoken on the telephone 
with his sister who is the university professor two or three times. In an interview with an 
authorized investigator, Applicant stated that he had telephone contact with his sister 
who is retired every one or two years. He also told the security investigator that his 
sister who is a university professor and her husband know he is being considered for a 
security clearance. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 35, 95-97.) 
  
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about India, as provided by the 
Government to Applicant and to me: 
 
According to its constitution, India is a “sovereign, socialist, secular 
democratic republic.” India’s political history since it gained independence 
from Great Britain in 1947 has included: (a) wars with Pakistan in 1947, 
1965, and 1971, and the 1999 intrusion of Pakistani-backed forces into 
Indian-held territory that nearly turned into full-scale war; (b) a 1975 
declaration of a state of emergency, with the suspension of many civil 
liberties; (c) the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in October 
1984; (d) the assassination of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in May 1991 
while he was campaigning for parliamentary elections; (e) sporadic 
outbreaks of religious riots, in which numerous people have been killed; 
and (f) violent attacks by a variety of separatist and terrorist groups in 
different parts of the country. In late November 2008, terrorists 
coordinated attacks in Mumbai, targeting areas frequented by Westerners, 
which highlighted the risk of Americans becoming intended or unintended 
victims of terrorism in India.  
 
India continues to experience terrorist and insurgent activities that may 
affect U.S. citizens. Anti-Western terrorist groups, some on the U.S. 
Government’s list of foreign terrorist organizations, are active in India, 
including Islamist extremist groups such as Harkat-ul-Jihad-i-Islami, 
Harakat ul-Mujahidin, India Mujahideen, Jaish-e-Mohammed, and 
Lashkar-e Tayyiba. India is one of the world’s most terrorism-afflicted 
countries and one of the most persistently targeted countries by 
transnational terrorist groups such as Lashkar-e-Tayyiba. 
 
The Soviet Union was India’s main foreign benefactor for the first four 
decades of Indian independence. After the 1979 Soviet invasion of 
Afghanistan, India implicitly supported the Soviet occupation. India had 
 
7 
 
 
long-standing military supply relationships with the Soviet Union, and India 
continues to obtain the bulk of its military supplies from Russia. 
 
Although the United States has sought to strengthen its relationship with 
India, there are some differences between the United States and India, 
including differences over India’s nuclear weapons programs and the pace 
of India’s efforts in economic reforms. In July 2009, however, the United 
States and India issued a joint statement of their intentions to foster 
bilateral relations by establishing working groups to address (1) strategic 
cooperation, (2) energy and climate change, (3) education and 
development, (4) economics, trade, and agriculture, and (5) science and 
technology, health, and innovation. 
 
The 2008 Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage lists India, along with seven other countries, as being 
involved in criminal espionage and U.S. export controls enforcement 
cases in 2008. An earlier version of that report specifically lists India as 
being among the most active collectors of U.S. economic and proprietary 
information and highlights specific incidents wherein India engaged in 
attempts to acquire export-restricted products. 
 
There have been numerous instances of violations of U.S. export laws 
involving India, which evidences India’s desire to acquire U.S. technology 
regardless of the laws protecting that technology. In March 2008, the 
owner of an international electronics business pleaded guilty to conspiracy 
to illegally export controlled technology to government entities in India that 
participate in the development of ballistic missiles, space launch missiles, 
and fighter jets. Furthermore, there have been other cases involving the 
illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual use 
technology to India, including: (1) high-tech testing equipment that posed 
an unacceptable risk of being diverted to a weapons of mass destruction 
program; (2) equipment which can be used in military and civilian aircraft 
to extract vibration information from engines and to simulate output for 
calibrating, servicing, and testing that equipment; (3) equipment that is 
used to manufacture a material that improves the accuracy of strategic 
ballistic missiles with nuclear capabilities; (4) an animation system to an 
Indian entity determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to 
programs for the development of weapons of mass destruction or their 
means of delivery; (5) nuclear pulse generators to two Indian entities that 
have been determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to 
developing weapons of mass destruction or missiles used to deliver these 
weapons; and (6) heat treating containers to an Indian entity determined 
to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to developing weapons of 
mass destruction or missiles used to deliver these weapons. The National 
Counterintelligence Executive warned that the threat to the United States 
from foreign economic intelligence collection and industrial espionage has 
 
8 
 
 
continued unabated with foreign collectors continuing to target a wide 
variety of unclassified and classified information in a range of sectors.  
 
                                            Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
 
9 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline L: Outside Activities 
 
 AG ¶ 36 expresses the following security concern pertaining to outside activities: 
“involvement in certain types of outside employment or activities is of security concern if 
it poses a conflict of interest with an individual’s security responsibilities and could 
create an increased risk of unauthorized disclosure of classified information.” 
 
 Applicant’s ownership of a software development company in India raised 
possible security concerns under AG ¶ 37, which reads, in pertinent part. “(a) [a]ny 
employment or service, whether compensated to volunteer, with: (2) any foreign 
national, organization, or other entity.”  
 
 Applicant’s ownership of the Indian software company could be mitigated under 
AG ¶ 38(b) if he “terminated the employment or discontinued the activity after being 
notified that it was in conflict with his or her security responsibilities.” The record 
evidence establishes that when he learned that his ownership of the Indian company 
could pose a security concern, Applicant resigned as a director of the company and sold 
the company to another individual. He provided documentary evidence to establish that 
he had terminated the activity after being notified it was in conflict with his security 
responsibilities. I conclude that AG ¶ 38(b) applies in mitigation to the facts of 
Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
  
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
 
10 
 
 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e) apply in this case. Applicant’s two sisters and his 
brother-in-law are citizens and residents of India. The SOR established, and Applicant 
admitted, the existence of a substantial business interest in India that could subject him 
to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.  
 
India is known to be an active collector of U.S. economic and proprietary 
information. In recent years, India has attempted to illegally acquire export-restricted 
technology products from U.S. companies that are federal contractors. In 2008, 
terrorists attacked areas in Mumbai, India, that were frequented by Westerners. Since 
that time, there has been a continuing threat that U.S. citizens might become the 
intended or unintended victims of terrorism in India. 
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 1982. He last traveled to India in 1984. As a 
U.S. citizen, he has developed a successful government contracting business in the 
United States. He estimated that in 2012, revenues from his business were $18 million. 
He estimated his own net worth at $8 million. Applicant’s relationships with his two 
sisters and his brother-in-law who are residents and citizens of India are sufficient to 
create “a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion.” His relationships with citizens and residents of India create a potential conflict 
of interest between Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and [his] desire to help” family members who are in India. For example, if the Indian 
 
11 
 
 
government wanted to coerce Applicant, it could exert pressure on his family members 
in India.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its record in seeking protected or proprietary information held by U.S. government 
contractors is relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, 
or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, 
if a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or if the 
country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. 
The relationship of India with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his family members living in India do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not 
be placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the 
United States and a desire to assist his siblings or in-laws.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 
at 4-5 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from India seek or have 
sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his family 
members living in India, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
Applicant’s continuing relationships with family members create a potential conflict of 
interest because these relationships are sufficient to raise a security concern about his 
desire to assist his family members in the event they should be pressured or coerced for 
sensitive or classified information.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
 
12 
 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have applicability in this case. Applicant’s family members in 
India are university professors and retirees. They do not have contact with the Indian 
government. It is not likely that their positions or activities could cause Applicant to be 
placed in a position of having to choose between their interests and those of the U.S. 
government. There appears to be little likelihood that his relationships with relatives who 
are Indian citizens could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.    
 
AG ¶ 8(b) also applies. Applicant has not visited his family in India since 1984. 
His contacts with his sisters and brother-in-law are occasional.  A key factor in the AG ¶ 
8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the 
U.S.” Applicant has resided in the United States since 1977. He became a U.S. citizen 
in 1982, and he has built his personal and professional life in the United States. He has 
established a successful business in the United States, and he reported a net worth of 
approximately $8 million.    
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family members in India. 
He communicates by telephone occasionally with his siblings in India; however, he has 
not traveled to India to visit them for almost 30 years. There is no evidence that 
terrorists, criminals, or those conducting espionage have approached or threatened 
Applicant or his family in attempts to coerce Applicant or his family for classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
While AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply, AG ¶ 8(f) applies in this case.  Applicant 
owned a business in India. However, when he learned that his ownership could be a 
 
13 
 
 
security concern under Guideline L, he sold the business and resigned from his position 
as a director. The value of his property interest is now zero, and it will not result in a 
conflict of interest or subject Applicant to pressure or manipulation. 
 
Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole-person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen for 30 years. He has made his life in the United 
States, and he has developed a successful business. He has not returned to India to 
visit since 1984, and his contacts with his two siblings and brother-in-law there are 
infrequent. When he learned that his financial and management activities in an Indian 
company could raise security concerns, he divested himself of those activities. I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated security concerns raised under the outside activities 
and foreign influence adjudicative guidelines.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline L, Outside 
Activities, and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
                                                 Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline L:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a.:                                  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:                       FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a. and 2.b.:                  For Applicant 
    
                                                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                               
 
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
 
