1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 12-09696
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows he has
mitigated the foreign influence security concern based on his strong family and
employment ties to the United States, which outweigh and overcome his ties to
Afghanistan. Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.
Statement of the Case
On October 3, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a
statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.7. 2
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some3
of which may be identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 Exhibit 4. 4
 Exhibit 4. 5
2
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information.1
The SOR is similar to a complaint, and it detailed the reasons for the action under the
security guideline known as Guideline B for foreign influence based on his ties to
Afghanistan.   
Applicant timely answered the SOR. Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel
requested a hearing, and so, the case will be decided on the written record.2
On or about January 31, 2013, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and
material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  This so-called file of relevant3
material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it February 24, 2013. He
replied to the FORM with the 30-day period allowed under the Directive, and his reply is
admitted without objections as Exhibits A and B. The case was assigned to me March
26, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a company engaged in defense
contracting. He works as a linguist in support of the U.S. armed forces in Afghanistan,
his country of birth. He has had this job since December 2011, and he is currently
working in Afghanistan. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance for the first time.
Applicant lived with his immediate family in Afghanistan until 1992, when his
family moved to Pakistan. His family left Afghanistan due to safety and security
concerns in light of the dominance of the mujahedin.  Over the next several years,4
Applicant’s family was allowed to immigrate to the United States.  Applicant immigrated5
to the United States in 2001, and he has since resided here. He became a naturalized
U.S. citizen in February 2010.   
Applicant’s employment history in the United States is not unusual. Initially, he
was unemployed during 2001–2002 because he lacked permission to engage in lawful
 Exhibit 6. 6
 Exhibits 4 and 5.7
 Exhibit 8. 8
 Exhibit 7. 9
 Exhibits 5 and 7. 10
3
employment. In 2003, he began employment with a fast-food restaurant. He worked in
that industry for the next several years, ending in about October 2011. He also worked
in sales for a major department store during 2009–2011. He left that job for his current
job as a linguist at the end of 2011. 
To that end, Applicant completed a security clearance application in December
2011 and January 2012.  He also underwent counterintelligence-focused security6
screening.  As part of his background investigation, he was interviewed at length in7
January 2012.  He was interviewed again in February 2012, the result of which is a8
signed and sworn statement.9
Applicant has never married and has no children. His immediate family no longer
live in Afghanistan or Pakistan, and their status is summarized in the following table.
Relationship Country of Birth Citizenship Residence
Father Afghanistan United States United States
Mother Afghanistan United States United States
Brother Afghanistan United States United States
Brother Afghanistan United States United States
Brother Afghanistan United States United States
Sister Afghanistan United States United States
Sister Afghanistan United States United States
In addition, Applicant has three sisters-in-law and two brothers-in-law, all of whom were
born in Afghanistan and now reside in the United States; three of the in-laws are legal
resident aliens while the others are U.S. citizens. All three of his brothers, as well as a
brother-in-law, are working or have worked as linguists in support of the U.S. armed
forces.10
Applicant has a few extended family members in Afghanistan. His aunt, on his
mother’s side, is about 40 years old and lives with her son, Applicant’s cousin, who is
about 25 years old. Both were born in Afghanistan and live there now. His aunt is a
 Exhibits A and B. 11
4
housewife and is not employed outside the home. His cousin is a student studying
business at a college in Afghanistan. Applicant also has a cousin who was born in
Afghanistan, but now lives in a European country. 
Applicant has traveled to Afghanistan to visit his extended family. The first trip
was during 2009 to attend the wedding of one of his brothers. He, along with other
family members, stayed at his aunt’s house during this trip. The second trip was during
2010 to attend the wedding of a cousin who was born in Afghanistan but now lives in a
European country. He, along with other family members, stayed at his aunt’s house
during the trip. Also during the 2010 trip, Applicant met with a young woman two to
three times during his stay. Previously, he had communicated with her online. His
intention was to become engaged to be married; he did not become engaged; and he
has had no contact with the young woman since the 2010 trip. 
Applicant’s third trip was during 2011 to visit his aunt and cousin. He spent his
time hanging out at his aunt’s house and looking around the local area. After about a
month, Applicant’s mother arrived, which led Applicant to extend his stay longer than he
had planned. As a result, he was in Afghanistan from June 2011 to October 2011. 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that a sister-in-law who is a citizen of
Afghanistan immigrated to the United States in May 2012, and she is now a U.S.
resident alien. He also stated that his aunt and her children are citizens of and residents
in Afghanistan, and that a friend is also a citizen of and a resident in Afghanistan. He is
no longer in contact with this friend. In his February 2013 reply to the FORM,  Applicant11
stated that he is currently in Afghanistan working as a linguist for the U.S. military.
Concerning his travel to Afghanistan, he stated that his mother has only one sibling
there, his aunt, and he wanted to visit her. He stated that he extended his trip when his
mother arrived so his mother did not have to stay there by herself. He stated that he
knows his aunt’s husband, but he rarely saw him because he has a job working in a
bank in another area of the country.  
In response to Department Counsel’s written request, which was included in the
FORM, I took administrative or official notice of certain facts about Afghanistan, and
they are summarized as follows. After the 1979 invasion and subsequent withdrawal of
the then Soviet Union, Afghanistan experienced a civil war among several factions,
including the Taliban. By the end 1998, the Taliban controlled most of Afghanistan and
provided sanctuary to Osama bin Laden, al Qaeda, and other terrorist groups. U.S.
military forces, along with forces from a coalition partnership, forced the Taliban from
power by November 2001. With U.S. assistance and support, a new democratic
government took office in 2004, which continues to this day. In spite of efforts by the
United States and the Afghan government, Afghanistan continues to be a violent,
unsafe, and unstable country, which is subject to terrorist attacks and suicide bombings.
Afghanistan’s human-rights record is generally poor, due to the continuing insurgency,
the weak government, and ongoing recovery efforts from years of war. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to12
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.13
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 14
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 15
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.18
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.19
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 20
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).21
5
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As12
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt13
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An14
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  15
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting16
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An17
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate18
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme19
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.20
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.21
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.22
 AG ¶¶ 6, 7, and 8 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 23
 AG ¶ 6. 24
6
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it22
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
The gravamen of the SOR is whether Applicant’s ties to Afghanistan, his country
of birth, disqualify him from eligibility for a security clearance. Under Guideline B for
foreign influence,  the suitability of an applicant may be questioned or put into doubt23
due to foreign connections and interests. The overall concern is:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.24
The guideline contains several disqualifying conditions. Given the evidence of
Applicant’s family to Afghanistan, I have especially considered the following
disqualifying conditions: 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business, or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or a resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
AG ¶ 7(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s
obligation to protect classified information or technology and the
7
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing
that information.
The guideline also contains several mitigating conditions. Given the evidence
here, I have especially considered the following mitigating conditions:  
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
United States; and
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding
relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
Applicant, age 32, is presumed to be a mature adult, and he is now working as a
linguist in support of the U.S. armed forces in Afghanistan, a place known as a high-risk
environment for our soldiers and the contractors who support them. He has not resided
in Afghanistan since he was a young child, leaving there with his family in 1992 and
eventually immigrating to the United States. He has lived in the United States since
2001 and worked here since 2003, which are substantial periods of time for a 32-year-
old man. He and his immediate family (and his in-laws) reside in the United States and
most are U.S. citizens. The United States has been conducting military operations in
Afghanistan since 2001, and Applicant is now performing important service in support of
the U.S. mission. Taken together, his family and employment ties to the United States
are much stronger than his ties to Afghanistan, and these facts and circumstances
weigh in his favor.  
The security clearance process is not a zero-risk program, because nearly every
person presents some risk or concern. Many cases come down to balancing that risk or
concern, and that is the situation here. Like most first-generation immigrants, Applicant
has some ties to his country of birth. This should not be dismissed or overlooked as
fanciful or unrealistic, because the circumstances in Afghanistan are dangerous and
unstable and create a heightened risk of foreign influence. With that said, his ties to
people in Afghanistan are normal and not extensive, and he has provided reasonable
explanations for his travel to Afghanistan in 2009, 2010, and 2011. Any security risk or
concern presented by his ties to Afghanistan is outweighed and overcome by his much
stronger family and employment ties to the United States. 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).25
8
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and
evaluating the evidence in light of the whole-person concept,  I conclude Applicant has25
mitigated the foreign influence security concern. Accordingly, I conclude he has met his
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. This case is decided
for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.   
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
