KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Judge concluded that Applicant’s immediate family members’ travels to Iran, their
regular contacts with their relatives in Iran, the potential for his immediate family members to
travel to Iran in the future, and the nature of the Iranian government and its relationship with the
U.S. all create unmitigated security concerns.  The record supports the Judge’s conclusions.  
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-09322.a1
DATE: 04/23/2013
DATE: April 23, 2013
In Re:
----------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-09322
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Eric Roper, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
August 20, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Department Counsel requested a hearing.
On January 25, 2013, after the close of the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Henry Lazzaro denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed, pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge erred in concluding that
no Guideline B mitigating conditions applied.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the
Judge’s unfavorable security clearance decision. 
The Judge found: Applicant is 55 years old.  He was born in Iran to Muslim parents.
Applicant resided in Europe from 1999 until he was permitted to immigrate to the United States in
2004.  Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2010.  Applicant has been married since 1987.
His wife is an Iranian citizen.  Applicant and his wife have two children.  Both are naturalized U.S.
citizens.  
Applicant’s parents are both deceased.  He has a brother and a sister who are both citizens
and residents of Iran.  Both siblings are married to Iranian nationals.  Applicant’s mother-in-law is
a citizen and resident of Iran.  Applicant’s wife has a sister and brother who are citizens and
residents of Iran.  Applicant and his wife have nephews and nieces who are citizens and residents
of Iran.
Since leaving Iran in 1999, the only time Applicant has visited there was in 2009 when his
mother became ill.  Applicant’s wife has visited Iran at least three times since she immigrated to the
United States.  She last visited Iran in 2012.  Applicant’s daughter has also visited Iran three times
since she immigrated to the United States. 
 Her last visit occurred in 2011.  Applicant’s son has also visited Iran on at least one occasion, in
either 2009 or 2010.  Applicant has expressed his concern to his wife and children about their visits
to Iran.  However, his wife insists on returning because she has family there, and none in the U.S.
Also, her mother is elderly.  
Applicant’s wife has either weekly or bi-weekly telephone contact with her relatives in Iran.
Applicant’s daughter is close to a cousin in Iran and speaks with her by telephone about every other
week.  His daughter speaks with other relatives in Iran about once a month.  Applicant’s wife and
children maintain their Iranian passports.
Applicant has proven himself to be trustworthy, honest, sincere, and a man of his word.  He
has high moral standards and is dedicated to supporting the United States.  He has absolutely no
loyalty to Iran, but is instead totally committed to the United States.
Iran is one of the most active state sponsors of terrorism.  Iran has a poor human rights record
and is reported to have carried out many executions.  It has detained U.S. citizens who have traveled
to Iran, including on false accusations of espionage.
The Judge concluded: Despite Applicant’s expressed concerns for their well-being, his wife
and daughter have traveled to Iran while he was serving with U.S. forces in another country.  The
danger to his wife and daughter during those travels would be great if Iranian officials were to
become aware of Applicant’s service to U.S. military forces.  Applicant has little contact with
1“[T]he nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the
positions and activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the
interests of the U.S.”
2“[T]here is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign
person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and
loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest[.]”
anyone in Iran; however, his wife and daughter have frequent contact with their Iranian relatives.
There is no reason to doubt that Applicant is a loyal American citizen or suspect he would ever
consider doing harm to the interests of the United States.  Still, his immediate family members’
travels to Iran, their regular contacts with their relatives in Iran, the potential for his immediate
family members to travel to Iran in the future, and the nature of the Iranian government and its
relationship with the U.S. create a security concern that has not been overcome.  
Applicant argues that it was error for the Judge not to find that one or more mitigating
conditions applied to his particular circumstances.  Specifically, Applicant asserts that Adjudicative
Guidelines ¶ ¶ 8(a)1 and 8(b)2 apply in his case since he stated in his SOR response and on the record
at the hearing that he would resolve any conflict in favor of U.S. interests.  Applicant also argues
that all his family ties and assets are in the United States.  Applicant states that his involvement in
the community and his work performance are further evidence of his deep and longstanding
relationship and loyalty to the U.S.  Applicant also asserts that the location of an individual’s foreign
contacts in a higher-risk country is not by itself a disqualifying condition.
Given the Judge’s findings about (1) the extent of Applicant’s family connections in Iran,
either directly or through his wife, and (2) the nature of the Iranian regime, the Board finds no error
in the Judge’s treatment of the mitigating conditions.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the
evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence,
or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).  Applicant’s appeal brief essentially argues for
an alternate interpretation of the record evidence.  The Judge’s decision is not based merely on the
fact that Iran is a higher-risk country.  While noting the nature of the Iranian government, the Judge
also considered the unique aspects of Applicant’s case.  Applicant’s arguments do not undercut the
Judge’s findings and conclusions regarding Applicant’s numerous family ties to Iran, the strength
of those ties, and the instances of family members traveling to Iran.  
In support of his appeal, Applicant points to a decision by the Hearing Office, which he
argues supports his request for a favorable determination.  The Board gives due consideration to this
case.  However, each case “must be decided upon its own merits.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).
Moreover, Hearing Office decisions are binding neither on other Hearing Office Judges nor on the
Board.  See ISCR Case No. 06-24121 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb 5, 2008).  
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156,
168 (1962)).  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent
with the interests of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan      
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed:   Jeffrey D. Billett         
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin            
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
