 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08675 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the Guideline E (Personal Conduct) allegations, but failed to 
refute or mitigate the Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) allegations. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 16, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines G and E. 
This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
On December 12, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on January 28, 2013. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 6, 2013, and the hearing 
 
2 
 
was held as scheduled on February 27, 2013. At the hearing, Department Counsel 
offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified, called one witness 
to testify on his behalf, and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F. The record 
was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. He submitted three emails 
with attachments that have been marked as AE G through L. All exhibits were admitted 
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 8, 
2013.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel withdrew the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a.1  
 
Findings of Facts 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He started working 
for his current employer in July 2012. He has earned two master’s degrees. He enlisted 
in the U.S. Navy in June 1971, attained the grade of petty officer second class (E-5), 
and received an honorable discharge in July 1975. He served on active duty in the U.S. 
Army as a helicopter pilot from October 1976 to May 2001 and retired in the grade of 
lieutenant colonel (O-5). He has been married twice. His first marriage ended in divorce. 
He and his second wife are separated and have filed for divorce. He has one adult child 
and four adult stepchildren. He held a security clearance for about 40 years without 
incident.2 
 
 The SOR contained fourteen Guideline G allegations. These allegations asserted 
that Applicant consumed alcohol, at times to excess or to the point of intoxication, from 
1971 to at least April 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.a); that he was charged or cited for alcohol-related 
offenses on eight occasions (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m); that an 
employer took adverse action against him twice for alcohol-related incidents (SOR ¶¶ 
1.f and 1.g); and that he received alcohol counseling or treatment on four occasions 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, 1.h, and 1.n). Under Guideline E, the SOR alleged that he deliberately 
falsified his responses to two questions on his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) dated July 11, 2011 (SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c). In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted to all or part of each Guideline G allegation and 
denied both falsification allegations. His admissions are incorporated as findings of 
fact.3 
 
 Applicant has a long and troubled history with alcohol. He started consuming 
alcohol at age 17 after enlisting in the Navy. He indicated that he would consume a six-
pack of beer two or three times a week at base clubs or in the barracks. He became 
intoxicated frequently. He continued his heavy consumption of alcohol while in the 
                                                          
1 Tr. 12. 
2 Tr. 7, 15-16, 34-37, 87-93; GE 1; AE B.  
3 Tr. 10-11; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
3 
 
Army. In the mid-1990’s, he started consuming whiskey on a regular basis. He testified 
that alcohol never negatively impacted his work performance in the military.4 
 
In April 2002, Applicant pushed his wife while he was intoxicated. She was not 
injured, but called the police. He was arrested and charged with a domestic violence 
offense, which was later dismissed. He underwent an evaluation at the Social 
Treatment Opportunity Program (STOP) that disclosed he may have an alcohol 
problem. In August 2002, he was arrested and charged with driving under the influence 
(DUI) of alcohol with a blood alcohol content of .20% or above. The court deferred his 
sentence on the DUI charge and ordered him to participate in STOP for two years. The 
STOP program involved hour-long sessions once a week. While participating in that 
program, he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He indicated that he stayed sober 
for about a year and a half while in that program, but began consuming alcohol again, 
believing he could manage his drinking. His consumption of alcohol, however, slowly 
increased.5 
 
In January 2004, Applicant was in the parking lot of a video store after he had 
been drinking. A truck drove by him very close; almost hitting him. He shouted at the 
truck. It turned around and returned to his location. Three young males were in the 
truck. Applicant claimed they threatened him, and he kicked the door of the truck 
causing about $1,400 in damage. The three males remained in the truck and called the 
police. The police arrested Applicant and charged him with malicious mischief. That 
charge was dismissed when he agreed to pay the damages.6 
 
About eight years ago, Applicant’s daily consumption of alcohol at home 
escalated to about six beers or about six shots of whiskey. During this period, he 
indicated that he became intoxicated almost daily. In his testimony, he acknowledged 
that his consumption of alcohol at times constituted habitual or binge drinking. While 
working for Company D in July 2008, he went on a business trip to a major military 
installation. His work ended there on a Friday. Over that weekend, he visited with his 
son in another city. He went to the airport on Sunday and learned his return flight was 
delayed. While waiting at the airport, he consumed about seven or eight mixed drinks. 
The police arrested him there for public intoxication. He pled guilty to that charge and 
was fined about $200. His company received a report of the airport incident, but did not 
know the identity of the employee involved. When his supervisor confronted him about 
the airport incident some time later, Applicant admitted his involvement. In September 
2008, his supervisor issued him a written reprimand for the airport incident because that 
misconduct occurred on the return leg of a business trip. In February 2009, Company D 
                                                          
4 Tr. 33-39; GE 3. 
5 Tr. 39-40, 104-109, 115-120, 124, 127-129; GE 3. 
6 Tr. 116-120; GE 3. This incident was not alleged in the SOR. Non-alleged misconduct will not 
be considered in applying the disqualifying conditions, but may be considered in applying the mitigating 
conditions and in making a whole-person assessment. 
 
4 
 
terminated his employment because he brought beer into the workplace in violation of 
company rules. He indicated that he did not consume any beer in the workplace.7 
 
In April 2009, Applicant began working for another defense contractor, Company 
W. In April 2010, he went to Company D to meet friends for lunch. Security personnel at 
Company D notified him that he should not be there. At the time, he was not aware of 
that restriction and departed. One of the employees at Company D called Applicant’s 
supervisor at Company W and informed him of the airport incident in July 2008. Up to 
that point, Applicant had never been counseled at Company W about his alcohol 
consumption, but believed his supervisor’s conversation with the Company D employee 
put concerns in his supervisor’s mind. His supervisor confronted him about those 
concerns. They got into an argument. Applicant stated he told his supervisor that he 
was quitting. The supervisor fired him the next day. Applicant testified that he was not 
sure “whether I’d quit or been fired, but I knew it was adverse conditions, no matter how 
you put it.”8 
 
 In May 2010, Applicant realized that he was an alcoholic and needed help. He 
checked himself into an inpatient alcohol treatment facility. During his two weeks of 
inpatient treatment, he was diagnosed again as alcohol dependent. He received follow-
on outpatient counseling and treatment from May to August 2010. He abstained from 
alcohol for about six months after that treatment, but then started to consume alcohol 
again.9 
 
In November 2011, Applicant and his second wife filed for divorce. He agreed to 
give her their home and other property. Around this time, he also became unemployed 
when his employer told him that he needed to resolve his alcohol problem to continue 
working. He stated this was an awful time for him. He first lived in a motel, then with 
friends, and finally out of his vehicle. He was drinking frequently. He described this 
period as “hitting bottom” and stated that he did not care what happened to him. 
Between January and March of 2012, he was arrested five times for alcohol-related 
offenses. While riding as a passenger in a car on January 28, 2012, he was arrested for 
public intoxication, which resulted in a fine. While sleeping in his parked car in a 
recreation area on February 6, 2012, he was arrested for DUI, a charge that was later 
dismissed. On February 15, 2012, he was arrested on federal property and charged 
with public intoxication, harassment, and disorderly conduct. He was convicted of those 
offenses in U.S. Magistrate Court, placed on probation, and ordered to participate in a 
court intervention program that is discussed in more detail below. On March 7, 2012, he 
was again arrested for DUI while sleeping in his parked car, a charge that was later 
dismissed. Finally, he was cited for public intoxication on March 12, 2012, pled no 
contest to that charge, and paid a $200 fine.10 
                                                          
7 Tr. 40-44, 95-98, 109-114, 129-131; GE 3. 
8 Tr. 31-33, 40-44, 92-99, 114-115; GE 3. 
9 Tr. 40-44, 114-124; GE 3, 4. 
10 Tr. 44-53, 124-127; GE 3, 4; AE C, D, E.  The court records reflecting the dismissal of the two 
DUI offenses have dates of arrest that do not match the SOR allegations.  
 
5 
 
The U.S. Magistrate who presided over Applicant’s federal offenses in February 
2012 wrote a letter stating: 
 
[Applicant] has been on probation since April 16, 2012, in my court based 
on convictions for public intoxication, harassment, and disorderly conduct. 
All three charges arose from one event. He was placed on probation for 
two years and ordered to participate in the Court Intervention Program 
(“CIP”) that I supervise. 
 
To say that [Applicant] has responded well to this program would be an 
understatement. I have operated this program for a number of years and 
can honestly say that [Applicant] is the best example I have of how such 
programs can benefit individuals. 
 
Shortly after entering the program, it became apparent that [Applicant] had 
come to grips with the fact that he had a problem with alcohol and that he 
intended to overcome that problem. To that end, he first participated in an 
in-patient program which he successfully completed. He then entered a 
follow-up counseling program at an organization known as [P] here in 
[location]. That program is designed to teach individuals with alcohol 
and/or substance abuse problems how to deal with them on a day-to-day 
basis. [Applicant] has participated in this program with no problems. 
 
In fact, [Applicant] has done considerably more than just complete the 
program. He and another individual took it upon themselves to assist 
others at [P] as mentors. In addition, they realized that many individuals at 
[P] needed help with basic life skills. Consequently, they have assisted 
others by tutoring them to obtain GED [General Education Development] 
certificates, help them fill out applications for such things as Pell Grants so 
they could attend school, and assisted them in filling out job applications in 
order to obtain employment.  
 
[Applicant] did all of this on his own. It was not required of him, but was 
accomplished solely because of his desire to help others. In my opinion, 
many people at [P] received valuable assistance they would never have 
otherwise received or been able to afford. 
 
Likewise, I am convinced that [Applicant] has mastered his problem with 
alcohol. I have been a lawyer for almost 36 years, including time as an FBI 
Special Agent, state and federal prosecutor, and 15 years as a judge. 
Consequently, I am not easily fooled by individuals who want me to 
believe they have overcome problems when, in fact, they have not. In the 
case of [Applicant], I am confident as I have ever been that he has 
overcome his problem and that it will not reoccur. I am sufficiently 
confident of this that today I terminated his probation over a year early. 
Despite being completely free of any oversight by me, [Applicant] has 
 
6 
 
indicated that he intends to continue his mentoring of [P] clientele. This 
speaks volumes with regard to the kind of person he has become.  
 
I have a tremendous amount of confidence in and respect for [Applicant]. 
He has demonstrated that he has mastered his problem with alcohol, and I 
do not believe it will ever be a problem for him again.11  
 
 Applicant testified that his latest treatment was much more intense than his 
earlier treatment. His latest treatment consisted of 21 days of inpatient treatment and 
three months of outpatient treatment at [P]. He lived in a halfway house during the 
outpatient treatment. Throughout this treatment, he participated in Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA), attending almost 400 AA meetings during his outpatient treatment. He 
has continued to attend AA meetings following his treatment. He has an AA sponsor 
and also serves as one. He also noted that the spiritual aspect of his recovery, which he 
cannot quantify, was much different this time. He provided documentation showing that 
his liver enzymes were eight times the normal level when he was drinking and 
approaching the point at which his liver would shut down. Since his most recent 
treatment, his liver enzymes have returned to normal levels. He also stated that he 
passed 36 urinalysis tests in the past year. He stated the U.S. Magistrate has asked him 
to mentor individuals with alcohol problems that appear in court and he has agreed to 
do so.12   
 
 Applicant’s alcohol counselor at [P] testified: 
 
[Applicant] -- basically anything that has been asked of him, he had done it 
above and beyond. He has never questioned anything that -- anything 
about our program. He was just there to start a new life and to live a better 
life. 
 
I’d say after about the first 30 days he was there, he really started showing 
the desire for change in his life. As most alcoholics and addicts go, that 
usually don’t come so quick. It’s a very long-drawn-out process to start a 
recovery life and to live one.   
*  *  * 
[S]ince the time he has [been] discharged from our program, he still 
comes back every Tuesday night for groups; Thursday night he still comes 
back, and his GED program that he started has actually turned into a life-
skills development program that we implemented at [P].13 
 
                                                          
11 AE G, H. On March 4, 2013, the U.S. Magistrate, Applicant, Department Counsel, and I 
participated in a conference call. During the call, the U.S. Magistrate reiterated the strong feelings he 
expressed in his letter. 
12 Tr. 52-65, 144-145; GE 4; AE K, L. 
13 Tr. 70-71, 81-83.  
 
7 
 
The alcohol counselor indicated that the executive director of [P], who was a licensed 
professional counselor, diagnosed Applicant as being alcohol dependent. Applicant 
successfully completed the program at [P] on July 26, 2012. The clinical director of [P] 
submitted a letter stating that Applicant’s “prognosis remains excellent as long as he 
continues as planned.”14 
 
Applicant testified that the last time he consumed alcohol was on April 4, 2012. 
His current employer is aware of his alcohol problem and indicated that Applicant is a 
valued employee whose work performance has been exceptional.15 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant falsified his e-QIP dated July 11, 2011, by 
deliberately failing to disclose that he was terminated from Company W in April 2010 
due to unprofessional behavior and poor performance (SOR ¶ 2.b) and by deliberately 
failing to disclose his DUI charge in August 2002 (SOR ¶ 2.c).  
 
On February 1, 2005, Applicant submitted a security clearance application     
(SF-86) in which he disclosed his domestic violence charge of April 6, 2002; DUI charge 
of August 13, 2002; and malicious mischief charge of January 18, 2004. In his e-QIP of 
July 11, 2011, he disclosed in Section 13A (employment/unemployment information) 
that he was “Released by employer” from his job at Company D in April 2009 and from 
his job at Company W in May 2010. In response to questions in Section 13C 
(employment record), he disclosed that he was released from Company D under 
adverse circumstances, but did not list the termination of his employment from 
Company W in that section. In Section 22, he responded “Yes” to questions that asked 
whether he had been arrested in the last seven years, whether he had ever been 
charged with a felony offense, and whether he had ever been charged with any 
offenses related to alcohol or drugs. In Section 22, he listed his arrest for public 
intoxication in 2008 and his arrest for malicious mischief in 2002 (which occurred in 
2004). In that section, he did not list his DUI arrest/charge in August 2002. A summary 
of Applicant’s Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview on August 22, 2011, 
indicated that he “volunteered” information about his August 2002 DUI arrest during that 
interview. At the hearing, he adamantly denied falsifying responses in his e-QIP and 
attributed those omissions to oversights.16 
 
OPM investigators interviewed Applicant on June 13, 2006, and August 22, 2011. 
Two different investigators conducted those interviews. Applicant adopted the 
summaries of both OPM interviews without making any modifications. Of note, there are 
significant inconsistencies between the statements Applicant reportedly made during 
those interviews as well as inconsistencies between those statements and his testimony 
at the hearing. These inconsistencies include: 
 
                                                          
14 Tr. 68-85; GE 4; AE I, J. 
15 Tr. 36-38, 81, 131-132; GE 4; AE B.  
16 Tr. 29-33, 92-104; GE 1, 2, 3.  
 
8 
 
a. In the June 2006 interview, Applicant reportedly stated that he had not 
consumed any alcohol since August 2002 (the month of his first DUI arrest), a period of 
almost four years. The summary of that interview contained a number of similar 
statements about the length of his abstinence from alcohol before the interview. In the 
August 2011 interview, however, Applicant reportedly stated that “about eight years 
ago” (approximately 2003) his daily consumption of alcohol escalated to about six beers 
or six shot of whiskey, and such consumption continued until May 2010 (the month of 
his first inpatient alcohol treatment). In his Answer to the SOR, he stated, “I completed a 
two year alcohol orientation/awareness program as part of the above DUI charge and 
did not consume alcohol during that period.” The SOR identified the period of that 
program as August 2002 to August 2004. At the hearing, he testified that he did not 
drink “for about a year and half” during that period, but then started to drink alcohol 
occasionally while he was still participating in that alcohol program (STOP).17 
 
b. In the June 2006 interview, Applicant reportedly stated that he had not been 
drinking before the incident in which he kicked the door of the truck in January 2004. At 
the hearing, however, he testified that he had been drinking before that incident and the 
young males in the truck probably called him “a drunk old man” or words to that effect.18 
 
 c. In the August 2011 interview, Applicant reportedly stated that he had not 
consumed any alcohol since his inpatient treatment in May 2010, a period of about 15 
months. At the hearing, he testified initially that he “was able to come out of there [two 
week inpatient treatment] and stay completely clean for a year, and in the second year I 
started dabbling in alcohol again.” During cross-examination, he testified that he started 
to consume alcohol about six months following that treatment.19  
 
In the Army, Applicant served in command five times. He flew helicopters for 
hundreds of hours in combat zones, including in Operation Desert Storm. In at least one 
assignment in the Army, he was responsible for the unit’s personnel reliability program. 
He has been awarded two Bronze Stars and a Legion of Merit.20 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
17 Tr. at 117-118. See notes 5, 6, and 7 and accompanying text; GE 3 at I-7, I-11, and I-13. It is 
noted that the summary of the OPM interview in August 2011 appears to have reported incorrectly a 
period of Applicant’s abstinence from alcohol. Specifically that summary stated, “After retiring from the US 
Army in 2001, he stopped consuming alcohol of any kind because he thought he might have an alcohol 
problem. After about two years of not consuming any alcohol the subject started consuming beer again.” 
From the Applicant’s testimony, it was apparent the OPM investigator may have been referring to his 
period of abstinence that occurred after his DUI charge in 2002 and during his participation in the STOP 
program, i.e., August 2002 to August 2004. 
18 See note 6 and accompanying text; GE 3 at I-12 
19 Tr. 43, 120-124. See also note 9 and accompanying text; GE 3 at I-7.  
20 Tr. 30, 35-36, 87-92; AE A.  
 
9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns under AG ¶ 22. Six are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other  
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
 (b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work in an 
intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; and 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program.  
 
Applicant committed alcohol-related misconduct on multiple occasions. An 
employer twice took adverse action against him for alcohol-related incidents. In 2012, a 
licensed professional counselor at an alcohol treatment facility diagnosed him as 
alcohol dependent. He admitted to engaging in habitual and binge drinking. In the past, 
he received inpatient and outpatient alcohol treatment and relapsed following such 
treatment. The evidence is sufficient to establish AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(b), 22(c), 22(e), and 
22(f).  
 
 Three alcohol consumption mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
11 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical health professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a 
staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.  
 
Applicant’s alcohol abuse and his alcohol-related misconduct occurred recently, 
repeatedly, and did not happen under unique circumstances. AG ¶ 23(a) does not 
apply. 
 
Applicant indicated that he last consumed alcohol in April 2012. Since then, he 
completed 21 days of inpatient treatment that was followed by three months of 
outpatient treatment in a halfway house. This treatment was much more intense than 
his previous treatment. As a result of this recent treatment, Applicant has made 
significant strides in coming to grips with his alcohol problem. He acknowledged his 
alcohol problem and realized he must change his way of living to conquer it. His alcohol 
counselor testified that he took a very active role in his recovery while in treatment and 
is still continuing to do so. Applicant continues to attend AA meetings regularly, still 
attends weekly group sessions at the outpatient clinic, and has agreed to become a 
mentor for individuals with alcohol problems in a U.S. Magistrates Court. He has 
developed a supportive network to assist him in his recovery. The clinical director of the 
outpatient clinic indicated that Applicant’s “prognosis remains excellent as long as he 
continues as planned.” 
 
The U.S. Magistrate’s letter is very enlightening. The magistrate is closely 
connected with the treatment programs that Applicant recently completed. For the past 
year the magistrate has been monitoring Applicant while he has been on probation. 
Based on that oversight, the magistrate concluded that Applicant has gone through a 
major lifestyle change and has mastered his alcohol problem. The magistrate was so 
impressed by Applicant’s recovery that he decided to terminate his probation a year 
early.   
 
While Applicant’s latest recovery appears quite remarkable, sufficient time has 
not passed to conclude that he has solved his alcohol problem. In the past, he has 
 
12 
 
relapsed following his successful completion of inpatient and outpatient alcohol 
treatment. He was released from probation the day before the hearing. The impact of 
the termination of that oversight on him and his recovery is unknown. His last 
consumption of alcohol as well as his last alcohol offense occurred less than a year 
before the hearing. In short, it is too soon to determine that his misuse of alcohol is 
unlikely to recur. 
 
Furthermore, the inconsistencies between the statements that Applicant made 
during the OPM interviews as well as inconsistencies between those statements and his 
testimony at the hearing are troubling. Most importantly, the statements he made during 
the OPM interviews about the lengths of his periods of abstinence from alcohol before 
those interviews were false and misleading. Those periods of abstinence were material 
issues during those interviews. From his military experience, Applicant would have 
understood the significance of those statements when he made them and would have 
known those purported periods of abstinence would play a key role in determining his 
suitability for a security clearance. Applicant’s prior inconsistent statements about his 
alcohol consumption, particularly the lengths of his periods of abstinence before the 
OPM interviews, have caused me to give less weight to his hearing testimony, 
especially his testimony about the nature and scope of his latest recovery. 
 
AG ¶ 23(b) and 23(d) partially apply, but do not mitigate the alcohol consumption 
security concerns in this case.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
 
13 
 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.21 
  
 In Section 13A of his e-QIP of July 2011, Applicant noted that he was “released” 
by Company W, but failed to list that termination in Section 13C. In a security clearance 
application in 2005, he disclosed his DUI arrest in August 2002. During his OPM 
interview in August 2011, he “volunteered” information about that DUI arrest; however, 
he failed to list it in Section 22 of his e-QIP. He plausibly explained that his failure to 
disclose his termination of employment from Company W in Section 13C and his DUI 
arrest in Section 22 were due to oversights. I found his explanation believable and 
conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is not established. The personal conduct security concerns 
are concluded in favor of Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines G and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment.  
 
Applicant is a mature adult who has served our country as a military member or 
defense contractor for over 40 years. During most of that period, he has held a security 
clearance without incident. He has held positions of responsibility in the military and 
understands the security clearance process. At the hearing, he has acknowledged his 
alcohol problem and knows he must abstain from alcohol. While it appears that he has 
turned a corner in his life and taken the right steps to overcome his alcohol problem, 
                                                          
21 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
14 
 
insufficient time has passed to conclude that problem is behind him. Despite the 
mitigation that he presented, Applicant’s past alcohol consumption remains a security 
concern at this point. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant refuted the Personal Conduct security concerns, but he failed to 
refute or mitigate the Alcohol Consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.n:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Withdrawn 
Subparagraphs 2.b – 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
