 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 12-06779
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns about his finances. He has paid his
past-due student loan, and he is repaying past-due tax debts. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On April 16, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his work as
an employee of a federal contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators were unable to
find it clearly consistent with the national interest to give Applicant access to classified
information.  On September 19, 2012, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on January 30, 2013.3
2
(SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in the adjudicative
guideline  for financial considerations (Guideline F).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on December 19, 2012, and I convened a hearing on January
15, 2013.  Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 5, which were3
admitted without objection. (Tr. 13 - 19) Applicant testified and proffered one exhibit
admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. (Tr. 20 - 22, 29 - 31)
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed approximately
$28,034.33 in past-due debts for unpaid taxes in 2001 (SOR 1.a) and 2002 (SOR 1.b),
and for a past-due student loan (SOR 1.c). Applicant admitted, with explanations, SOR
1.a and 1.b. Applicant denied SOR 1.c, and established that he paid that debt in August
2012. Accordingly, SOR 1.c is decided for Applicant. Applicant’s admissions are
incorporated herein as facts. Having reviewed the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I
make the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is 35 years old and has been employed by a defense contractor as a
heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) mechanic since December 2009. This is
his first application for a security clearance. After graduating high school in 1997,
Applicant sporadically attended college and technical schools. The student loan
addressed in SOR 1.c arose when Applicant’s stepfather failed to pay tuition as he had
promised for Applicant’s first academic year in 1997-1998. (Gx. 1; Gx. 3)
Applicant was self-employed in sales and marketing jobs between about
February 2000 and January 2004. Thereafter, he worked in various jobs for low and
minimum wages. He was fired from two of those jobs for misconduct. Between February
2007 and December 2009, Applicant was twice unemployed for a total of 17 months.
(Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Gx. 3; Tr. 37 - 40, 47, 53)
In 2003, the IRS audited Applicant’s 2001 and 2002 tax returns. By 2005, the IRS
determined that Applicant owed $9,874 in unpaid taxes for 2001 and $13,889 in unpaid
taxes for 2002, because he could not substantiate work-related deductions and credits
he had claimed. Applicant started to negotiate an offer in compromise to settle his tax
debt. However, he was unable to make the initial payments required by the IRS and
stopped pursuing that solution. Also, while the audit was pending, Applicant was
advised by a certified public accountant (CPA) to delay filing his federal tax returns for
the next few years. The CPA told Applicant that doing so would preserve those tax year
refunds for use in satisfying any tax debts that might arise from the audit. This was
 See Directive. 6.3.4
3
erroneous because of IRS time limits on the disbursement of tax refunds. Relying on the
CPA’s advice, Applicant did not timely file his returns for tax years 2003 through 2008.
However, the only tax liability he incurred was for tax year 2003, which he has since
satisfied. Applicant completed filing all of his past-due tax returns in April 2009.  (Gx. 1 -
Gx. 3; Tr. 23 - 26, 31 - 38, 40 - 41, 54 - 57)
Between 2004 and 2009, in addition to his tax debts, Applicant incurred
delinquent debts for credit cards and unpaid rent. Much of his financial difficulty during
this period was due to uneven employment. Applicant acknowledged that some of his
employment problems arose from his own misconduct. After he was hired by his current
employer in December 2009, he became able to use money in a pre-existing 401(k)
retirement account to help repay his debts. Only one of those debts, a civil judgment for
unpaid rent, is reflected in his credit history. It appeared in a May 2010 credit report (Gx.
4), but not in a June 2012 credit report (Gx. 5). Applicant presented information showing
he paid that debt. There are no other adverse accounts, including those alleged in the
SOR, listed in either credit report. (Gx. 2 - 5; Tr. 47, 46 - 53, 59 - 61, 69)
Sometime during the summer of 2012, Applicant renewed his negotiations with
the IRS to resolve his tax debts. He was able to take funds from his 401(k) to pay his
tax year 2003 debt, and to make the initial payments required to establish a repayment
plan for his 2001 and 2002 tax debts. He has been making $540 monthly payments on
those debts since September 2012. His tax debts will be repaid by September 2015
under this plan. (Answer; Gx. 2 - 3; Ax. A; Tr. 25 - 26)
Applicant’s response to DOD interrogatories (Gx. 2) included a personal financial
statement (PFS). After paying all of his monthly expenses, including the monthly
payment to the IRS, Applicant has a positive cash flow of about $500 each month.
There is no indication he incurred any additional past-due debt since 2009. His only
credit card debt was recently incurred to pay for tools he needs for work, and he has
begun restoring the retirement savings he used to pay his debts. (Tr. 62 - 68)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those
factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).7
4
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  6
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Applicant admitted two of the three allegations. He supported his denial of SOR
1.c with information showing his past-due student loan debt was satisfied before the
SOR was issued. However, available information also shows his debt for unpaid taxes
in 2001 and 2002 has been due and owing for more than ten years. That information
raises a security concern about Applicant’s finances, which is articulated, in relevant
part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
5
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations). Applicant filed his taxes as required for
2001 and 2002, but he did not support some of the deductions and credits claimed as
part of his self-employment in sales and marketing. He did not follow through on an
attempted offer in compromise in 2005, and the debts generated from those tax returns,
as alleged in SOR 1.a and 1.b, remained unaddressed until 2012.
Applicant is now current with all of his tax filing obligations. He is repaying the
SOR 1.a and 1.b tax debts through an agreement with the IRS that will resolve the
debts in three years. The Government is reasonably concerned about the seven years
that passed between the IRS audit and his repayment agreement. The reasons for that
delay were a combination of Applicant’s own misconduct leading to loss of employment
and income with which to pay, and erroneous advice from a CPA. Applicant has
corrected those circumstances by filing all of his past-due tax returns and establishing a
repayment agreement for the tax debts addressed in SOR 1.a and 1.b. Applicant did not
immediately address his tax debts after he was hired for his current job because he
decided to resolve other debts. For example, he had already resolved the SOR 1.c
student loan debt before the SOR was issued. Applicant’s current finances reflect a
positive cash flow each month, increasing retirement savings, and the absence of
recent past-due debts. All of the foregoing supports application of the following AG ¶ 20
mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
6
On balance, Applicant has mitigated the security concerns established by
adverse information about his finances. 
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant made poor decisions in his personal
life that adversely impacted his finances. However, since 2009, his defense contractor
job has afforded him the ability to resolve his financial problems. He resolved other
debts not addressed in the SOR, filed all of his past-due tax returns, paid off a
delinquent student loan, and is now repaying his 2001 and 2002 tax debts. A fair and
commonsense assessment of all available information shows that Applicant has
mitigated the security concerns raised by his unpaid debts. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
