 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 12-07667
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Paula Phinney, Esquire
______________
Remand Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based on a review of the record, which now includes a timely post-hearing
submission not previously received by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) Hearing Office, Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted.
On March 7, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his work as
an employee of a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing
background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to find that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access to classified
information,  and issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
 See Directive E3.1.7.3
 Admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - H.4
2
which raise security concerns addressed in the adjudicative guidelines  under Guideline2
B (foreign influence) and Guideline C (foreign preference).
In response to the SOR, Applicant requested a decision without a hearing;
however, Department Counsel requested a hearing,  which I convened on November3
14, 2012. After the hearing, I left the record open to receive from Applicant additional
information, in relevant part, about the status of his foreign passport. However, the
submission received by the DOHA Hearing Office  did not address his foreign passport.4
I closed the record on December 7, 2012. On December 12, 2012, I issued an
unfavorable decision, in which I concluded Applicant had mitigated the security
concerns under Guideline B, but not Guideline C. 
Applicant retained counsel and appealed my decision. Only my findings about
Applicant’s passport under Guideline C were addressed. On appeal, Applicant
established he had, in fact, submitted information about his foreign passport. It is still
not clear from the record why the DOHA Hearing Office did not receive that information. 
On March 11, 2013, the DOHA Appeal Board remanded this matter to me “for
further processing.” I received the case file on March 22, 2013, but without the
information to which the Appeal Board referred in its decision. I re-opened the record to
receive that information. The record closed on March 27, 2013, when I received the
following documents:
a. Applicant’s Declaration Renouncing his Pakistani Citizenship, dated October
19, 2011.
b. Applicant’s Affidavit regarding his Pakistani Passport, dated September 19,
2011.
c. Applicant’s Affidavit regarding his Pakistani Passport, dated October 19, 2011.
d. Affidavit of Applicant’s Facility Security Officer (FSO), dated November 8,
2011.
e. Applicant’s Affidavit regarding his Pakistani Passport, dated February 23,
2011.
These documents, and Department Counsel’s email conveying her waiver of
objection, are admitted collectively as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) I.
 See Directive. 6.3.5
3
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline C, the Government alleged that Applicant possesses a Pakistani
passport valid until December 31, 2013, and that he obtained that passport after
becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen and receiving a U.S. passport (SOR 2.a). Applicant
admitted, with explanation, this allegation. (Answer). My findings of fact in my original
decision are incorporated herein. Based on the information contained in Ax. I, I make
the following additional findings of fact.
Applicant is a 29-year-old naturalized citizen of the United States. He was born in
Pakistan and emigrated at age 15 to the United States in 1998. He became a U.S.
citizen in December 2005 and received a U.S. passport in April 2006. At the time of his
naturalization, Applicant also held an active Pakistani passport, which he had renewed
in 2002 to travel abroad for a one-month religious pilgrimage. At the behest of his
mother, he again renewed his Pakistani passport on January 1, 2007. It has never been
used and expires at the end of 2013. 
Applicant disclosed his Pakistani passport when he submitted his application for
clearance in March 2011. In February 2011, he provided an affidavit, ostensibly to his
employer, disclosing his possession of that passport and expressing his willingness to
relinquish it. In March 2011, the U.S. military conducted a pre-deployment screening of
Applicant for potential counterintelligence concerns as part of his employment as an
interpreter and translator with U.S. troops in Afghanistan. At that time, Applicant stated
he would relinquish the passport after his pre-deployment screening was complete.
When he was interviewed a few days earlier by an investigator from the Office of
Personnel Management (OPM), he stated his intent to relinquish his foreign passport
after screening. Applicant subsequently deployed to Afghanistan for work as an
interpreter. Between September and November 2011, Applicant completed paperwork
and affidavits showing he had renounced his Pakistani citizenship and relinquished his
Pakistani passport to his FSO. (Ax. I) 
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept, those
factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).8
4
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue6
to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.8
Analysis
Foreign Preference
Applicant renewed his Pakistani passport in 2007, after receiving U.S. citizenship
and a U.S. passport. The foreign passport is valid until 2013. Although he has never
used that passport, his renewal is sufficient to raise a security concern about foreign
preference. That concern is expressed at AG ¶ 9, as follows:
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
5
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of
the United States. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
condition at AG ¶ 10(a):
exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current
foreign passport.
Applicant has corroborated his claim that he relinquished his Pakistani passport
to his security officer in Afghanistan. With this fact established, Applicant benefits from
the mitigating condition at AG ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to
the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated). Possession of a foreign
passport in addition to a U.S. passport allows individuals to travel outside the purview of
the U.S. Government. Such conduct is not illegal; however, it has security significance
when an individual with access to classified information is able to travel in and out of the
United States as a citizen of another country.
Applicant was credible in his testimony about his passports and other issues in
this case. However, the Government’s compelling interest in these matters required
documentation of Applicant’s actions to relinquish his passport. Having now been
provided that information, AG ¶ 11(e) applies and Applicant has mitigated the security
concern under this guideline.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
6
