 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ADP Case No. 12-05593 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the concerns arising from her possession of a passport from 
India and her other connections to India. She has continuously resided in the United 
States for the past 20 years, and became a U.S. citizen in 2003. She formally 
renounced her Indian citizenship and relinquished her Indian passport. She started a 
family, purchased a home, and worked her entire adult life in the United States. She has 
close friends, family, and other substantial ties to the United States. Applicant 
established that her preferences squarely lie with the United States and she will resolve 
any potential conflict of interest arising from her ties to India in favor of the United 
States. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 14, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) recommending that Applicant’s eligibility for occupancy of an 
automated data processing (ADP) position, generally referred to as a public trust 
position, be denied due to concerns arising under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and 
Guideline C (Foreign Preference). This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (Feb. 20, 1960) and 
 
2 
 
 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).1 
 
On December 7, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to 
establish her eligibility for a public trust position (Answer). With her Answer, Applicant 
submitted documentation showing that she had formally renounced her Indian 
citizenship and surrendered her Indian passport two years earlier. On February 4, 2013, 
Department Counsel indicated the Government was ready to proceed with a hearing. 
On February 11, 2013, I was assigned Applicant’s case. The following day a notice of 
hearing was issued, scheduling Applicant’s case for March 5, 2013. 
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel stipulated that, based on the evidence Applicant 
submitted with her Answer, the foreign preference concerns were mitigated.2 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 and 2, which were admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel also submitted Hearing Exhibit (Hx.) I, a 
proposed summary of facts regarding India. The official, unclassified source documents 
Department Counsel relied on in preparing HE I were marked as exhibits for 
administrative notice (An.) I – XIV, and I have considered them in assessing the security 
concerns at issue. Applicant appeared at the hearing with her husband and they both 
testified. At Applicant’s request, I kept the record open to provide her an opportunity to 
submit additional documents. She timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A – F, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
March 14, 2013, and the record closed on March 29, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 43 years old and was born in India. She married in 1992 and, shortly 
thereafter, immigrated to the United States with her husband, who had procured a job in 
the United States. They settled in the United States and started a family. They have two 
children, who were born in the United States and are now 10 and 17 years old. 
Applicant and her husband became U.S. citizens in 2003.3 
 
 Applicant has worked for her current employer, a U.S. company, for nearly eight 
years. She is a lead database engineer, maintaining her employer’s information 
technology infrastructure that contains sensitive information. Due to her reliability and 
trustworthiness in maintaining and protecting sensitive systems in the past, Applicant 
was selected by her employer to support a DoD contract for which she submitted her 
                                                          
1 Pursuant to a Memorandum from the Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for 
Counterintelligence and Security, dated November 19, 2004 (Memorandum), the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) is directed to utilize the provisions of the Directive, to include Enclosure 2, 
the adjudicative guidelines, to resolve contractor cases forwarded to it for a trustworthiness determination. 
 
2 Tr. at 16-17, 78-79. The Government elected not to withdraw the Guideline C allegation and, to 
avoid any potential issues, I have made formal findings regarding said allegation.  
 
3 Tr. at 34, 41-42, 51-52, 58-60; Gx. 1-2; Ax. A; Answer. 
 
 
3 
 
 
application for a public trust position. She has worked in the United States for the past 
16 years and previously served as the database engineer for other U.S. companies, 
including a major U.S. accounting firm. Her current annual salary is approximately 
$120,000. She has received awards and commendations from her current employer for 
her work, including contributions on a project related to the U.S. Patriot Act.4 
 
 Applicant’s husband was also born in India. He is a software engineer for a U.S. 
company. Applicant and her family are deeply involved in their community. Her son is a 
volunteer with the the American Red Cross and has represented his local chapter 
before the state legislator.5  
 
 Prior to becoming a U.S. citizen in 2003, Applicant renewed her Indian passport, 
which was set to expire at the end of 2012. Applicant formally renounced her Indian 
citizenship and surrendered her Indian passport in 2010. No evidence was presented 
that Applicant used her Indian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen or that she has an 
Overseas Citizens of India (OCI) card, which is similar to a U.S. green card and confers 
to its holder certain benefits. Applicant is not eligible for an Indian passport in the future, 
because India does not recognize dual citizenship.6 (SOR ¶ 2.a) 
 
 Applicant’s mother and two of her sisters are citizens and residents of India. Her 
mother is a widow, who never worked outside the home and financially supports herself 
through her late husband’s pension. One of her sisters is also a widow and works as a 
clerk for an insurance company. The other sister is married and does not work outside 
the home. Applicant is close to her mother and sisters. She maintains frequent contact 
with them, and visits them when she travels to India.7 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.b) 
 
 Applicant’s third sister is a U.S. citizen. She is currently living in India with her 
husband and children, because her husband’s U.S. job transferred him there for a short-
term project. Once her husband’s project in India is completed, Applicant’s sister plans 
to return to the United States, where she owns a home. Her sister’s husband and their 
children are U.S. citizens.8  
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and one of her husband’s three brothers are citizens 
and residents of India. Her mother-in-law has lawful permanent residency status in the 
United States (green card), and spends part of the year in the United States with 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 38-39, 42-43, 60; Gx. 1; Ax. A; Ax.D-E.  
 
5 Tr. at 71-72; Gx. 1; Ax. A. 
 
6 Answer; Gx. 1-2. See also, An. XIII at 11 (“India does not permit its citizens to hold dual 
nationality.” As for OCI card holders, they “can travel to and from India indefinitely, work in India, study in 
India, and own property in India . . . An OCI card holder, however, does not receive an Indian passport, 
cannot vote in Indian elections, and is not eligible for Indian government employment.”). 
 
7 Tr. at 43-49, 55-56; Gx. 1-2; Ax. A. 
 
8 Tr. at 49-51. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant and her family. Applicant’s mother-in-law never worked outside the home, is a 
widow, and spends her time visiting her children and grandchildren. She supports 
herself from her late husband’s pension, though Applicant’s husband and his three 
brothers do provide some support to their mother. Applicant’s brother-in-law in is a 
manager of a company in India. Applicant has no other relatives or close friends in 
India.9 (SOR ¶ 1.c) 
 
 In 2006, Applicant opened an Indian non-resident bank account through the 
branch office of an Indian bank, located in the United States. It allows Applicant to 
deposit money in the United States and withdraw it in India. Applicant did so to minimize 
the amount of cash she travels with when traveling to India. She does not use the 
account to financially support her family in India. It has a current balance of 
approximately $2,000 and Applicant manages the account from the United States. 
Applicant is also the co-owner, with her husband, of stocks her husband received from 
his former employer in India prior to their marriage and immigrating to the United States 
in 1992. This foreign investment account is dormant, and Applicant and her husband 
have not had access to it for over 18 years. They believe the stocks in the account have 
grown in value from approximately $1,000, when her husband received the stocks, to 
their current value of approximately $10,000. Applicant and her husband have no 
interest in this investment, and have not been motivated to look for and submit the 
necessary paperwork to reactivate the account. If and when they retire, they might look 
for and provide the necessary information to access the account and transfer the money 
to the United States. Applicant does not have any other financial interest or property in 
India or any other foreign country. She voluntarily disclosed her foreign bank account, 
foreign investment account, and foreign family members on her application for a public 
trust position. She also fully discussed these foreign connections during her ensuing 
background interview for a position of trust.10 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.e) 
 
 Applicant and her husband purchased their home in the United States in 1999. 
They satisfied the mortgage on the home some time ago, and it has a current value of 
approximately $630,000. They also have a number of U.S. investment and retirement 
accounts, totaling over $800,000, and a savings account with a balance of about 
$500,000. Applicant and her husband plan to live their lives, raise their children, and 
retire in the United States.11  
 
Applicant’s employer writes that: 
 
[Applicant] is trustworthy, reliable, organized, efficient, and extremely 
competent. She has an excellent rapport with all team members, our 
partners, clients and customers. Her communication skills, both written 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 52-56; 64-68; Gx. 1-2; Ax. A. 
 
10 Tr. at 34-37, 56-58, 60-62, 65-66, 69-72; Gx. 1-2; Answer. 
 
11 Tr. at 58-61; Ax. B. 
 
 
5 
 
 
and verbal, are excellent. In summary, [Applicant’s] performance and 
professional conduct have been exemplary.12 
 Concerning Applicant’s country of birth,13 India is a multiparty, federal, 
parliamentary democracy with a population of approximately 1.2 billion. Its political 
history, since gaining independence from Great Britain in 1947, has included several 
armed conflicts with Pakistan, assassinations of two prime ministers, sporadic 
outbreaks of religious riots, and violent attacks by several separatist and terrorist 
groups. There is a continuing threat from terrorism throughout the country, including 
attacks on targets where U.S. citizens or Westerners are known to congregate or visit. 
Despite the growth of a large urban middle-class, India remains a largely rural and 
agriculture-based society, and is home to some 500-600 million people living in poverty. 
U.S.-Indian relations are grounded on the two countries shared values of 
democracy, pluralism, and rule of law. Furthermore, the United States is one of India’s 
largest trading and investment partners. The two countries have a common interest in 
the free flow of commerce and resources, including through the vital sea lanes of the 
Indian Ocean. Both countries also share a common interest in fighting terrorism and in 
creating a strategically-stable Asia. Recognizing India’s key strategic position, the 
United States has sought to strengthen its relationship with India. The countries are 
collaborating in a number of areas, to include energy, climate change, trade, education, 
and counterterrorism.  
Despite the two countries strategic alliance, differences exist. The United States 
remains concerned about India’s nuclear weapons programs, pace of economic 
reforms, protection of intellectual property rights, and trade in dual-use technology. 
Historically, India has been one of several countries that engaged in economic 
intelligence collection and industrial espionage targeting the United States. Between 
2004 and 2008, several individuals and companies were convicted or subjected to 
regulatory fines for their roles in illegal exporting or attempting to illegaly export 
restricted technology to India.  
The U.S. State Department notes a number of significant human rights problems 
in India, notably abuses committed by police and security forces. Another significant 
problem is corruption, which remains at significant levels throughout the Indian 
government and contributes to widespread impunity at all levels of government.  
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as sensitive positions. 
The standard that must be met for assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all 
available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that 
                                                          
12 Ax. C. 
 
13 The facts about India are taken from An. I – XIV.  
 
 
6 
 
 
assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.14  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust, an administrative 
judge must apply the provisions of the Directive, to include the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG or guidelines).15 In addition to brief introductory explanations, the guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, considering all available and 
reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
In addition to the guidelines, the Directive sets forth procedures that must be 
followed in trustworthiness adjudications. The Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. While an applicant is responsible for 
presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. An applicant has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility for a public trust position.16  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve any doubt in favor of national security.17  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The foreign influence concern is set forth at AG ¶ 6:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
                                                          
14 Memorandum; Directive, § 3.2. Cf. Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended, ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7, C3.1.2.1.2.3, C6.1.1.1. 
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 2. See also, Memorandum from the Office of the Under Secretary of 
Defense for Intelligence, dated August 30, 2006, directing that the adjudicative guidelines be applied to all 
adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive and DoD Regulation 5200.2-R. 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14 – E3.1.15. 
 
17 Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶2(b). 
 
7 
 
 
An individual’s familial ties to a foreign country can raise the foreign influence 
concern. However, there is no per se rule against applicants for a public trust position 
who have familial ties to a foreign country. Instead, in addressing the foreign influence 
concern, an administrative judge must consider the foreign government involved; the 
intelligence gathering history of that government; the country’s human rights record; and 
the presence of terrorist activity in that country.18  
 
 Applicant’s strong ties to her family members in India raise the foreign influence 
concern. These foreign connections, in light of the threat of terrorism in India and history 
of unauthorized U.S. technology transfers to India, establish the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 7:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;19  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
 Applicant’s foreign connections and finding of heightened risk does not end the 
analysis, because AG ¶ 8 lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the concern. 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are relevant to the case at hand: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
                                                          
18 See ISCR Case No. 11-04980 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2012).  
 
19 See ISCR Case No. 09-08512 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 2011) (judge’s finding that “heightened 
risk” existed was sustained on appeal, because Applicant and his wife had close familial ties to India and 
the risk of terrorism in India).  
 
8 
 
 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply. Applicant has been in this country for more than 20 
years, and she has been a U.S. citizen since 2003. Her entire professional career has 
been in the United States. She started a family in the United States, and her children 
were born and raised in the United States. Applicant and her family are deeply involved 
in their community, and have close friends and family members in the United States. 
While she and her husband still have family in India that they care for, their life and 
future are in the United States. India is a democracy and strategic partner of the United 
States. Technology has been illegally exported to India, but the documents provided for 
administrative notice do not show that coercion was utilized. I find that it is unlikely 
Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of the 
Indian government or her family members in India and the interests of the United 
States. I further find there is no conflict of interest, because Applicant can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States.  
 
 As for the bank account Applicant opened through a U.S. branch office of an 
Indian bank and the dormant foreign investment account that she co-owns with her 
husband, such foreign interests are not substantial when compared to their financial 
holdings and other ties to the United States. Accordingly, I find that there is no likelihood 
Applicant could be subjected to foreign influence through these relatively minor foreign 
financial interests.20 Furthermore, since Applicant voluntarily disclosed these foreign 
financial interests in her application for a public trust position, she can be expected to 
reveal any attempt to influence her through them. More importantly, for all the reasons 
stated above, I find that Applicant would rebuff any attempt to influence her through 
these relatively minor financial interests in India.21 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
 Under AG ¶ 9, the concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States.” Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
 Before Applicant submitted her Answer, the Government was only aware that 
Applicant possessed an Indian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. Such possession 
would normally raise the foreign preference concern and, specifically, the disqualifying 
condition at AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign 
citizenship,” to include “possession of a current foreign passport.” However, with her 
                                                          
20 Specifically, I find that disqualifying condition AG ¶ 7(e) does not apply (“a substantial business, 
financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, 
which could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation”). 
 
21 Assuming arguendo AG ¶ 7(e) applied, it would be mitigated by AG ¶ 8(f) (“the value or routine 
nature of the foreign business, financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a 
conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.”). 
 
9 
 
 
Answer, Applicant submitted documentary proof that she surrendered her Indian 
passport and renounced her Indian citizenship two years before the SOR was issued. 
Applicant refuted the foreign preference concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).22 I incorporate my comments under Guidelines B and C 
herein and note some additional whole-person factors. Although this is Applicant’s first 
application for a public trust position, she has properly maintained and safeguarded 
sensitive information for years. Her employer specifically nominated her to support a 
DoD contract because of her reliability and trustworthiness in handling and protecting 
sensitive information. Trustworthiness adjudications entail a certain degree of predictive 
judgment, where an applicant’s past history is the best indicator of future conduct. 
Applicant established that she has a history of properly handling and safeguarding 
sensitive information and there is no reason to doubt her ability to do so going forward.  
 
 Additionally, Applicant’s personal character and integrity, which are vital matters 
to be considered in assessing an individual’s suitability for a position of trust, are 
unassailable. Applicant has been candid about her foreign connections from the start of 
her background investigation. Furthermore, I had an opportunity to observe her and her 
husband’s demeanors while they testified. I found them forthcoming with details 
regarding their foreign connections to India and wholly credible when they testified 
about their deep and long-standing relationships to the United States. These favorable 
whole-person factors, in conjunction with the mitigating conditions noted above, mitigate 
the concerns at issue. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:         For Applicant 
 
                                                          
22 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of 
the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) 
the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; 
(5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information. Applicant’s request for a public trust position is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
