 
1 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 12-09448 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guidelines B 
(Foreign Influence) and C (Foreign Preference). Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 11, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines B and C. 
This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
On September 24, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and did not elect to have 
a hearing. Department Counsel received Applicant’s case file on October 9, 2012; 
requested a hearing on October 24, 2012; and submitted a ready-to-proceed notification 
on November 29, 2012. The case was assigned to me on February 11, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 15, 2013. The hearing was held as scheduled on March 19, 2013. At the 
hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 
Department Counsel’s list of exhibits was marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. In HE 2, 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of facts concerning 
Afghanistan, which was granted without objection. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. He only had the original of AE A and wanted to submit a copy 
for the record. The record of the hearing was left open and Applicant timely submitted a 
copy of that document. All exhibits were admitted into evidence without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 26, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
SOR and Applicant’s Answer to the SOR 
 
 The SOR contained five Guideline B allegations. Those allegations asserted that 
Applicant’s wife is a citizen of Afghanistan (SOR ¶1.a) and that his parents-in-law, 
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, and mother’s cousin are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan (SOR ¶¶ 1.b–1.e). Under Guideline C, the SOR asserted that Applicant 
applied for, and obtained, an Afghan passport after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen 
(SOR ¶ 2.a) and that he used that Afghan passport to travel to Iran in May 2009 (SOR ¶ 
2.b). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 
1.d, 2.a, and 2.b. Some of his admissions contained explanatory comments. His 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.1 
 
Applicant’s Background and Foreign Contacts 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since February 2012. He was born in Afghanistan. He 
graduated from high school in the United States in June 2006 and attended college for 
about two years. He is married and has one child who is almost two years old. This is 
the first time that he is seeking to obtain a security clearance.2  
 
Applicant’s father was a shoemaker. In 1993, his father was killed in a rocket 
attack while he was standing near a vegetable cart at a bazaar in Kabul. Applicant 
believed the Taliban was responsible for that attack. In about 1991, his sister lost her 
hearing when a rocket exploded near their home. In about 1995, Applicant, his mother, 
and his sister fled to Pakistan to get away from the Taliban. In 2002, they were granted 
                                                          
1 SOR and Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
2 Tr. 6-7, 24, 37-38, 54; GE 1, 2, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
refugee status in the United States. They came to the United States without passports. 
He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in November 2008. His mother and sister are also 
citizens and residents of the United States. His mother has not remarried. His sister is 
his only sibling, and she is not married.3 
 
Applicant’s wife was born in Afghanistan. She is still a citizen of Afghanistan, but 
resides in the United States. From about 2004 to 2010, she lived with her parents as a 
refugee in Iran. Applicant had a courtship with his wife before they married, but their 
marriage was essentially arranged between his mother and her mother who were 
neighbors in Afghanistan.4  
 
Before his marriage, Applicant traveled to Iran from May to August 2009 to meet 
his future wife. He obtained an Afghan passport for that travel. Prior to traveling, he was 
concerned about sending his U.S. passport to the Iranian Interest Section in 
Washington, DC, to obtain a visa. Specifically, he was concerned that his U.S. passport 
would be lost or that he would run into difficulties in Iran if he traveled on a U.S. 
passport. A U.S. Government employee, who administered naturalization tests, 
suggested that it might be better for Applicant to obtain an Afghan passport for use in 
traveling to Iran. After doing some research on the internet, Applicant contacted an 
Afghan consulate and obtained an Afghan passport. When he returned from his trip to 
Iran, he gave his Afghan passport to his mother and told her to destroy it. He later 
checked with his mother and was informed that she destroyed it in 2009. In his 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) dated February 7, 2012, 
Applicant indicated that his Afghanistan passport was destroyed in August 2009. He has 
not obtained another Afghan passport since then and stated that he will not do so in the 
future. During an Office of Personnel Management interview, Applicant indicated that he 
is willing to renounce his Afghan citizenship.5 
 
While in Iran, Applicant and his future wife had an engagement party. In 2009, 
Applicant’s fiancée and her parents moved back to Afghanistan. In August 2010, she 
traveled to the United States on a fiancée visa. Applicant and his wife married the 
month she arrived in the United States. In October 2012, Applicant applied for his wife 
to obtain permanent resident alien status in the United States. The delay in filing for her 
“green card” occurred because he initially had no money to do so and then his wife 
became pregnant and she could not get vaccinated during her pregnancy. She has now 
obtained a work permit, but still is waiting to obtain her “green card.” She plans to 
become a U.S. citizen. She has not left the United States since her arrival. At the time of 
the hearing, she was 23 years old. Their son was born in the United States.6 
 
                                                          
3 Tr. 24-29; GE 2, 3. 
 
4 Tr. 30-31; GE 2, 3. 
 
5 Tr. 31-34, 52-53, 64-68; GE 1, 2, 3. 
 
6 Tr. 34-38, 44-45; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s mother- and father-in-law are citizens of Afghanistan and residents of 
Sweden. While living in Iran, his father-in-law sold meat grinders and had no connection 
with the Iranian Government. In about May of 2012, Applicant’s parents-in-laws were 
granted asylum and moved to Sweden. He believes they may have Swedish “green 
cards.” He indicated they are living there permanently. His father-in-law is elderly, has a 
heart condition, and no longer works. His mother-in-law does not work. They receive 
support from the Swedish Government. Applicant does not support them financially. His 
wife calls her parents about once or twice a month.7 
 
 Applicant’s brother-in-law (wife’s brother), his brother-in-law’s wife, and their 
children are citizens and residents of the Netherlands. His brother-in-law is a tailor and 
has been living in the Netherlands for about ten years. Applicant’s wife had contact with 
her brother about five times in the past year. Applicant’s sister-in-law is a citizen of 
Afghanistan, but has been residing in Germany as a refugee since about May 2012. His 
sister-in-law is apparently separated from her Afghan husband, and resides with her two 
children. Applicant’s wife has contact with her sister through Skype about two or three 
times a month.8 
 
  Applicant’s cousin (mother’s cousin) is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. He 
is about 28 years old and has no affiliation with the Afghan government. He sells 
groceries in a bazaar. Applicant has never met his cousin in person. He has not had any 
contact with his cousin in the past year and did not know whether his cousin was 
married or had ever been arrested.9 
 
 Applicant has a female friend who is a citizen of Afghanistan. They met on 
Facebook while they were both students. They have never met in person. They had the 
same major in college and communicated about their studies. She was then studying at 
a university in Kyrgyzstan. His last conversation with her occurred in about February 
2012. The last email he received from her indicated that she was going to Germany.10 
 
 Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant has not voted in any Afghan elections, 
but has voted in U.S. elections. No evidence was presented that Applicant has any 
financial interests outside the United States. He has filed his U.S. income tax returns as 
required. He has been working as a translator in Afghanistan since about March 2012. 
He has been assigned to U.S. Army counterintelligence teams. In December 2012, he 
received a certificate of appreciation for his exemplary support to a counterintelligence 
team. At times, he is required to wear body armor and other military gear. The military 
installation that he has been assigned to has been subjected to mortar or rocket attacks 
                                                          
7 Tr. 38-41, 60, 60-63; GE 2, 3. 
 
8 Tr. 41-45, 63-64; GE 2, 3.  
 
9 Tr. 45-48; GE 2, 3. 
 
10 Tr. 48-50; GE 2, 3. 
 
 
5 
 
 
while he has been there. He returns to the United States periodically to visit his family. 
His goal is to buy a home in the United States.11 
 
Afghanistan12  
 
 Afghanistan became an independent nation in 1919. A monarchy ruled until a 
military coup in 1973. Following a Soviet-supported coup in 1978, a Marxist government 
emerged. In December 1979, Soviet forces invaded and occupied Afghanistan. Afghan 
freedom fighters, known as Mujahideen, opposed the communist regime. The 
resistance movement eventually led to an agreement known as the Geneva Accords, 
signed by Afghanistan, Pakistan, the United States, and the Soviet Union, that ensured 
Soviet forces withdrew by February 1989.  
 
The Mujahideen were not a party to the negotiations for the Accords and refused 
to accept them. As a result, a civil war continued after the Soviet withdrawal. In the mid-
1990s, the Taliban rose to power largely due to anarchy and the division of the country 
among warlords that arose after the Soviet withdrawal. The Taliban sought to impose an 
extreme interpretation of Islam on the entire country and committed massive human 
rights violations. The Taliban also provided sanctuary to Osama Bin-Laden, to Al Qaida 
generally, and to other terrorist organizations. 
 
 After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States, the Taliban 
rejected U.S. demands to expel Bin-Laden and his followers from Afghanistan. U.S. 
forces and a coalition partnership commenced military operations in October 2001 that 
forced the Taliban out of power in November 2001. After a few years of control by an 
interim government, the first democratic election took place in 2004, and a second 
round took place in 2009. Despite progress made since the Taliban was disposed, 
Afghanistan still faces many daunting challenges. Among these challenges are: 
defeating terrorists and insurgents; recovering from over three decades of civil strife; 
and rebuilding a shattered physical, economic, and political infrastructure.  
 
Afghanistan’s human rights record remains poor. Human rights problems 
included extrajudicial killings; torture and other abuse; poor prison conditions; 
widespread official impunity; ineffective government investigations of abuses by local 
security forces; arbitrary arrest and detention; prolonged pretrial detention; judicial 
corruption; violations of privacy rights; restrictions on freedom of the press; limits on 
freedom of assembly; restrictions on freedom of religion, including on religious 
conversions; limits on freedom of movement; official corruption; violence and societal 
discrimination against women; sexual abuse of children; abuses against minorities; 
trafficking in persons; abuse of worker rights and child labor. There were numerous 
reports of the government – or its agents – committing arbitrary or unlawful killings.  
 
                                                          
11 Tr. 50-60, 68-70; GE 1; AE A. 
 
12 HE 2.   
 
 
6 
 
 
Despite some tactical defeats and operational setbacks, the Taliban-led 
insurgency continues to threaten U.S. and international goals in Afghanistan. The 
insurgents retain the capability and intent to conduct high-profile attacks that have had a 
disproportionate effect on local and international perceptions of security. Although there 
have been some improvements in the Afghan military and police forces, progress is 
slow and uneven. Predatory corruption – extortion, land seizures, illegal checkpoints, 
kidnapping, and drug trafficking that threaten local communities and authority structures 
– has fueled the insurgency and is detrimental to the Afghan people’s perception of their 
government and to the international community’s objectives.  
 
 Criminal networks and narcotics cultivation constitute a source of funding for the 
insurgency in Afghanistan. Streams of Taliban financing from across the border in 
Pakistan, along with funds gained from narcotics trafficking and kidnapping, have 
allowed the insurgency to strengthen its military and technical capabilities. Instability 
along the Pakistan-Afghan frontier also continued to provide Al-Qaida with the 
opportunity to conduct training, planning, and targeting of Western European and U.S. 
interests.  
 
The U.S. Department of State warns that the security threat to U.S. citizens in 
Afghanistan remains critical. Travel in all areas of Afghanistan is unsafe due to military 
combat operations, landmines, banditry, armed rivalry between political and tribal 
groups, and the possibility of terrorist attacks. Numerous high-profile Afghan 
government officials were assassinated in 2011. No part of Afghanistan is immune from 
violence. Even the Afghan capital, Kabul, is considered at high risk for militant attacks, 
including rocket attacks, vehicle-borne IEDs, and suicide bombings.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
7 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them, and the following disqualifying conditions 
potentially apply: 
 
 
8 
 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(c) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone could 
be sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in 
the compromise of classified information. In this case, Applicant’s cousin is a citizen and 
resident of Afghanistan. His wife, parents-in-law, sister-in-law, and a friend are citizens 
of Afghanistan, but reside in other countries. Those continuing, close contacts are 
sufficient to raise Guideline B security concerns.  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an unstable government or subject to 
terrorist activity. Insurgency operations are being conducted in Afghanistan against 
Afghan and U.S. forces. There is also evidence that Afghanistan has a poor human 
rights record and has active terrorist groups operating within its borders. This places the 
burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his contacts in Afghanistan do 
not pose a security risk and that he will not be placed in a position of having to choose 
between his loyalty to the U.S. and his family members. With Afghanistan’s negative 
human rights record, its unstable government, and the violent insurgency being 
conducted within its borders, it is conceivable that Applicant’s family members could be 
vulnerable to coercion. The dangerous circumstances that exist in Afghanistan create a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
I find that AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply in this case. AG ¶ 7(c) does not apply. 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 8. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
 
9 
 
 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Of Applicant’s foreign contacts listed in the SOR, only his cousin continues to 
reside in Afghanistan. Applicant is not close to his cousin. He has never met his cousin 
in person. He has not had any contact with his cousin in the past year. He only had 
contact with his cousin when he was living with his mother and his mother and cousin 
would communicate with each other. Applicant’s contact with his cousin is so casual 
and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it would create a risk of foreign influence 
or exploitation. AG ¶ 8(c) applies to SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
Since the SOR was issued, the residences of most of Applicant’s foreign contacts 
have changed, thereby reducing significantly the likelihood of any foreign influence and 
exploitation in this case. Applicant’s parents-in-law now live in Sweden. His brother-in-
law is a citizen and resident of the Netherlands. His sister-in-law is a resident of 
Germany. His friend listed in the SOR is also in Germany. Given these changes, it is 
unlikely that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual or group and the interests of the United States. Applicant 
is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas in dangerous conditions in support of 
U.S. forces. The Appeal Board has held that an applicant’s proven record of action in 
defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable result for an 
applicant in a Guideline B case.13 Applicant has met his burden of mitigating the security 
concern under Guideline B. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply to all of the Guideline B 
allegations.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference is as follows:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
                                                          
13 ISCR Cases No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr 9. 2008) (internal citations omitted). See also ISCR Case 
No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006) citing ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. May, 30, 2006); and ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006). 
 
 
10 
 
 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to:  
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
 
 After becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant obtained an Afghan passport in 2009. 
He used his Afghan passport to travel to Iran in 2009. AG ¶¶ 10(a) and 10(b) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 11 sets forth conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security 
concerns. Three are potentially applicable here: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willing to renounce dual citizenship; and 
 
(d) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
In 2009, Applicant actively exercised his foreign citizenship by obtaining an 
Afghan passport while he was a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 11(a) does not apply.  He was about 
22 years old when he obtained that foreign passport. His decision to obtain that 
passport was based in part on advice obtained from a U.S. Government employee, but 
he was also concerned about losing his U.S. passport by sending it to the Iranian 
Interest Section to obtain a visa and about being hassled while traveling on a U.S. 
passport in Iran. He no longer has a need to travel to Iran or to obtain a foreign 
passport. He has expressed a willingness to renounce his Afghan citizenship. He 
indicated that his mother destroyed his Afghan passport and that he has no intention of 
obtaining another Afghan passport. AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
11 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B and C in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen that has worked overseas under dangerous conditions in 
support of U.S. forces. Nevertheless, the complicated state of affairs in Afghanistan 
places a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his foreign 
family members in that country do not pose an unacceptable security risk. He has met 
that burden. He only has one family member who remains in Afghanistan and he has 
only casual and infrequent contact with that family member.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising under the foreign 
influence and foreign preference guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
