 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-10862 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations and 
foreign influence. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 26, 2012, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to her on September 28, 2012, under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified 
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to 
Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR 
                                                          
1
 GE1 ((SF 86), dated June 26, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline B 
(Foreign Influence) and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The DOD adjudicators recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR. In a sworn statement, dated 
December 12, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and initially requested 
a decision on the record in lieu of an in-person hearing because she was in 
Afghanistan. She subsequently changed her mind and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to 
proceed February 22, 2013. The case was assigned to me on February 26, 2013. A 
Notice of Hearing was issued on February 27, 2013, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled, by video teleconference, on March 18, 2013. 
 
 During the hearing, nine Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 9) and five 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through AE E) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 26, 2013. I kept the record open to enable 
Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took advantage of that opportunity, and she 
submitted 14 additional documents which were marked as exhibits (AE F through AE S) 
and admitted into evidence without objection. The record was closed on April 8, 2013. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take 
administrative notice of certain enumerated facts pertaining to the Islamic Republic of 
Afghanistan (Afghanistan), appearing in nine U.S. Government publications. Facts are 
proper for administrative notice when they are easily verifiable by an authorized source 
and relevant and material to the case. In this instance, the Government relied on source 
information regarding Afghanistan in publications of the U.S. Department of State,2 the 
Director of National Intelligence,3 and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.4  
 
                                                          
2
 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, dated 
February 7, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 2011 Human Rights 
Report: Afghanistan, dated May 24, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, 
Country Reports on Terrorism 2011, dated July 31, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, 
Travel Warning: Afghanistan, dated June 27, 2012; U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for 
Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 2011, Chapter 5: Terrorist Safe Havens, dated July 31, 2012; U.S. 
Department of State, Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs, Fact Sheet, dated September 6, 2012; and U.S. 
Department of State, Bureau of International Information Programs (IIP) Article, U.S. Declares Haqqani Network a 
Terrorist Organization, dated September 7, 2012. 
 
3
 Director of National Intelligence, Unclassified Statement for the Record on the Worldwide Threat 
Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community for the House Permanent Select Committee of Intelligence, dated 
February 2, 2012. 
 
4
 Statement of Admiral Michael Mullen, U.S. Navy, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff before the Senate Armed 
Services Committee on Afghanistan and Iraq, dated September 22, 2011. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 
201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,5 as set 
forth below under the Afghanistan subsection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted only one of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶ 1.c.). All the remaining factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations and foreign influence (¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b., 1.d. 
through 1.f., and 2.a. through 2.c.) were specifically denied. Nevertheless, Applicant 
actually admitted, with explanations, substantial portions of several of those allegations. 
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since June 
2012, has served as a linguist.6 She previously worked for several different employers 
serving in a variety of positions, including nursing assistant/care giver, customer 
service, loan officer, broker, postal mail sorter, and realtor. Applicant has never served 
in the U.S. military,7 and she has never held a security clearance.8 She currently serves 
as a civilian linguist for the U.S. Army in support of Operation Enduring Freedom at or 
near a military facility in Afghanistan.9  
 
Character References and Work Performance 
 
 In recognition of Applicant’s exceptional performance while stationed in 
Afghanistan with an Army cavalry regiment in 2012, she was awarded a certificate of 
appreciation from her troop commander and linguist manager:10  
 
In recognition of your support to Operation Enduring Freedom and the 
overall Global War on Terrorism. Your dedication, relentless efforts, 
                                                          
5
 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & 
Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize 
authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing 
internet sources for numerous documents).  
 
6
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 14; GE 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated July 11, 2012). 
 
7
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 24. 
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 59. 
 
9
 AE K (Certificate of Appreciation, dated November 26, 2012). 
 
10
 AE K, supra note 9. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
professionalism and expertise proved an invaluable asset to the 
International Security Assistance Forces. Your steadfast commitment, 
support and friendship to Task Force . . . is much appreciated, and we 
hereby acknowledge your great contributions and offer our sincere 
appreciation for a job well done. . . .  
 
The linguist manager of one of the Army units in Afghanistan characterized 
Applicant as “an extreme asset to our mission,” and said she has “earned the trust and 
confidence of every team member, including our Commander.”11 Another linguist 
manager, as well as Applicant’s supervisor on a female engagement team, considered 
Applicant’s presence and quality of performance, especially during a variety of 
operations among the local populace, to be crucial to the mission. Applicant is 
considered the best, by far, of all the linguists working with those particular Army units.12 
A friend, who is a linguist and cultural adviser in Afghanistan, and who has known 
Applicant since they were in high school together, considers Applicant to be selfless, 
kind, and honest.13 Applicant’s son-in-law, a Naval reservist with a top secret security 
clearance, said she was a “committed, dedicated, and a loyal person,” who also 
assisted his family while he was deployed. He also stated that she “is on the top of my 
list of people I trust.”14 
 
Financial Considerations 
It is unclear when Applicant started experiencing financial difficulties which may 
have led to accounts becoming delinquent and placed for collection or charged off. At 
some point around 2005 or 2006, Applicant invested in a small used car dealership. The 
dealership went out of business and she lost her investment.15 She also went through 
two periods of unemployment (June through August 2008, and February 2009 through 
December 2011) during which she did not receive unemployment compensation, but 
was supported by her daughter.16 Because of her business loss and insufficient money 
to enable her to pay her taxes or other bills, accounts became delinquent, placed for 
collection, or charged off, and tax liens were filed against her. 
Before she was employed as a linguist, Applicant provided a personal financial 
statement reflecting a monthly net income of zero; monthly expenses of $200; and 
monthly debt repayments of $100; leaving a monthly deficit of $300.17 She also reported 
                                                          
11
 AE J (Memorandum, dated November 26, 2012). 
 
12
 AE S (Character Reference, dated April 4, 2013); AE Q (Character Reference E-mail, dated April 4, 2013). 
See also, AE P (2012 Annual Assessment, dated December 22, 2012), wherein Applicant was rated “outstanding” in 
all of the ten competencies rated. 
 
13
 AE R (Character Reference E-mail, dated April 3, 2013). 
 
14
 AE L (Letter, dated March 24, 2013). 
 
15
 Tr. at 134. 
 
16
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 16, 18; GE 3, supra note 6, at 2. 
 
17
 GE 5 (Personal Financial Statement, date obliterated). 
 
5 
                                      
 
a savings account with $1,900, and indicated she used her savings to pay her 
expenses.18  
The SOR identified six purportedly continuing delinquencies. There is a state tax 
lien recorded in November 2009, for tax years 2005-2007, in the amount of $3,537.60, 
including $2,667 for tax, $595.82 for penalty, $604.78 for interest, and $258 for 
collection fees, but also reflecting payments of $588 (SOR & 1.a.).19 Although both the 
June 2012 credit report (using information reported by TransUnion), and the August 
2012 ROI, listed the account as a current unresolved tax lien, Applicant had actually 
paid off the outstanding balance and the lien was released on June 15, 2012 – three 
months before the SOR was issued.20 The account has been resolved. 
 
There is another state tax lien recorded in December 2008, for the tax year 2005, 
in the amount of $2,730, including $2,213 for tax, $417.32 for penalty, $445.79 for 
interest, and $247 for collection fees, but also reflecting payments of $588 (SOR & 
1.b.).21 Although Applicant had actually paid off the outstanding balance and the lien 
was released on June 15, 2012, and the August 2012 OPM ROI correctly reported that 
fact, the June 2012 credit report (using information reported by TransUnion) listed the 
account as a current unresolved tax lien.22 The account has been resolved. 
 
There is a federal tax delinquency for the tax periods 2005 and 2007 in the 
amount of $24,995.78 (SOR & 1.c.).23 In May 2012, four months before the SOR was 
issued, Applicant entered into an installment agreement with the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) under which she agreed to make monthly payments of $100, commencing 
June 1, 2012.24 The debt is in the process of being resolved. 
 
There is a credit card account with a high credit of $10,600 that was placed for 
collection and charged off (SOR & 1.d.).25 Applicant’s niece obtained the credit card in 
1990, and placed Applicant’s name on the account as an authorized user in the event of 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
18
 Personal Financial Statement, supra note 17. 
 
19
 GE 4 (Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Report of Investigation (ROI), dated August 30, 2012); GE 
9 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated June 30, 2012), at 5. The August 2012 ROI 
reflects the recording date as November 19, 2009, but the state records indicate the actual date was November 12, 
2009. See, AE A (Release of Lien, dated June 15, 2012. 
 
20
 GE 9, supra note 19, at 5; GE 4, supra note 17; AE A, supra note 19; AE N (Equifax Credit Report, dated 
March 26, 2013), at 4; AE O (TransUnion Credit Report, dated March 26, 2013), at 2. 
 
21
 GE 4 (OPM ROI, dated August 30, 2012) (different from the other ROI of the same date); GE 9, supra 
note 19, at 5.  
 
22
 GE 4, supra note 21; GE 9, supra note 19, at 5; AE B (Release of Lien, dated June 15, 2012);  AE N, 
supra note 20, at 4. 
 
23
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1, supra note 1, at 60. 
 
24
 AE C (Installment Agreement, dated May 17, 2012); GE 1, supra note 1, at 60; GE 3, supra note 8, at 2. 
 
25
 GE 9, supra note 19, at 7. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
an emergency. The niece eventually declared bankruptcy, and her delinquent accounts, 
including this particular account were discharged.26 The creditor declared that when the 
account was reported to the consumer reporting agencies, those agencies “are 
informed that authorized users are not contractually liable for the account.”27 
Nevertheless, the SOR alleged that Applicant was responsible for the account. 
Applicant successfully disputed the account with the creditor, and her name was 
ordered removed from her credit report.28 The account has been resolved. 
 
There is an account with a cable company with a high credit and unpaid balance 
of $275 that was placed for collection (SOR & 1.e.).29 The account was transferred or 
sold to a collection agent. Applicant disputed the account in June 2012, claiming she 
only had an account for two months and had paid it off.30 Her dispute was successful, 
and the collection agent agreed to have the account deleted from her credit report.31 
The account has been resolved. 
 
There is an automobile loan account with a past due balance of $16,474 that was 
placed for collection and charged off (SOR & 1.f.).32 Applicant informed the OPM 
investigator that she had experienced repeated mechanical problems with the vehicle. 
She was aware of a class action lawsuit filed against the manufacturer and eventually 
voluntarily surrendered the vehicle to the manufacturer’s representative.33 Her 
explanation of her action was misinterpreted by the DOD adjudicator as constituting a 
“repossession,” but it was not. The class action resulted in a settlement between the 
parties, including Applicant who was a member of the class. The creditor acknowledged 
Applicant’s dispute in July 2012, and the account was ordered deleted from her credit 
report.34 On November 20, 2012, as part of the settlement of the class action lawsuit, 
the creditor issued Applicant a payment of $513, and her account was closed.35 The 
account has been resolved. 
  
                                                          
26
 GE 3, supra note 8, at 3. 
 
27
 AE F (Letter, dated March 22, 2013). 
 
28
 AE F, supra note 27; AE D (Letter, dated January 4, 2013). 
 
29
 GE 9, supra note 19, at 7; GE 3, supra note 8, at 3. 
 
30
 GE 3, supra note 8, at 3. 
 
31
 AE G (Letter, dated March 25, 2013). 
 
32
 GE 9, supra note 19, at 7. 
 
33
 GE 3, supra note 8, at 3. 
 
34
 AE E (Letter, dated July 2, 2012). 
 
35
 AE H (Letter, dated March 20, 2013); AE E (Letter and Check, dated November 20, 2012). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant was born in Afghanistan.36 Both of her parents (her father was a farmer 
who had previously served in the Afghan Army under the last King of Afghanistan; and 
her mother, a housewife)37 were born in Afghanistan, and they are deceased.38 
Applicant was raised and educated in Afghanistan, and temporarily relocated to 
Pakistan because of the civil unrest and hostilities in Afghanistan during the Soviet 
invasion and occupation. After residing in several other countries as a refugee, she 
immigrated to the United States in 1982.39  She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
1991.40  
 
Applicant was married in Germany in February 1982 or 1983, and divorced in 
April 1994.41 She has one daughter, born in the United States in 1985.42 Applicant’s ex-
husband was born in Afghanistan, but has been a resident of the United States since he 
arrived in the 1980’s, and is a naturalized U.S. citizen.43 Applicant has four brothers, 
three of whom are citizens and residents of Germany, and one who is a citizen and 
resident of Afghanistan.44 Her brother in Afghanistan is a farmer.45 Before her current 
employment, Applicant communicated with him about once every four years.46 She last 
visited with him several years ago, and before that, not since the mid-1990’s. Because 
of concerns for his safety, she has not communicated with him or visited with him since 
she has been in Afghanistan as a linguist. 47  
 
Applicant also has five sisters, three of whom are citizens and residents of 
Germany, one who is deceased, and one who is a permanent resident of Germany but 
a citizen of Afghanistan.48 Although this one sister has resided in Germany for over 20 
                                                          
36
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 5. 
 
37
 GE 6 (Relatives and Associates Chart, dated July 10, 2012), at 1; GE 7 (Afghanistan Relative and 
Associate Organization Chart, dated July 10, 2012), at 1. 
 
38
 GE 6, supra note 27, at 1. 
 
39
 GE 3, supra note 8, at 1; GE 6 (Foreign Travel Chart, dated July 10, 2012). 
 
40
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 8; GE 3, supra note 8, at 1. 
 
41
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 26; GE 3, supra note 8, at 1. 
 
42
 GE 1, supra note 1, at 31; GE 3, supra note 8, at 1. 
 
43
 GE 6 (Foreign Travel Chart, dated July 10, 2012), at 1; GE 3, supra note 8, at 1. 
 
44
 GE 6 (Relatives and Associates Chart), supra note 37, at 1. 
  
45
 Tr. at 104; GE 6, supra note 37, at 1. 
 
46
 GE 6, supra note 37, at 1. 
 
47
 Tr. at 105-106, 115-116. 
 
48
 GE 6, supra note 37, at 1-2; Tr. at 111-114. 
 
8 
                                      
 
years, she is unable to master the German language well enough to pass the test for 
German citizenship.49 Nevertheless, she considers herself a citizen of Germany. 
  
Although she has a step-mother who is a citizen of Afghanistan, residing in 
Germany, Applicant has no relationship with her.50 The woman has resided in Germany 
for over 20 years, and is illiterate and unable to take or pass the examination to become 
a naturalized German citizen.51  
 
With the exception of Applicant’s deceased father, there is no evidence that any 
member of her family has ever been associated with the Afghan military or intelligence 
service. 
 
Applicant has never financially supported any relatives in Afghanistan.52 She 
considers herself to be a loyal American:53 
 
My loyalty is to the United States first. But yes, I want Afghanistan to be at 
peace because I work with these people, with children, and I pray to God 
that one day they - - they have peace and they live a comfortable life. 
 
She acknowledged that her unit has come under fire and been confronted with 
explosive devices, and added:54 
 
. . . I’m in Afghanistan because I want to be there, because I am 53 years 
old, and I’m working with the Army, and these are all young [18, 19, and 
20 years old] soldiers. I’m not only translator or language person there. I’m 
their mother. I’m really their mother, and I want to be there. 
 
Afghanistan  
 
Formerly under the control of the United Kingdom, Afghanistan received 
independence in August 1919. It has common borders with Pakistan on the east and 
the south, Iran on the west, and Russia on the north. Afghanistan has had a turbulent 
political history, including the abolishment of the monarchy in 1973, following a coup 
d'état, invasion by the Soviet Union in 1979, occupation by the Soviet Union until 1989, 
and civil war between the occupiers and home-grown freedom fighters, known as 
mujaheddin. Anarchy ensued, and fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan, 
and religious warlords and their respective militias even after the Soviet Union withdrew 
                                                          
 
49
 Tr. at 108-109. 
 
50
 Tr. at 117-118. 
 
51
 Tr. at 117; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
52
 Tr. at 114. 
 
53
 Tr. at 124. 
 
54
 Tr. at 125, 149. 
 
9 
                                      
 
from the country. By the mid-1990s, the Taliban rose to power and controlled significant 
portions of the country, imposing repressive policies and Sharia law, guiding all aspects 
of Muslim life. Afghanistan became a sanctuary for terrorist groups. 
 
After the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, United States demands that 
Afghanistan expel Osama Bin-Laden and his followers were rejected by the Taliban. In 
October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the country, 
forcing the Taliban out of power. Following a few years of governance by an interim 
government, a democratic presidential election took place in October 2004, and a new 
democratic government took power. Despite the election, many daunting challenges 
remained largely because terrorists including al-Qaida and the Taliban continue to 
assert power and intimidation within the country. Terrorists continue to target United 
States and Afghan interests through suicide bombings, assassinations, and hostage 
taking.  
 
Afghanistan’s human rights record remains poor. There are continuing 
extrajudicial killings; torture and other abuse; widespread official corruption and 
impunity; ineffective government investigations of abuses by local security forces; 
arbitrary arrest and detention; judicial corruption; violations of privacy rights; violence 
and societal discrimination against women; sexual abuse of children; trafficking in 
persons; and restrictions on freedoms of religion, the press, assembly, and movement. 
 
Taliban insurgents retain the capability and intent to conduct attacks and 
kidnappings of Americans, other Western nationals, and members of the local populace. 
The United States has made a long-term commitment to help Afghanistan rebuild itself 
after decades of war, and along with others in the international community, provides 
substantial assistance, focusing on reintegration, economic development, improving 
relations with Afghanistan regional partners, and steadily increasing the security 
responsibilities of the Afghan security forces. Furthermore, there is increased terrorist 
support coming into Afghanistan from Pakistan and Iran. Not only has the security 
situation remained volatile and unpredictable throughout Afghanistan, but there are also 
tensions with Afghanistan over limiting U.S. military operations. 
  
 The security situation in Afghanistan worsened in 2008, driven in part by 
insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous Afghan-
Pakistan border. In early 2009, the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), a semi-
autonomous tribal region in northwestern Pakistan, continued to provide vital sanctuary 
to al-Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups. Al-Qaida 
exploits the permissive operating environment to support the Afghan insurgency, while 
also planning attacks against the United States and Western interests in Pakistan and 
worldwide. Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremists groups, al-Qaida 
uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare regional and 
transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and supplies.  
 
  
 
10 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”55 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”56   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”57 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.58  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
55
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
56
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
57
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
58
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”59 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”60 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise 
security concerns. Commencing in about 2005 or 2006, and continuing for several years 
thereafter, Applicant was unable to pay her taxes or other bills, and accounts became 
delinquent, placed for collection, or charged off, and tax liens were filed against her. AG 
¶¶ 19(a) and19(c) apply.    
 
                                                          
59
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
60
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. Evidence 
that the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.61 In addition, it is potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(e) when the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), 20(d), and 20(e) apply. The nature, frequency, and relative 
recency of Applicant’s purported financial difficulties since 2005 or 2006, and continuing 
for several years thereafter, make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or 
“was so infrequent.” Her financial problems, at least with respect to her tax issues, were 
attributed to a loss of her business investment and two periods of unemployment, 
circumstances that were clearly largely beyond her control. She used her savings to 
remain current on a number of her accounts. In an effort to address and resolve her 
accounts, Applicant contacted her creditors and collection agents regarding the alleged 
delinquent accounts. She managed to pay off her delinquent taxes and resolved her tax 
liens. Applicant successfully disputed two accounts, satisfying one creditor that the 
account was not her responsibility, but that of her niece, and satisfying the other creditor 
by indicating that the account had previously been resolved. The one remaining 
purported delinquent account, listed in the SOR as a repossession rather than a class 
action lawsuit, turned out to be an inaccurate allegation. Applicant had a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of some of her accounts, and provided documented proof 
to substantiate the basis of her disputes. While there is little evidence that Applicant 
ever received financial counseling, there are clear indications that her financial 
                                                          
61
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
problems have been resolved and are under control.62 Applicant’s actions under the 
circumstances confronting her do not cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.63 
There is a substantial risk when one accepts, at face value, the contents of a 
credit report without obtaining original source documentation to verify entries. Credit 
bureaus collect information from a variety of sources, including public records and 
“other sources,” and it is these other unidentified sources that are the cause for 
concern. Likewise, when accounts are transferred, reassigned, sold, or merely churned, 
an individual’s credit history can look worse than it really is. In this particular instance, 
the credit reports referred to several accounts that were either incorrectly reported or no 
longer accurate after the status of the account had changed. Erroneous entries were 
eventually deleted, but it took the combined efforts of Applicant and her creditors to 
accomplish the task. The Appeal Board has previously held that “adverse information 
from a credit report can normally meet the substantial evidence standard.” However, 
when the information in the credit report is refuted by documentation from the actual 
creditor, and the credit reporting company is furnished the correct information but still 
refuses or fails to correct its entries in a timely manner, one can conclude that the 
information in the credit report – actually a summary or secondary evidence pertaining 
to an account – is less accurate, trustworthy, or reliable than the other evidence of 
record.64 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern under the Foreign Influence guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
                                                          
62
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
63
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
64
 In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally meet the substantial 
evidence standard and the government’s obligations under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent 
allegations. At that point, the burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.65 Applicant’s varied relationships with one of her 
brothers, a citizen and resident of Afghanistan; one of her sisters, a citizen of 
Afghanistan and a permanent resident of Germany; and her step-mother, a citizen of 
Afghanistan and a permanent resident of Germany, are current security concerns for 
the Government.  
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), it is potentially disqualifying where there is:  
contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if 
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), security concerns may be raised when there are: 
connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create 
a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to help a 
foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply in this case. However, the security significance of 
these identified conditions requires further examination of Applicant’s respective 
relationships with those two siblings and her step-mother to determine the degree of 
“heightened risk” or potential conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where: 
the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.  
Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may apply where the evidence shows:  
                                                          
65
 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
15 
                                      
 
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where: 
contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent 
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence 
or exploitation.  
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances in light of any 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.66 In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”67 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States. It is reasonable to presume that although a friendly relationship, or the 
existence of a democratic government, is not determinative, it may make it less likely 
that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or 
associates in that foreign country. 
 
As noted above, since October 2001, when U.S. forces and coalition partners led 
military operations in Afghanistan, there has been first an interim government, and then 
a democratic government in Afghanistan. Nevertheless, many daunting challenges 
remained largely because terrorists including al-Qaida and the Taliban continue to 
assert power and intimidation within the country. It is less likely that the Afghan 
government would attempt coercive means to obtain sensitive information. The real 
concern in this instance is not the Afghan government, but rather al-Qaida and Taliban 
terrorists. Applicant’s one brother still resides in Afghanistan and there is substantial risk 
– a “heightened risk” – of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a security clearance. Because of her 
sister’s and step-mother’s permanent residence in Germany, that heightened risk is 
essentially diminished and there is no continuing substantial risk of any kind of foreign 
                                                          
66
 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
67
 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
16 
                                      
 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant 
from holding a security clearance. There is no evidence that Applicant’s brother is or 
has ever been a political activist, challenging the policies of the Afghan government; 
that terrorists have approached or threatened Applicant or her brother for any reason; 
that the Afghan government, al-Qaida, or the Taliban have approached Applicant; or 
that her brother currently engages in activities that would bring attention to himself. As 
such, there is a reduced possibility that he would be a target for coercion or exploitation 
by the Afghan government, al-Qaida, or the Taliban, which may seek to quiet those who 
speak out against them. 
 
Applicant has significant connections to the United States, having lived in the 
United States for over 30 years. Her ex-husband, daughter, and grandchildren are U.S. 
citizens residing in the United States. Applicant wants her security clearance so that she 
can remain in Afghanistan to assist U.S. Armed Forces in their combat and intelligence-
gathering mission there. This is not a situation where an applicant seeks a security 
clearance so he or she can simply work with classified information and enjoy the 
comforts of home in the United States. Applicant has offered to continue to risk her life 
to support the United States’ goals in Afghanistan, and has shown her patriotism, 
loyalty, and fidelity to the United States. Applicant’s continuing relationship with her one 
sister is close and her contacts with her are relatively frequent, too close and frequent to 
generate more than a limited application of AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c). Her relationship with 
her one brother has, because of security concerns, been guarded and infrequent. Her 
relationship with her step-mother is not close and her contact with her is basically 
nonexistent. Applicant has met her burden of showing there is little likelihood that 
relationships with her one brother, or one sister, or her step-mother, could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation. Furthermore, I am persuaded that Applicant’s 
loyalty to the United States is steadfast and undivided, and that she has “such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that [she] can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
17 
                                      
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.68       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s situation, because one of 
her brothers remains an Afghan citizen-resident, and is at risk from al-Qaida and Taliban 
terrorists. Applicant also was unable to pay her taxes or other bills, and accounts 
became delinquent, placed for collection, or charged off, and tax liens were filed against 
her.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant has offered to continue to risk her life to support the United States’ goals in 
Afghanistan, and has shown her patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States by 
remaining embedded with U.S. Army infantry units. She is fully aware of the risks to 
herself and her brother from al-Qaida and Taliban terrorists. These circumstances 
increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report any attempts by a 
foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit her.69 Moreover, 
while the “heightened risk” of terrorist activities occurring in Afghanistan is of 
significance, it should also be remembered that terrorists and would-be terrorists are 
also active in the United States, creating a substantial risk here as well. With the vast 
majority of her family members residing either in the United States or Germany, there is 
a reduced risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
As far as the financial issues are concerned, Applicant resolved all of the tax 
delinquencies, had her liens released, and successfully disputed and corrected the 
erroneous allegations of other delinquencies. Under the evidence presented, I have no 
questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
                                                          
68
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
69
 See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). 
 
18 
                                      
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
