 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-12170 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has a federal tax debt 
and three accounts placed for collection, which are unresolved. Applicant failed to rebut 
or mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 the DoD issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on October 26, 2012, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. On November 12, 2012, Applicant answered the 
SOR and elected to have the matter decided without a hearing. Department Counsel 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated 
November 15, 2012. The FORM contained ten attachments (Items 1 – 10). On February 
15, 2013, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to 
file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially 
disqualifying conditions. On March 28, 2013, Applicant’s response to the FORM was 
received. On April 11, 2013, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admits the allegations and states he has a 
monthly repayment plan with the Internal Revenue Service whereby he makes $105 
monthly payments on his tax debt (SOR 1.a). He stated he would pay the remaining 
delinquent accounts. His admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of 
the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old linguist who has worked for a defense contractor since 
July 2012. His work location was in Afghanistan. He is married and has a four-year-old 
child. He was previously married from 1997 to 2007. In 2003, Applicant filed for Chapter 
7 bankruptcy protection and discharged approximately $20,000 in debt. (Item 7) He filed 
after losing his job.  
 The state had imposed a state tax lien for Applicant’s failure to pay his 2006 state 
income taxes. After paying the tax, the tax lien was removed in May 2010. He failed to 
pay his 2000, 2002, 2008, and 2009 federal income taxes. On June 11, 2012, Applicant 
had entered into an installment agreement with IRS to pay his past-due tax. He was 
required to start making $105 monthly payments in July 2012. (Item 6) On June 22, 
2012, Applicant received a letter from the Department of the Treasury stating the 
Appeals Office had determined all action by the IRS had been appropriate, but had 
determined to withdraw the tax lien. (Item 6) 
In Applicant‘s SOR response (Item 4), he alleged he was paying the IRS $105 
monthly and would pay the other four debts when he returned from Afghanistan. The 
SOR informed him he could introduce evidence on his behalf and the Judge would 
make a decision based on “all of the written materials provided.” (Item 2) The FORM put 
him on notice that he had to present sufficient evidence to support allegations of 
payment. He failed to produce any documents showing he had made actual payments. 
In his response to the FORM he again alleged he was paying $105 monthly to the IRS. 
In August 2012, Applicant completed a personal financial statement (PFS). (Item 
6) At that time, his net monthly income was $4,300, his monthly expenses were 
approximately $3,300, and he was paying $170 on his debts. He listed he was paying 
$65 monthly on his student loans and $105 monthly to the IRS. His monthly net 
remainder (monthly income less monthly expenses and debt payment) was $835. On 
that form he asserts the $475 medical bill (SOR 1.d) and the $746 automobile collection 
debt were his ex-wife’s debts. (Item 6) He was a cosigner on his ex-wife’s vehicle. On 
the PFS, he listed $8,700 in his 401(k) retirement fund. 
 
3 
In a September 2012 interview (Item 6), Applicant indicated when he obtained his 
telephone he was receiving text messages, which were apparently for the individual 
who had previously had the telephone number. Applicant received numerous text 
messages, which were not covered by his telephone service plan. His first month’s 
service bill was more than $1,000 due to the unwanted text messages. During the 
interview, he indicated he was disputing this debt. In his SOR response (Item 4), he 
admitted the $1,148 debt listed in SOR 1.c. In his FORM response, he said he was 
paying this debt. 
During the same September 2012 interview, Applicant stated he was going to 
pay the $4752 (SOR 1.d), $433 (SOR 1.e), and $746 (SOR 1.f) debts with his first 
paycheck from his new job. (Item 6) In November 2012, he said he would pay the debts 
as soon as he returned from Afghanistan. In March 2013, he stated he had paid the 
$433 (SOR 1.e) debt and the $746 (SOR 1.f) debt. He stated he was paying his tax debt 
(SOR 1.a) and the $1,148 (SOR 1.c) debt. In March 2013, he said he was unsure about 
the $475 (SOR 1.d) debt. In July 2012, when he completed his Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), he stated he was unsure about 
this debt and planned on finding out about it. (Item 5) 
The FORM provides a good discussion of the rationale for the security concerns 
at issue. The FORM advised Applicant of his right to submit objections, rebuttal, 
extenuation, mitigation, or explanation, sufficient to overcome the security concerns 
raised by the SOR. A February 19, 2013 DOHA letter informed Applicant that before the 
FORM was sent to the Administrative Judge he had the opportunity “to review the 
attached copy of the complete file and submit any material you wish the Administrative 
Judge to consider or to make any objections you may have as to the information in the 
file.”  
In response to the FORM, Applicant provided telephone numbers and contact 
points from various individuals he spoke with concerning the SOR debts. He did not 
provide any documents from those creditors, copies of cancelled checks, or other 
documents showing he had actually made payment to those creditors. He also provided 
a copy of his March 28, 2013 credit bureau report (CBR). There is nothing in the CBR 
showing he has made payment on his past-due tax obligation or the four SOR debts. 
The July 2012 CBR (Item 10) lists the tax obligation (SOR 1.a, $6,844), a collection 
account (SOR 1.c, $1,148), an unpaid medical debt (SOR 1.d, $475), a telephone 
collection account debt (SOR 1.e, $433), and a charged-off automobile account (SOR 
1.f, $746).  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
2 During the interview, Applicant stated he did not know the origin of this debt, but still intended to pay it 
with his first check from his new company. (Item 6)  
 
4 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
 
5 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Behavior in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may 
behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. He had a bankruptcy in 2003, a tax 
obligation, and four additional unpaid, charged-off accounts, or accounts placed for 
collection, which total approximately $9,600. The evidence supports application of 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶19.a, “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG 
¶19.c, “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
 Applicant has been aware of the security concerns over his unpaid accounts 
since his September 2012 interview. At that time, he stated was making monthly 
installment payments on his tax debt and would pay three additional debts with his first 
pay check from his new company. He provided a copy of the IRS installment plan, but 
he failed to provide documents establishing that he was making monthly payments to 
that plan as agreed. He provided no documents from the creditors establishing payment 
on any of the accounts or that he has arranged repayment plans on the other four 
delinquent accounts. He asserts he had paid two of the SOR debts, but submitted no 
documents showing payment. He failed to provide documents such as copies of 
cancelled checks or bank records showing debits, or other proof that he is actually 
making the payments. 
 
Applicant has five delinquent debts, which remain unpaid. There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude his actions happened under unusual circumstances or that they 
are unlikely to recur. He, at one time, disputed the telephone debt, but has provided no 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of his dispute. There is no evidence he has 
received financial counseling in the last several years, that there is a clear indication 
that his financial problems are being resolved, or that his financial problems are under 
control.  
 
 
6 
Applicant’s response lacks evidence that he has acted responsibly to address the 
SOR debts. There is no evidence of a good-faith effort to repay his creditors. I find none 
of the mitigating conditions apply. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case.  
 
In not requesting a hearing, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. 
However, in so doing he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
articulate his position, and mitigate the financial security concerns. He failed to offer 
evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation regarding his past efforts to 
address his delinquent debt. By failing to provide such information, and in relying on 
only a brief explanation, financial considerations security concerns remain.  
 
Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled without a hearing, I am 
unable to evaluate his demeanor, appearance, or credibility. From the record, I am 
unable to find Applicant was sincere, open, and honest. Even if I found for him in these 
matters, there is no evidence of payment on the delinquent debts.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a life time 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances a clearance is not 
recommended, but should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
 
7 
with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, he may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid. It is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2(a)(1)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a – 1.f:  Against Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_____________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge
 
