 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-11110 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kevin W. Kloster, Personal Representative 
 
 
April 24, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct security 
concerns. Drug Involvement security concerns arose out of Applicant’s marijuana use 
during the period of January 2003 to January 2007; and in September 2009 while 
holding a security clearance. Personal Conduct security concerns arose out of 
Applicant’s drug use, his answers to questions about his drug use on his March 2008 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigative Processing (e-QIP), and his disclosures 
about his drug use to an investigative agent. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 27, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
 
2 
 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 3, 2013, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 19, 2013. 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 
19, 2013, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on April 8, 2013. The 
Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted without objection. 
The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one witness. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 17, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old government contractor. He possesses both a 
bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree awarded by the same prestigious university. 
He has been married for seven years, and has a newborn daughter. (GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 
48, 51.)  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant used marijuana from January 2003 to January 
2007 and again in September 2009, after he was hired by a government contractor in 
March 2008 and granted a DOD Secret security clearance. The SOR also alleged that 
Applicant deliberately omitted, on his March 2008 e-QIP, his drug use from January 
2003 to January 2007, and provided false answers regarding his September 2009 drug 
use during an interview with another government agency in October 2009. In his 
Answer and during his testimony, Applicant admitted all of the allegations contained in 
the SOR pertaining to his marijuana use, but denied intentionally falsifying his e-QIP or 
intentionally misleading the government agent concerning his marijuana use. (Answer; 
GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 53.) 
 
 Applicant testified that between the ages of 19 and 23 he infrequently 
experimented with marijuana during his college years from January 2003 to January 
2007.  He estimated that he used marijuana 10 to 12 times when he visited friends at 
other universities. He graduated with his master’s degree in August 2007. He did not 
use marijuana from January 2007 through August 2009. (GE 1; Tr. 24-32.) 
 
 In March 2008, Applicant began employment with a government contractor. He 
completed an e-QIP on March 21, 2008, in connection with that position. The e-QIP 
asked: “Section 24: Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity a. Since the age of 16 or 
in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used any controlled 
substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, 
morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants (barbituates, 
methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription 
drugs?” Applicant answered, “No.” Applicant testified he does not recall indicating “No” 
to this question and indicated he did not intentionally provide false information. (GE 2; 
Tr. 37-38, 57-60.) Applicant was subsequently granted a Secret security clearance.  
 
3 
 
 On June 16, 2009, Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions, Standard Form 86 (SF 86) while applying for program access with another 
government agency. Section 23 asked Applicant: “In the last 7 years, have you illegally 
used any controlled substance, for example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, 
hashish, etc.) narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants 
(amphetamines, speed, crystal methamphetamine, Ecstacy, ketamine, etc.) 
depressants (barbituates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, 
PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants (toluene, amyl, nitrate, etc.) or prescription drugs 
(including pain killers? Use of a controlled substance includes injecting, snorting, 
inhaling, swallowing, experimenting with or otherwise consuming any controlled 
substance.” Applicant answered, “YES,” and disclosed “very infrequent recreational 
marijuana use” from “1/2003-1/2007 (EST).” He submitted his application for program 
access in July 2009. He knew that he would be subject to a polygraph as a result of his 
application for program access. (AE 1; GE 3; Tr. 38-40, 60-62.)  
 
 In 2009 Applicant was interviewed by a government agent in connection with his 
application for program access after submitting his SF 86. The interview took placed 
prior to Labor Day weekend in 2009.1 During the interview, Applicant discussed his 
marijuana use from January 2003 to January 2007. (GE 3; Tr. 40-46.) 
 
 Shortly after the interview, Applicant took a trip out of state to visit a friend for 
Labor Day weekend. During that trip, he used marijuana on three consecutive evenings. 
He possessed a Department of Defense security clearance at the time of this marijuana 
use. He acknowledged that he knew it was a violation of federal law, national security 
regulations, and his company’s policies to use marijuana, but that he “was just not 
thinking about it, and [he] wasn't considering the consequences.”(Tr. 30-34, 50, 64-65.) 
 
 In October 2009, a government agent contacted Applicant and questioned him 
further about his marijuana use from January 2003 to January 2007. Applicant 
discussed his January 2003 to January 2007 marijuana use with the agent during the 
conversation. He testified that near the end of their conversation he volunteered the 
additional information that he smoked marijuana two to four times between September 
4, 2009, and September 8, 2009. (Tr. 41-45.) 
 
 As a result of his marijuana use, his application for program access with another 
government agency was denied based solely on his drug involvement. He was notified 
of the denial by letter dated January 20, 2010. The letter of denial also indicated: 
 
During your September 2009 background investigation, you reaffirmed 
you used marijuana 10 times total between January 2003 and January 
2007. You said the marijuana you used was provided by friends and that 
you did not purchase it. You mentioned that you received a “Baggie” of 
marijuana as a wedding gift in 2005 and that you and your wife smoked it 
together. You also stated that you stopped using marijuana because you 
                                                          
1 The exact date of the first interview was not specified. There were no written records of this interview 
offered into evidence. 
 
 
4 
 
knew it was irresponsible to break the law and because you were getting 
an important job. You said you had no intentions of using illegal drugs in 
the future. 
 
During an October 2009 telephone interview with a security representative 
you initially reaffirmed your illegal drug use as listed on your S[F] 86 and 
discussed during your BI. However, after you were advised there may be 
additional security processing to include a polygraph examination, you 
changed your dates and amounts of illegal drug use. You added that you 
smoked marijuana two to four times between 04 September and 08 
September 2009. When you were asked why you used marijuana while 
holding a security clearance, you stated that you believe smoking 
marijuana is harmless although “irresponsible.” (GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant’s Secret security clearance was also suspended. Applicant waited one 
year and reapplied for a security clearance. He completed an e-QIP on March 1, 2011. 
On the e-QIP, he disclosed marijuana use from January 2003 to January 2007, and 
September 4 through September 7, 2009, as discussed above.2 (GE 1, GE 3.) 
 
 Applicant testified he is “older and wiser” now. He acknowledged the seriousness 
of his transgressions. On December 31, 2012, he signed a statement of intent not to 
abuse any drugs in the future. He testified that he has not used any illegal substances 
since Labor Day weekend in 2009. Applicant no longer associates with marijuana users. 
He testified that if he discovered any friends or acquaintances using marijuana, he 
would immediately leave the premises. (Tr. 26, 34-35.) He explained his 2009 use, 
noting: 
 
I just think that, you know, the first few years that I came out here, it may not 
have just sunk in to me at the time how egregious an error like that would 
be. I never sought it out really. I found myself in that situation, and I, you 
know, obviously acted on it, and it was a huge mistake. Through all of this, 
as a lesson learning and just life i[n]general, I know now how stupid that was 
and how foolish. I wouldn't say that I'm anywhere close to as naive as I was 
back then. (Tr. 33-34.) 
  
 Applicant is well respected by those who know him, as verified by the witness 
who testified on his behalf. Additionally, Applicant presented letters of recommendation 
that attest to the high quality of his character. Applicant is credited for exhibiting a 
sterling record of discretion, trustworthiness, and integrity through the eyes of his co-
workers, over the past few years. He has been awarded a number of “spot awards” and 
was nominated for an individual achievement award for his exceptional work 
performance. Further, witnesses verify that his personal life is now consistent with his 
work life. (Tr. 82-89; AE C; AE D.) 
   
                                                          
2 Applicant’s March 1, 2011 e-QIP uses the date of September 7, 2009, instead of September 8, 2009, as 
set out above. This minor discrepancy is not alleged to raise security concerns. 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR ¶¶ 1.a.-1.b.). Applicant used marijuana from 
January 2003 to January 2007; and during September 2009 while holding a security 
clearance. The facts established through the Government’s evidence and through 
Applicant’s admissions raise security concerns under all of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant has worked hard to excel in his career. Since his last marijuana use, 
over three-and-a-half years ago, Applicant has matured. He now has a young daughter 
and is dedicated to his family. He has ceased association with any friends that continue 
to use illegal substances. He avoids environments where illegal drugs are used, and he 
has signed a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
 
7 
 
violation. He performs well at work, as attested to by those that know him best. He has 
not used any type of legal or illegal intoxicant since 2009. He pledged to not allow drugs 
to interfere with his job or future. These mitigating conditions apply, but are outweighed 
by other evidence in this case.  
 
Applicant used marijuana infrequently from 2003 to 2007, and again over Labor 
Day weekend in 2009 while possessing a security clearance. In September 2009 
Applicant told the investigating agent that he “stopped using marijuana because [he] 
knew it was irresponsible to break the law and because [he was] getting an important 
job.” He also indicated he “had no intentions of using illegal drugs in the future.” Shortly 
after making these statements he used marijuana on multiple occasions. More than two 
years passed between his marijuana use in January 2007 and his use in September 
2009. He made a conscious choice to use marijuana again, despite his responsibilities 
that existed at the time to his job and wife. Given these facts, I cannot afford much 
weight to his signed statement without the passage of additional time and a 
demonstrated commitment to remaining drug free.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal 
in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a basis for 
 
8 
 
exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence service or 
other group. 
 
 Applicant was repeatedly dishonest about the full extent of his marijuana use. He 
deliberately omitted his January 2003 to January 2007 marijuana use on his March 
2008 e-QIP. He also intentionally failed to disclose his September 2009 marijuana use 
in a timely manner when he was interviewed about drug use in October 2009. He did 
not disclose the information until he was advised that he would likely have to take a 
polygraph in the future. He knew his actions were illegal, a violation of security policies, 
and in violation of his employer’s policies. He substituted his own misguided judgment 
that “smoking marijuana is harmless,” and in doing so, he demonstrated that he lacked 
the good judgment to comply with rules and regulations that are counter to his desires. 
The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 Applicant corrected the omission of his January 2003 through January 2007 
marijuana use on his March 2008 e-QIP by disclosing it on his June 2009 SF 86. He did 
so before being confronted with facts concerning his marijuana use, but his disclosure 
was not timely. It took place over a year after the initial falsification. I find that AG ¶ 
17(a) does not apply to Applicant’s March 2008 falsification. In Applicant’s October 2009 
discussion with the government agent, he initially did not disclose his September 2009 
marijuana use. However, he eventually chose to disclose it during that same 
conversation. His disclosure to the agent was prompt and before he was confronted 
with facts to the contrary. AG ¶ 17(a) is applicable, in part. 
 
 Applicant’s eventual disclosures of his marijuana use do not mitigate the 
concerns relating to his poor judgment and vulnerability to coercion. He made poor 
decisions to violate laws, security procedures, and company policies because he did not 
agree with them. Applicant exhibited a pattern of exercising poor judgment in using 
 
9 
 
marijuana with a security clearance after indicating to a Government agent that he 
would not use the drug again. He failed to produce sufficient evidence that similar 
lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur, without the passage of more time or other 
evidence that demonstrates trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) 
are not applicable.  
 
 Applicant has earned an excellent reputation for honesty and trustworthiness at 
work. However, not enough time has passed to know whether Applicant could again be 
tempted to violate laws or other rules for his own personal benefit, as he did when he 
knowingly used marijuana after being granted a security clearance. AG ¶ 17(e) does not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is highly respected 
by those who know him. He has not used marijuana since September 2009. He has 
divulged information about his drug use, although not always in an expedient manner. 
He has signed a written statement that he will not use illegal substances in the future. 
However, he broke a similar vow to abstain from drug use in the past. Not enough time 
has passed since Applicant’s drug use in 2009 to permit a finding that future drug use is 
unlikely to occur. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Drug Involvement and Personal Conduct 
security concerns. 
 
 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
