KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant failed to demonstrate that she had been granted a third continuance of her
case.  The Judge did not deny Applicant the due process afforded under the Directive.  The
Judge’s finding that Applicant had falsified her answers in her clearance application is
sustainable.  Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 10-07104.a1
DATE: 02/25/2013
DATE: February 25, 2013
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-07104
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 7, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On November 30, 2012, after the hearing, Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
1The SOR alleged at ¶ 2(a) that Applicant had failed to disclose a judgment against her in the amount of $5,856.
At ¶ 2(b), the SOR alleged that Applicant had deliberately failed to disclose that several of her delinquent debts had been
turned over to a collection agency.  ¶ 2(c) alleged that Applicant had failed to disclose that a specified account had been
charged off.  The Judge found that these false answers were deliberate.  The SOR alleged one other falsification, but the
Judge resolved that one in Applicant’s favor.  
2Department Counsel did not file a Reply Brief. 
2
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether she was denied due process;
whether the Judge erred in concluding that she had deliberately provided false answers in her
security clearance application (SCA); and whether the Decision was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  The Judge’s favorable findings under Guideline F are not at issue in this appeal.
Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant’s
SOR alleged that she had provided false answers to certain questions on her SCA.1  The Judge found
that Applicant had provided several explanations for her answers.  He found that she variously
claimed that she had made an honest mistake, that she should have answered the questions in the
affirmative, and that she should have reviewed her answers before submitting the SCA.  
In the Analysis, the Judge noted that in her Answer to the SOR, Applicant appeared to claim
to be unaware of the judgment against her.  This was not consistent with her testimony that she knew
she had a judgment against her and should have answered the question “yes.”  Applicant also stated
that she had intended to disclose the judgment against her but unaccountably failed to do so. He
found that she made another explanation for her false statements in that she claimed to have paid off
the debts, which, in her view, provided some excuse for her answers.  The Judge stated the
following: 
After carefully weighing Applicant’s answers and her testimonial responses to SOR
¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c, it is clear that she deliberately falsified the [SCA] to conceal
relevant information about her financial problems and improve her chances of
receiving security clearance access.  Decision at 8.  
 In evaluating the mitigating conditions, the Judge stated that Applicant had made no efforts
to correct her false answers and that she continued to deny that she had falsified the SCA.  In the
whole-person analysis, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s failure simply to admit her
falsifications undercut her efforts to demonstrate mitigation.  
Applicant has raised an issue of due process.  Her brief refers to matters outside the record,
which we generally are not able to consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  However, we have, in appropriate
cases, considered evidence outside the record insofar as it raises issues of due process, jurisdiction,
etc.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-05486 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 1, 2012).  In this case we will consider
Applicant’s assertions insofar as they shed light on her claim that the Judge granted her a
continuance that DOHA subsequently failed to schedule.2  
3The Judge opened the hearing on August 30, in order to make part of the record the circumstances of
Applicant’s failure to appear due to the accident.  A transcription of this hearing is included in the record.  
3
The hearing in Applicant’s case was originally scheduled for June 22, 2012.  However, the
Judge granted a continuance until August 30, 2012.  On that date Applicant was in an automobile
accident,3 so the hearing was again continued, this time until October 1, 2012.  Applicant argues that
she was granted another continuance, until October 15, 2012.  She states that she had been unable
to attend this last hearing, due to a death in the family, and got in touch with the Department Counsel
to reschedule it.  However, she states that Department Counsel never got back with her.  
The transcript demonstrates that, at the end of the October 1, 2012, hearing, the Judge agreed
to hold the record open until October 16, 2012, in order to enable Applicant to submit additional
evidence.  He advised Applicant as follows: “October 16th, you have until that particular day to
submit information to [Department Counsel], and then he will pass that information to me.”  Tr.,
October 1, 2012, at 81.  At the end of the hearing the Judge announced adjournment.  Tr., October
1, 2012, at 83.  There is nothing in the record to demonstrate that Applicant submitted additional
documentation during the time extension she had been granted.  The Judge stated that the record
closed on October 16, 2012.  Decision at 2.
The record provides no support for Applicant’s contention that she had been granted a third
continuance of her hearing.  To the contrary, the Judge simply held the record open until October
16 for the submission of additional documentation, which Applicant apparently failed to do.  The
Judge’s instructions to Applicant were clear and, even if Applicant actually believed she had
received a further continuance, such a belief was not reasonable under the circumstances.
Accordingly, we conclude that Applicant was not denied the due process afforded her by the
Directive.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-06659 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 22, 2012).  
Applicant takes issue with the Judge’s finding that she had deliberately falsified her answers
to the SCA.  In analyzing an applicant’s mens rea, a Judge must consider the applicant’s answers
in light of the entire record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-04821 at 4 (App. Bd. May 21, 2012).  In
this case, the Judge cited to Applicant’s inconsistent statements, her acknowledgment that she
should have answered at least one of the questions differently, and her failure give a reasonable
explanation  for the false statements.  This evidence supports the Judge’s finding about the deliberate
nature of the falsifications.  To a certain extent, Applicant’s argument on appeal repeats her
presentation at the hearing.  As such, it amounts to nothing more than a challenge to the Judge’s
weighing of the evidence.  It is not sufficient to undermine the finding at issue.
Applicant contends that the Judge failed to consider all of the record evidence, such as her
claims that certain of the debts were not owed and evidence which she believes demonstrates her
trustworthiness.  Concerning the debts, the Judge entered favorable findings regarding all of the
Guideline F allegations.  Moreover, he made a finding describing her testimony concerning her
honesty and trustworthiness.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered
all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-02311 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 26, 2012).
4
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan             
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                   
Jean E. Smallin 
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
