 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-09264 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 15, 2009, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On June 4, 2012, the Department of Defense 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on July 15, 2012 (Answer). Applicant 
requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On November 20, 2012, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on November 26, 2012. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
December 7, 2012. Applicant filed a Response to the FORM on January 1, 2013, within 
the 30 day time allowed that would have expired on January 6, 2013. I received the 
case assignment on January 31, 2013. Based upon a review of the complete case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.h and 1.i and admitted all 
other allegations. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant is 47 years old and separated from his wife since 2008. He has two 
adult children. He served in the U.S. Army from 1983 to 1998. Applicant works for a 
defense contractor. Applicant asserts in his FORM Response he remarried in 2012 and 
is trying to repay his debts. (Item 5) 
 
The SOR lists nine delinquent debts. Applicant admits the first seven debts and 
denies owing the last two debts. These debts total $121,543, including his delinquent 
house mortgage. Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to debts incurred by his 
wife before their separation and his obligation to pay for two residences after their 
separation. (Answer; Items 6, 7) 
 
Applicant interviewed with government investigators in November 2009 and 
March 2010. He discussed his delinquent debts with the investigators at both sessions. 
He also had a third interview in August 2010 to discuss a driving under the influence 
arrest which is not the subject of any allegation in the SOR. (Item 6) 
 
 Applicant owes a community college $866 (Subparagraph 1.a). The current 
amount of the debt is $715.47. Applicant claims he arranged a $50 monthly payment 
plan starting on July 11, 2012. His Response contained two billing documents showing 
another $50 payment was due December 12, 2012. Applicant’s regular payment plan is 
shown in two documents submitted with his FORM Response. This debt is being 
resolved.  
 
 Applicant owes a music mail-order club $95 (Subparagraph 1.b). Applicant 
claims this debt was paid on July 10, 2012, but he did not submit any information 
validating his assertion. The credit report of November 14, 2012, contained in the 
FORM shows the debt as unpaid as of that date. This debt is unresolved. (Answer; Item 
11) 
 
 Applicant owes a bank $427 on a credit card debt (Subparagraph 1.c). The debt 
appears on his April 6, 2012 credit report in the File. His November 14, 2012 credit 
report in the File shows the balance as zero. Applicant paid this debt on October 23, 
2012. The debt was owed on a credit card his former wife had. This debt is resolved. 
(Items 10, 11; FORM Response)  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant purchased an automobile operated by his former wife. It has a $5,023 
balance on the loan (Subparagraph 1.d). He claims in his Answer he is paying $250 
monthly to repay this loan. Applicant did not submit any documents proving he is 
making these payments. However, the debt continues to appear on Applicant’s credit 
reports as unpaid, as late as November 14, 2012. This debt is unresolved. (Items 8-11; 
Answer)   
 
 An automobile purchased by Applicant has a debt balance on the purchase loan 
of $7,724 (Subparagraph 1.e). The seller repossessed the car. Applicant contends he 
pays $101 monthly to repay this debt. Applicant submitted a document with the same 
final four digits of the loan number showing a check sent to the creditor in December 
2012 on a balance of $6,713.78. The November 14, 2012 credit report shows this debt 
is a paid repossession. This debt is being resolved. (Items 8-11; Answer; FORM 
Response attachment)  
 
 Applicant’s mortgage lender listed his home as a foreclosure with a loan balance 
of $106,000. The house was purchased in 2001. This home was foreclosed in 2009 
(Subparagraph 1.f). The house was to be sold as part of the divorce arrangement with 
his first wife but Applicant could not do so because he claimed it needed too much 
repair work to present favorably for a sale. The mortgage lender obtained a $94,715.08 
judgment plus costs against Applicant in December 2010. There is no information 
regarding any current debt on the balance between the $97,824 sale price at the 
sheriff’s sale in 2010, or any tax consequences from the house sale at less than the 
amount owed on the mortgage balance. It was appraised at $120,000 as shown on a 
document dated December 9, 2010, submitted in Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
Applicant did not submit any current information concerning the status of any residue 
debt from the sheriff’s sale. The November 14, 2012 credit report states the foreclosure 
process started. The status of the balance of the debt is uncertain and therefore it is 
unresolved, (Items 6 at pages 312, 315 and 324, 8-11; Answer; FORM Response) 
 
 Applicant owes a bank $580 on a closed account (Subparagraph 1.g). He claims 
he contacted the bank to resolve the debt but the person to whom he was directed has 
not returned his telephone calls. This debt continues to appear on Applicant’s credit 
reports. It is unresolved. (Items 8-11; Answer) 
 
 Applicant owes another entity $206 (Subparagraph 1.h). Applicant denies owing 
this debt and knowing who the creditor is. His Answer stated he would research this 
debt. No further information was sent by Applicant. This debt is unresolved. (Items 8-11; 
Answer) 
 
 Applicant also denies owing a cell telephone bill for $622 (Subparagraph 1.i). 
Applicant claims he purchased a cell phone in 1999 through a website. The number he 
received was not a local number and he requested a local telephone number for his cell 
phone number. He got a new number and completed the contract in 2001. He asserts 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
he disputed the debt in 2001 and has continued to do so. There has not been a 
resolution of this debt. This debt is in dispute and is unresolved. (Items 8-11; Answer)  
 
 Applicant is paying or has paid three delinquent debts totaling $9,027 
(Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, and 1.e). Six of the remaining nine debts are under $900 and 
Applicant has worked to resolve only two of those debts. The total amount of those six 
debts is $2,790. The remaining three debts are over $5,000 each. Applicant is paying 
on one of those debts. (Items 6-11; Answer; FORM Response) 
 
 Applicant was unemployed in 2009 for three months. He attributes his 2008 
separation from his first wife, his loss of employment, and the need to relocate to 
another state to work at a job paying 50% less than he made previously as the basic 
causes of his financial difficulties. Applicant did not present, in his written documents, a 
comprehensive and coherent plan to repay his debts within a certain time. The burden 
of proof is on Applicant to show he resolved his debts or is not obligated to pay listed 
debts. (Items 5-7; Answer; FORM Response) 
 
 Applicant had a federal tax obligation of about $1,439 he had to pay. His 
statement to the government investigators in 2009 and his answer to Question 26P of 
the SF-86 disclose this debt. Applicant arranged an installment payment plan with the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and apparently is current with the plan and the matter is 
resolved. (Items 5-7)  
 
 Applicant submitted in his FORM Response a Contempt Citation from February 
11, 2010, in his divorce action. His former wife alleged Applicant did not make the 
payments on the automobile which is the subject of the delinquent debt in SOR 
subparagraph 1.d. Applicant’s former wife operated this car. She also alleged Applicant 
failed to make payments on the mortgage for their marital home and did not send the 
temporary alimony payments of $600 monthly as ordered by the divorce court. Applicant 
was cited for contempt and ordered to appear in court on March 11, 2010, to respond to 
his former wife’s allegations. The disposition of this action is not shown in any 
documents Applicant submitted. (Items 5-7; FORM Response attachments)    
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2009 to the present, Applicant accumulated nine delinquent debts totaling 
$121,543 that remain unpaid or unresolved. Applicant is paying or has paid three 
delinquent debts totaling $9,027 (Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, and 1.e). Six of the remaining 
nine debts are under $900 and Applicant has worked to resolve only two of those debts. 
These debts have been unresolved for the past three years. AG ¶ 19 (a) and (c) apply. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Two mitigating conditions might apply: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of employment were shown by Applicant to 
have a substantial effect on his ability to repay his debts. Since 2008, Applicant has 
been unemployed three months. He was separated from his wife and eventually 
divorced her. His largest debts involve the former marital home and two automobiles 
they owned (Subparagraphs 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f). The remaining six debts total $2,796, a 
comparatively small amount of money. One of the auto loans is being paid and the car 
was repossessed previously.  
 
The debts arising from the separation and divorce, and Applicant’s move to 
another state for a job paying less than he earned previously, affected his financial 
situation adversely. However, for less than $2,800 he could have resolved six 
delinquent debts during the past three years. His marital home debt is not resolved 
because Applicant did not submit any documents to show the balance due on the 
mortgage was paid, compromised, or settled. Therefore, a debt likely exists. Regardless 
of the foreclosure, Applicant did not pay his mortgage in a regular and timely manner, 
thereby necessitating the foreclosure action by the creditor. While there does not 
appear on his credit reports any significant pre-2009 delinquent debt, he has not acted 
responsibly under the circumstances because he allowed his debts to accumulate and 
remain unpaid. He did not meet his burden of proof on the AG ¶ 20 (b) issue. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Applicant is paying three debts in a regular manner. The remaining six debts are 
at issue. Applicant did not submit a written repayment plan or pay his six smaller debts 
first to demonstrate he is making an effort to resolve his debts within his available 
financial resources. Therefore, AG ¶ 20 (d) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He knew he was in financial trouble when his divorce started in 2008 
and he could not make his mortgage payments. He started to take some action on his 
debts in 2010, before the SOR was issued in 2012, but after he was aware of the 
government’s security concerns evidenced by the investigative reports in 2009 and 
early 2010.  
 
Applicant’s debt of $622 for a cell telephone debt dates from 1999. It remains 
unresolved, even though it is one of his smaller debts. His lack of action to resolve the 
obligation before this time shows an inattention to his debts which demonstrates his 
ability to procrastinate on resolving delinquent debts. This debt is one example of 
Applicant’s failure to resolve in a timely and responsible manner his debts.  
 
The contempt of court citation in 2010 shows a lack of adherence to his legal 
obligations regarding the marriage separation agreement of 2009. Applicant also failed 
to pay his federal income tax in 2008 and had to make an installment payment 
agreement with the IRS to resolve it. Again, this action shows he has continuing 
problems managing his legal obligations involving money.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Applicant’s financial problems are recent and continuous. He did not submit any 
plan to resolve them in an orderly manner. He also did not submit any documents to 
show his history of regular payments on debts he claims to be paying. He did not show 
when he started paying the debts so that a judgment could be made about his reliability 
and trustworthiness in adhering to his payment schedule.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, and 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.b, 1.d, 1.f to 1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
