 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 11-06619 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on July 9, 2010. On July 25, 
2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guideline B. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on December 17, 2012. A notice of hearing was 
issued on December 20, 2012, scheduling the hearing for February 7, 2013.  
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant testified and presented Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through E. I received the 
transcript (Tr.) on February 19, 2013. 
 
     Procedural Issue 
 
 The Government, through Department Counsel, requested that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts with respect to Egypt and Saudi Arabia. Applicant 
did not object to the documents. A file was labeled Hearing Exhibit I and entered into 
the record.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) with the exception of ¶¶ 1.e and 1.i. He provided 
additional information to support his case. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant was born in Egypt in October 1963. He was educated in Egypt and  
received  his undergraduate degree, in business administration, in 1985. (Tr. 13) He left 
Egypt in 1986 to live in Italy and work for his uncle. (Tr. 14) He did not serve in the 
Egyptian military. In 1992, he came to the United States. He became a naturalized 
citizen in August 2008. He has not held a security clearance, but he believes he held a 
position of trust. From 2002 until 2008, he worked for various federal agencies. 
Applicant has earned many certifications in a specialized area of software application. 
From 2008 until 2012, Applicant worked for a defense contractor. He currently works as 
a sub-contractor for a defense contractor. (Tr. 35) 
 
 Applicant is married and has three children who are U.S. citizens. Applicant’s 
wife, who was born in Egypt, became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2008.  Applicant and 
his wife own two homes in the United States. His net worth is approximately $700,000.  
(Tr. 49) (AX I) He and his wife have savings accounts in U.S. banks.   
 
 Applicant has a brother who is a citizen and resident of Egypt. His brother has a 
law degree but as a result of poor health, he does not practice law.  He is not married. 
Applicant’s brother did not serve in the Egyptian military. Applicant maintains contact by 
telephone an average of once every one to two months. (Tr. 36) 
 
 Applicant’s three sisters are citizens and residents of Egypt. They are married 
and stay at home with their children. Applicant maintains some telephone contact with 
them. He usually rotates calling his sisters. (Tr. 32)  
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law is deceased. HIs mother-in-law is a citizen and resident 
of Egypt. She visited Applicant and his family last year in the United States. She was 
accompanied by Applicant’s wife’s brother. Applicant’s wife maintains phone contact 
with her mother weekly. (Tr. 38)   
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s wife’s brother and sister, along with their spouses, are citizens and 
residents of Egypt who work in Saudi Arabia. (Tr. 23) None of them have ever been 
employed by the Egyptian government.  
 
 Applicant purchased a townhome in Egypt in 2003. He sold the home in 2011. 
The home was valued at $250,000. He initially opened a bank account in Egypt to 
deposit the money from the sale of the home to a bank account. He transferred the 
money to his account in the United States. (AX D) The bank account in Egypt now has a 
zero balance. (Tr. 45) 
 
 Applicant purchased another townhome in Egypt in 2006. The home is currently 
valued at approximately $250,000. Applicant is trying to sell the home.  (AX A) He has a 
bank account with a different bank in Egypt because the funds from the eventual sale of 
the house are required by law to be deposited in an account in an Egyptian bank.   
 
 Applicant’s last trip to Egypt was in 2008 when his mother died. Before that he 
visited her annually. (GX 2)  When Applicant visited his mother, he would see his 
siblings.  (Tr. 39) Applicant travels on his U.S. passport. He does not have an Egyptian 
passport. Applicant has no intention to visit Egypt in the future. (Tr. 49) 
 
 Applicant is the vice-president of his homeowner’s association. He is active in the 
community. He also is active in various sports activities with his children. (Tr. 31) 
Applicant explained that none of his relatives know about his work or that he is applying 
for a security clearance. None of his family members have any connection with the 
Egyptian government.  
 
Administrative Notice 
  
 Egypt is the most populous country in the Arab world and the second-most 
populous on the African Continent. Egypt is undergoing a historic political transition after 
a popular revolution which began in January 2011 and forced the resignation of 
Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. Although U.S. policy toward Egypt has long been 
framed as an investment in regional stability in the Middle East, the relationship has 
now entered a period of profound uncertainty. In the wake of Mubarak’s resignation, a 
Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF), consisting of military officers in leading 
positions under Mubarak, exercised executive authority, but is officially ceded power to 
newly elected president Muhammad Morsi on June 30, 2012. President Morsi has since 
consolidated power around his administration and a broader network of Muslim 
Brotherhood supporters at the expense of the military. 
 
 In the past, the United States and Egypt have enjoyed a strong and friendly 
relationship based on shared mutual interest in Middle East peace and stability, 
revitalizing the Egyptian economy, strengthening trade relations, and promoting regional 
security. Yet even taking into account their mutual interests and military cooperation, 
U.S.-Egyptian opportunities for diplomacy may be overshadowed by disruptive trends 
 
4 
 
 
that have been unleashed by the “Arab Spring,” allowing for more anti-Americanism, 
radical Islamist policies, and antipathy towards Israel and sectarianism. 
 
 There have been instances of instability and public disorder in areas of Egypt. 
Recently demonstrations in downtown Cairo, near Tahrir Square turned violent and 
resulted in numerous deaths and injuries. In the last year, demonstrations have 
degenerated on several occasions into violent clashes between police and protesters, in 
some instances resulting in deaths and injuries. 
 
 Egypt has suffered from numerous terrorist attacks over the years. Major terrorist 
attacks, where foreigners have either been killed or kidnapped, have occurred as 
recently as July 2012. Americans have been the victims of some of these terrorist 
attacks. 
 
 Criminal networks that may be associated with terrorist groups in the region, 
including Hezbollah, have used tunnels located in Egypt to smuggle humans, weapons, 
and other contraband into Israel and the Gaza strip. In addition to terrorism, extremist 
activity in certain areas of Egypt has created instability and public disorder. 
 
 During the uprising in 2011, abuses of power and human rights abuses were 
rampant and continued after Mubarak’s resignation, Violent clashes with police at 
demonstrations are a reason for continued concerns. Egypt’s current, ongoing state of 
flux continues under President Morsi; his November 2012,declarations of broader 
powers have left the country in a constitutional vacuum. 
 
Saudi Arabia 
 
 The central institution of the Saudi Arabian Government is the monarchy ruled by 
the Al Saud family, and there are no political parties or national elections. The Qu’ran is 
the constitution of the country and Saudi Arabia is governed on the basis of Islamic Law 
(Shari’a). 
 
 Despite generally good relations, the United States remains concerned about 
human rights conditions in Saudi Arabia. Principal human rights issues include abuse of 
prisoners and incommunicado detention; prohibitions or severe restrictions on freedom 
of speech, press, peaceful assembly and association, and religion; denial of the right of 
citizens to change their government; systematic discrimination against women and 
ethnic and religious minorities; and suppression of workers’ rights. Saudi Arabia has a 
religious police known as the Mutawwa’in (MOI) or the Committee for the Promotion of 
Virtue and Prevention of Vice (CPVPV) which reports directly to the king. The religious 
police monitor public behavior to enforce strict adherence to conservative Islamic 
norms. In years past, CPVPV and MOI have been accused of harassing, abusing, and 
detaining citizens and foreigners of both sexes. 
 
 The United States and Saudi Arabia share a common concern about regional 
security, oil exports and imports, and sustainable development. However, Saudi 
 
5 
 
 
Arabia’s relations with the United States were strained after the September 2001, 
terrorist attacks. On May 12, 2003, suicide bombers killed 35 people, including nine 
Americans, at three housing compounds for westerners in Riyadh. In 2004, several 
terrorists killed, kidnapped, and beheaded Americans. A Travel Warning is in effect for 
Saudi Arabia due to concerns about the possibility of terrorist activity directed against 
American citizens and interests. Terrorist groups continue to target housing compounds 
and other establishments where westerners may be located. 
 
 The Saudi government continues to build and augment its capacity to counter 
terrorism and extremist ideologies. Between December 2009 and December 2010, 
Saudi authorities arrested 765 people for involvement in terrorist activities.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
 
6 
 
 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. A disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign 
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). In addition, AG ¶ 7(d) states that 
“sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that 
relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure or 
coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(e) provides that “a substantial business, financial, or property interest 
in a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk or foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 
7 
 
 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a), (7d) and 7(e) are raised by Applicant’s relationships with his family 
members who are living in Egypt and Saudi Arabia as well as his property interests in 
Egypt. Applicant’s mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Egypt. Applicant’s wife’s 
brother and sister, along with their spouses, are citizens and residents of Egypt who are 
working in Saudi Arabia. Applicant maintains regular contact with his relatives in Egypt.  
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the government, an 
administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the country at issue. See 
generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to 
grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area 
where family members resided). The Government submitted country summaries of 
Egypt and Saudi Arabia. Record evidence places a burden of persuasion on Applicant 
to demonstrate that his relationships with his family members living in Egypt and Saudi 
Arabia do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed in a position where he 
might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist 
his family living in Egypt.  Applicant shares living quarters with his spouse. Applicant 
maintains a bank account in Egypt. He still owns one townhome that is worth 
approximately $250,000.  
 
Applicant’s communications with his relatives in Egypt are frequent.A[T]here is a 
rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the 
immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 
DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has not fully rebutted this 
presumption. Applicant’s wife maintains a close relationship with her mother. Applicant’s 
mother-in-law has visited him in the United States recently. After considering the totality 
of Applicant’s wife’s family ties to  as well as each individual tie, I conclude that 
Applicant’s family ties are sufficient to raise an issue of a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. These relationships with 
 
8 
 
 
residents of Egypt and Saudi Arabia create a concern about Applicant’s “obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology” and his desire to help his family in Egypt.   
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member in Egypt and 
Saudi Arabia is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could possibly 
result in the compromise of classified information. See generally   ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case NO. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Egypt or Saudi 
Arabia seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant, or family members, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
Applicant’s telephone communications with his family living in Egypt are frequent. 
Applicant’s wife maintains communication with her mother and other family members in 
Egypt and Saudi Arabia. Applicant also acquired real property in Egypt in the form of a 
townhome and a bank account. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
raise the issue of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(d) and 7(e) 
apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating 
conditions.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can also be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b).  
 
 Under AG ¶ 8(c) “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation” is a mitigating condition.  
 
 AG ¶ 8(f) provides additional mitigation if “the value or routine nature of the 
foreign business, financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in 
a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual.” 
 
 AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(c), and 8(f) have limited applicability. Applicant and his wife have 
frequent contacts with their family members living in Egypt and Saudi Arabia. The 
amount of contacts between an applicant and relatives living in a foreign country are not 
 
9 
 
 
the only test for determining whether someone could be coerced or influenced through 
their relatives. Because of his connections to his wife, and their connections to their 
family members living in Egypt and Saudi Arabia, Applicant is not able to fully meet his 
burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [ he and his spouses’ relationships with 
relatives who are citizens and residents of Egypt and Saudi Arabia] could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation.” His frequent contact with his relatives living in 
Egypt in varying degrees is an objective manifestation of affection and closeness 
towards his family members and his wife’s family members living in Egypt and Saudi 
Arabia. 
 
 AG ¶ 8(b) has some applicability. Applicant expressed his loyalty to the United 
States. He is a naturalized citizen who has lived and worked in the U.S. since 1992. He 
has a home in the United States. His wife and three children are in the United States. 
He has been employed for many years holding a position of public trust without incident. 
He does not intend to return to Egypt. 
 
 Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family members who 
live in Egypt and Saudi Arabia. There is no evidence that terrorists, criminals, the 
Egyptian or Saudi Arabian governments, or those conducting espionage have 
approached or threatened Applicant, his wife, or his family members living in Egypt or 
Saudi Arabia to coerce or influence Applicant for classified or sensitive information. As 
such, there is a reduced possibility that Applicant or Applicant’s family would be 
specifically selected as targets for improper or coercion or exploitation.  
 
  AG ¶ 8(f) is not fully applicable.  As discussed, Applicant still has a townhome 
that he purchased in Egypt. Granted, he has a desire to sell the property but that has 
not been yet accomplished. He is required by Egyptian law to maintain a bank account 
so that the mortgage money can be directly deposited in an account in Egypt, Thus, he 
still has a bank account in Egypt. The other home that he purchased has been sold. 
While he does have a home in the United States and savings accounts in the United 
States, there is still the monetary tie to Egypt.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
10 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns. Applicant has 
lived in the United States since 1992. He is a naturalized citizen as is his wife. His son is 
a U.S. citizen. He has held a position of public trust without incident. Applicant has been 
successful in his work. He and his wife share a home in the United States. 
 
 Applicant and his wife maintain close ties with family members living in Egypt and 
Saudi Arabia. He purchased two townhomes in Egypt. He has sold one townhome but 
he has not yet sold the other home. He still has a bank account in Egypt. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence.  Accordingly, I conclude 
he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegation in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   Against Applicant  
 Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In view of all the circumstances presented in this case, it is not clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
