 
1 
 
 
                                                                 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )             ISCR Case No. 11-06106 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for foreign influence and 
foreign preference. His request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 27, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DoD on September 1, 2006. The SOR listed 
security concerns addressed in the Directive under Guidelines B (foreign Influence) and 
C (foreign preference). In his July 18, 2012 Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
allegations 1.a through 1.d and 1.h under Guideline B; he denied allegations 1.e 
 
2 
 
 
through 1.g. He admitted both allegations under Guideline C. Applicant also requested a 
decision without a hearing. 
 
Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
prepared a written presentation of the Government’s case in a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) dated November 21, 2012. She forwarded it to Applicant, along with eight 
evidentiary documents (Items 1 through 8) on November 27, 2012. Applicant received 
the FORM on December 20, 2012. His response was due on January 19, 2013, 30 days 
from the date he received it. Applicant did not submit a response. The case was 
assigned to me on February 20, 2013, for an administrative decision based on the 
record. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Department Counsel’s FORM amended the SOR by changing three allegations 
(1.e through 1.g), and adding four new allegations (1.i through 1.l). As Applicant did not 
respond to the amended allegations or the new allegations, I have deemed Applicant's 
position as follows. 
 
• Department Counsel changed subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f to align 
with the corrections Applicant submitted in his Answer. I deem 
Applicant to have admitted these amended allegations, as they 
reflect the information he provided;  
 
• The amendment to subparagraph 1.g is substantive, because 
Department Counsel added the employment of Applicant's friend. I 
deem Applicant to have denied this allegation;  
 
• Three of the new subparagraphs 1.i through 1.k, list information 
about the citizenship and residency of Applicant's wife, two 
brothers-in-law, and three sisters-in-law. Subparagraph 1.l lists 
property owned by Applicant's wife. I deem Applicant to have 
denied these allegations. 
 
In addition, Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of 
information related to Pakistan and Saudi Arabia. Administrative or official notice is the 
appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings.1 The facts 
administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and not subject to 
reasonable dispute. The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is notice of facts from Government reports. I take administrative notice of 
facts relating to Pakistan and Saudi Arabia set forth in the Government documents 
provided by Department Counsel, and marked as HE I. 
                                                          
1 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). 
 
 
3 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the 
FORM, I make the following additional findings. 
 
Applicant is 45 years old and was born in Pakistan. He earned a bachelor’s 
degree in agricultural engineering in Pakistan in 1990. He has not served in the 
Pakistani military. He came to the United States in August 1999. Applicant traveled to 
Pakistan in February 2007, and married a Pakistani citizen there in March 2007. They 
remained in Pakistan until May 2007. They have a two-year-old daughter, who was born 
in the United States. As of October 2010, his wife was a citizen of Pakistan, residing in 
the United States. (Items 5, 8) 
 
Between 1999 and 2010, Applicant worked in retail sales and as a bank teller. 
While a bank teller in September 2010, he was terminated after he had a verbal 
altercation with a customer. He disclosed this incident on his security clearance 
application. In November 2010, he accepted his current position with a defense 
contractor. Applicant is employed in Afghanistan. (Items 5, 7, 8) 
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen in November 2007, and received a U.S. 
passport in February 2008. In his security interview of November 8, 2010,2 Applicant 
stated he used his U.S. passport when he took a trip from the United States to Pakistan 
in January 2009, and returned in February 2009. The record evidence includes the front 
and back cover of this passport, and six interior pages. Those pages show a trip to 
Pakistan from January to February 2009, and a six-month visa for travel to Saudi 
Arabia, valid from January to June 2009. In his security interview of November 8, 2010,3 
(Items 5, 7, 8) 
 
When Applicant completed his security clearance application in November 2010, 
he possessed a Pakistani passport that was valid from 2004 to May 2009. The record is 
ambiguous about which passport Applicant used for trips to Pakistan after 2007. In his 
2012 interrogatory response, Applicant stated he used this Pakistani passport for the 
2009 trip, “so that I don’t have to pay a visa fee and also save a trip going to (city) and 
deal with the lazy staff of embassy for obtaining a visa.” Applicant also admitted SOR 
                                                          
2 Applicant was interviewed on November 8, 2010 by a U.S. Army agent. The report notes that the 
Applicant “confirmed the Unsworn Declaration,” resulting this interview. (Item 8) Applicant was also 
interviewed by an agent of the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on November 22, 2010. Item 6, a 
DOHA interrogatory, contains a report of that interview, which was forwarded to Applicant for his review. 
Item 7 contains other parts of the Interrogatory, but not the interview report. Neither Item 6 not Item 7 
contains an affirmation by Applicant that the interview summary is accurate, or that he adopts its 
contents. Given that Applicant has not confirmed the accuracy of the OPM interview, I will not consider it 
in my findings of fact, and will rely instead on the November 8, 2010 interview (Item 8) and Applicant's 
signed and notarized responses to the DOHA interrogatory. (Item 7) 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
subparagraph 2.b, which alleged he used his Pakistani passport for travel to Pakistan 
instead of his U.S. passport. (Item 5; Item 7 at p. 22; Item 8)  
 
Applicant's Pakistani passport does not show entry or exit stamps in January and 
February 2009. It is unclear why Applicant stated he used his Pakistani passport for this 
2009 trip. I cannot determine if Applicant traveled to Pakistan on his Pakistani passport 
at other times, and simply confused the dates, because the copy of his Pakistani 
passport is missing pages 10 through 17. Applicant traveled to Afghanistan for his job in 
2010, 2011, and 2012, but his Pakistani passport had expired by that time. (Items 5, 7, 
8) 
 
Applicant admits that he possesses a Pakistan National Identity Card, which is 
issued to Pakistani citizens who reside outside Pakistan. The card was issued in April 
2006 and will expire in March 2016. During his interview on November 8, 2010, 
Applicant stated that he considered himself a dual citizen, because he had never 
renounced his Pakistani citizenship. He did not list himself as a dual citizen in his 
security clearance application. (Item 5; Item 8 at pp. 3 and 42)  
 
Applicant's parents are deceased. His father was an engineer, and his mother 
was a homemaker. One of his brothers4 and his two sisters are citizens and residents of 
Pakistan. Applicant's brother works for the Pakistani government, and has been the 
assistant to the head of a provincial health department in a province in the Federally 
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) region for approximately 30 years. In 2010, Applicant 
said he talks to his brother by telephone once per month; in 2012, he said he talks with 
his brother once every three months. Applicant's oldest brother passed away in April 
2012. He had worked for the Pakistani government for several decades as a contract 
negotiator. Applicant has three sisters-in-law who are all homemakers and citizen-
residents of Pakistan. He speaks with them once or twice per month. (Items 5, 7, 8) 
 
Applicant's sisters are both homemakers. He talks to one about twice per month, 
and the other eight times per year. As of 2010, Applicant had three brothers-in-law. Two 
were citizen-residents of Pakistan. One is a retired doctor, and the other holds a 
government job as a director in the department of labor services. Applicant speaks with 
them once every three or four months. Applicant's third brother-in-law is a citizen of 
Pakistan, who resides in Saudi Arabia. He is employed as a planning engineer. 
Applicant speaks with him two or three times per year; their last contact was in April 
2012. (Items 5, 7, 8) 
 
Applicant's parents-in-law are also citizen-residents of Pakistan. His mother-in-
law is a homemaker and his father-in-law is a retired electrical engineer. He speaks with 
his parents-in-law once per month. Applicant also has a nephew who joined the 
                                                          
4 Applicant had three brothers, but only two are alleged in the SOR. The non-alleged brother is a citizen-
resident of Pakistan. In 2010, Applicant stated this brother works as an electrician, and he speaks to him 
six times per year. In 2012, he listed this brother as a farmer, and stated he speaks to him three times per 
year. (Items 7, 8) 
 
 
5 
 
 
Pakistani army in April 2010. He holds the rank of lieutenant and is currently a liaison 
officer.5 (Items 7, 8)  
 
Applicant has a friend who is a citizen of Pakistan and a resident of Saudi Arabia. 
He is an electrical engineer and has been the assistant project manager in the power 
department of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia since 2007 or 2008. In 2010, Applicant said 
he spoke to his friend about once per month. In 2012, Applicant stated he speaks to him 
about twice per year. (Item 7)  
 
Applicant co-owns a lot outside the city where his family lives in Pakistan. He is a 
joint owner with his five siblings and two cousins. His two cousins’ interest is 50 percent, 
and the remaining 50 percent is equally held by Applicant and his four remaining 
siblings. It is approximately 18 to 20 acres, with an estimated value of $2,500. 
Applicant's wife owns a plot of land in the same area. Applicant received the land from 
his father, who is deceased, and gave it to his wife as a wedding gift. As of November 
2010, Applicant and his wife had a joint checking account in a Pakistani bank. It had a 
balance of approximately $18,000. However, in his response to interrogatories in May 
2012, Applicant stated that he closed the joint checking account in Pakistan in 2012. He 
submitted an incomplete personal financial statement, which does not provide an 
accurate picture of his current financial status. Although he listed net monthly income of 
$7,990, and estimated his expenses to be $1,716, he listed no payments on any debts, 
noting that he owes “0.” He did not list a net monthly remainder. He listed the value of 
his U.S. assets as $155,600. (Items 5, 7, 8)  
 
The Islamist Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan) 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic in South Asia, with a population of 
more than 170 million. It held successful elections in February 2008 and has a coalition 
government. However, many parts of the country are affected by militancy and violent 
extremism. 
 
Terrorist networks operate within Pakistan. Members of the Taliban are known to 
be in the FATA region, in Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Afghanistan, 
and in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in the FATA region. The FATA region is a sanctuary to 
al-Qaida and other extremist groups. The Haqqani Network also operates with impunity 
in Pakistan. On September 7, 2012, the United States formally declared the Haqqani 
Network a foreign terrorist organization.  
 
The U.S. Department of State (DOS) defines terrorist safe havens as 
“ungoverned, under-governed, or ill-governed physical areas where terrorists are able to 
organize, plan, raise funds, communicate, recruit, train, transit, and operate in relative 
                                                          
5 In his interrogatory response, Applicant answered “No” when asked if his nephew is still employed by 
the military. However, when asked the end date of his nephew’s service, he answered, “Still work [sic] 
with army.” (Item 7 at p. 7) 
 
 
6 
 
 
security because of inadequate governance capacity, political will, or both.”6 The DOS 
concludes that, despite efforts by Pakistani security forces, groups including Afghan and 
Pakistani militants, foreign insurgents, and al-Qaida terrorists have safe haven in 
Pakistan, and train and operate there to plan attacks against the United States and its 
allies in Afghanistan. Taliban senior leaders also enjoy safe haven in Pakistan. 
 
The Pakistani government has a poor human rights record. Reported violations 
include extrajudicial killings, torture and disappearances by security forces, lack of 
judicial independence, arbitrary arrest, honor crimes, wide-spread corruption, 
disappearance and imprisonment of political opponents, and trafficking in persons. The 
May 2012 Human Rights Report by the U.S. DOS notes reports that Pakistani domestic 
intelligence services monitored political activists, politicians, suspected terrorists, and 
the media. The DOS warns U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan in light 
of the presence of terrorists who have attacked civilian and foreign targets. Credible 
reports indicate that authorities routinely used wiretaps, and intercepted and opened 
mail without requisite court approval. 
 
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (Saudi Arabia) 
 
 Saudi Arabia is a monarchy ruled by a king chosen from and by the members of 
the Al Saud family. The authority of the monarchy stems from Islamic law, which 
provides the foundation of the country’s conservative customs and social practices.  
 
 The United States and Saudi Arabia have good relations in general, although 
human rights issues remain a concern. These include severe restrictions on freedom of 
speech, press, peaceful assembly, and religion; abuse of prisoners; and systematic 
discrimination against women and minorities. The Commission for the Promotion of 
Virtue and Prevention of Vice is a religious police force that monitors social behavior to 
enforce morality. Although the law guarantees privacy of communications, officials 
routinely opened mail and shipments. Informants reported on “seditious ideas” and 
“behavior contrary to Islam” in their locales. 
 
 The Saudi government is building its capacity to counteract terrorism and 
extremists. However, terrorists operate in Saudi Arabia and continue to target 
establishments where westerners congregate. As of November 2012, a travel warning 
was in effect for Saudi Arabia because of concerns about possible terrorist activity 
against U.S. citizens and interests. Individuals and organizations based in Saudi Arabia 
have been designated by the U.S. Government as providers of financial and material 
support to al-Qaida and other terrorist groups. 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
                                                          
6 U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2011, Chapter 5, Terrorist Safe Havens. (HE I) 
 
7 
 
 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.7 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines B (foreign influence) and C (foreign preference). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest8 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.9 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.10 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
                                                          
7 Directive ¶ 6.3. 
 
8 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
9 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
10 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8 
 
 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, and find that the 
following are relevant to the case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information;  
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 The mere possession of close family ties with a resident or citizen of a foreign 
country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one 
relative lives in a foreign country, and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts 
with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.11 
 
 Moreover, the country in question must be considered. In particular, the nature of 
its government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant's family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion.12 Several terrorist networks operate within Pakistan, including the 
Taliban and al-Qaida. Terrorists have safe haven in Pakistan, where they train and plan 
attacks against the United States and its allies in Afghanistan. The threat of terrorism 
remains high. Further, Pakistan has a poor human rights record, including widespread 
corruption, torture by security forces, and disappearances and imprisonment of political 
opponents. The DOS notes credible reports that Pakistani authorities routinely used 
                                                          
11 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 4 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008). 
 
9 
 
 
wiretaps, and intercepted and opened mail. American citizens with family members who 
are citizens or residents of Pakistan are at heightened risk of coercion, exploitation, or 
pressure. 
 
 Applicant has immediate family members who are citizens and residents of 
Pakistan, including his brother and sisters, his parents-in-law, sisters-in-law, and 
brothers-in-law. Several of Applicant's family members have contacts with the Pakistani 
government. His brother is a long-time employee of the Pakistani government. He works 
in a region of Pakistan where terrorist networks are known to operate. His brother-in-law 
is also a government employee, and his nephew is a Pakistani military officer. Applicant 
is in touch with his foreign family members about once each month to once every few 
months. Applicant also has a friend who is a Pakistani citizen, residing in Saudi Arabia. 
Their contact has decreased from once a month in 2010 to twice per year in 2012. 
However, Applicant's friend has contact with the Saudi government through his 
employment as an engineer. Terrorists operate in Saudi Arabia. As recently as 
November 2012, U.S. citizens were warned against travel to Saudi Arabia because of 
possible terrorist activity against U.S. citizens and interests. Applicant's close 
relationship with his immediate family members in Pakistan creates a heightened risk of 
exploitation or coercion. Moreover, Applicant's ties of affection to his foreign family 
create a potential conflict of interest between his desire to protect them, if they were 
threatened or coerced by terrorists or extremists, and the obligation he would have to 
protect classified information, were he to hold a security clearance. AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) 
apply. 
 
 Applicant lives with his wife, who is a citizen of Pakistan. She has family who are 
citizen-residents of Pakistan, and Applicant is in touch with them. In addition, at the time 
Applicant's investigation began, he had a Pakistani bank account with a balance of 
$18,000. He closed the account in 2012, and it no longer represents a security issue. 
Applicant also has an ownership interest in a plot of land in Pakistan worth about 
$2,500. His wife owns another parcel of land in Pakistan, with an unknown value. AG ¶ 
7(d) and (e) apply. 
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline B (AG ¶ 8), 
especially the following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
 
10 
 
 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
 Given Applicant’s ties to immediate family in Pakistan, he could be placed in a 
position that could force him to choose between U.S. and foreign interests. He is bound 
by ties of affection to his foreign family, who live in a country where terrorists and 
extremists operate and target U.S. interests. Applicant's foreign relatives could be 
subject to coercion that could force him to choose between their interests and those of 
the United States. AG ¶ 8 (a) cannot be applied. 
 
  In evaluating mitigation under AG ¶ 8(b), I considered Applicant's frequent 
contact with his extensive family in Pakistan, some of whom have ties to the Pakistani 
government and military. His wife is a Pakistani citizen, and Applicant is also in touch 
with her family in Pakistan. I also considered Applicant's ties to the United States, which 
include his child and his employment. However, the file contains little information that 
would support a conclusion that he has deep and long-standing ties in the United 
States. I cannot confidently conclude, based on these facts, that Applicant would 
resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) does not 
apply.  
 
 Mitigation under AG ¶ 8(c) is also unavailable. Applicant’s contacts with his 
foreign family are frequent and ongoing. There is a rebuttable presumption that 
relationships with immediate family members, and with relatives of a spouse, are 
close.13 Applicant has not rebutted that presumption about his relationships with his 
foreign family. 
 
 Applicant's assets in the United States total approximately $155,000 and 
outweigh his small share of real estate in Pakistan. AG ¶ 8(f) applies to his partial 
interest in the plot he co-owns with other family members. However, Applicant's wife’s 
ownership of land in Pakistan cannot be evaluated because the record evidence does 
not indicate its value. AG ¶ 8(f) cannot be applied to her parcel of land.  
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
AG ¶ 9 expresses the security concern under Guideline C: 
 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). 
 
11 
 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 10, the following disqualifying condition is relevant: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. . . .  
 
 Applicant is a dual citizen of Pakistan and the United States. Dual citizenship, in 
and of itself, is not disqualifying; nor is Applicant’s use of a Pakistani passport before he 
became a U.S. citizen. However, conduct that constitutes an exercise of foreign 
citizenship, after becoming a U.S. citizen, is disqualifying.  
 
 Applicant exercised the rights of a Pakistani citizen by possessing a Pakistani 
passport that he could have used for international travel at any time, after becoming a 
U.S. citizen in 2007. However, his passport expired in May 2009, and he no longer 
possesses a valid foreign passport. The concern is that he may have traveled using his 
foreign passport after becoming a U.S. citizen in 2007. It is unclear from the evidence if 
Applicant used his foreign passport between 2007. Although his foreign passport does 
not indicate such travel, it is missing eight pages, which may contain evidence of foreign 
travel. The evidence shows he did not travel to Pakistan on his foreign passport in 2009; 
however, he may have used it to travel there on other date(s). Because Applicant 
admitted in both his Answer to the SOR, and in his interrogatory response, that he used 
his Pakistani passport to travel to Pakistan after becoming a U.S. citizen, I find 
allegation 2.b against Applicant. Applicant also exercises his rights as a Pakistani 
citizen by possessing a Pakistani identity card, which is valid until 2016. AG ¶ 10(a)(1) 
applies. 
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline C, AG ¶ 11, 
especially the following: 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
The record contains no evidence that Applicant is willing to renounce his 
Pakistani citizenship. As to his foreign travel on his Pakistani passport, Applicant 
 
12 
 
 
explained that he used it to save money. Personal convenience does not mitigate use of 
a foreign passport after becoming a U.S. citizen. AG ¶ 11(b) and 11(c) do not apply. AG 
¶ 11(e) is not relevant to Applicant's expired foreign passport. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
In evaluating the whole-person factors, I considered several factors in Applicant's 
favor: He has been a U.S. citizen for five years; his child is a U.S. citizen; and he has 
been working for the U.S. government since 2010. However, Applicant has strong 
foreign family ties. He has numerous immediate family members who are citizens and 
residents of Pakistan, several of whom have government ties. He keeps in touch with 
his foreign family, and there is no evidence indicating that this situation will change. 
These facts, along with the dangerous conditions in Pakistan, and the prevalence of 
terrorists and extremists who target U.S. interests, represent a heightened risk that has 
not been mitigated.  
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts 
about his ability and willingness to protect the Government’s interests.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g  Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.h   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.l  Against Applicant  
 
 
13 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
