 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07817 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 15, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a long history of financial indebtedness due to long periods of 
unemployment or underemployment, periods of receiving late pay checks, medical 
problems, and the national recession. She does not have the funds to satisfy her debts 
on her current income. She has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 6, 2012, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant’s Answer to the Statement of Reasons (Answer) was dated August 9, 
2012. Applicant elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing in her Answer. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on November 16, 2012. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was 
received by Applicant on November 26, 2012. She was afforded 30 days to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
On January 17, 2013, applicant submitted a nine page response (Response). 
Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s Response and it was admitted into the 
record. The case was assigned to me on February 8, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 65 years old. She worked as a civilian employee for the U.S. Coast 
Guard from December 1965 to August 1969. She was married in 1965 and divorced in 
1978. She did not identify any children on her Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). However, in her Response and answers to 
interrogatories, she indicated she had an adult daughter and two adult sons. 
(Response; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
From 1993 through 2003, Applicant was employed. During this period, Applicant 
was the primary income earner in a household of five (including her adult daughter, 
adult niece, and two minor grandchildren). Her weekly income was $640. On this 
income, she was only able to afford food, rent, utilities, and her car payment. She 
“struggled with paying basic living expenses, filed federal and state tax returns” but she 
“could not afford to make a payment on or clear amount[s] owed.” Each year, Appellant 
found herself deeper in tax debts owed to both state and Federal taxing authorities. In 
1998, she also experienced an undisclosed medical problem that exacerbated her 
financial difficulties. Additionally, from 1999 to 2003, her employer unpredictably 
delayed salary payments, which added to her hardship. (Response; Item 4; Item 5; Item 
6.)  
 
Applicant was unemployed from January 2004 through March 2005. During that 
time, she was financially supported by her “sons, daughter, a friend, and [her] church,” 
because she was ineligible for unemployment compensation. (Response; Item 5; Item 
6.) 
 
She was employed as a contractor from March 2005 to December 2006, when 
her contract was terminated. She indicated in her Response that she attempted to 
“clear” obligations that she failed to satisfy during her previous unemployment with the 
funds from this job. She provided no documentation to support this assertion. 
(Response; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
Applicant claims she has been unemployed since December 2006. She indicated 
she “filed for and received 26 weeks of unemployment compensation beginning January 
2007 through its ending June 2007.” She also worked temporary assignments in 2007 
and had short-term employment in 2008. However, she was unable to secure a full-time 
position due to the U.S. economic crisis in 2007 and 2008. Applicant failed to list her 
 
3 
 
temporary periods of employment on her E-QIP because they were “30 or 90 days.” 
Instead, Applicant listed self-employment from December 2006 to present. In her 
Response, she explained her “self-employment” was a volunteer activity which she 
undertook to help honor students from low-income families. She earned no income from 
her volunteer work. Her unemployment compensation and meager income from her 
temporary assignments left her homeless for three years, during which she resided with 
relatives. (Response; Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
In 2009, Applicant began receiving social security. She currently receives $619 
per month in social security income and “it is just enough to sustain [her].” She does not 
receive any assistance from her children, but could request help from them if she 
needed it. However, she has no funds available to satisfy her delinquent debts she 
incurred in the past. (Response.) 
 
The SOR lists 19 delinquent debts totaling over $37,000, including state and 
Federal tax obligations totaling almost $20,000. These debts are documented on credit 
reports dated February 23, 2011, June 11, 2012, and April 6, 2012. These debts are as 
follows. (Item 7; Item 8; Item 9.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a vehicle loan in the amount of $13,412, as alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.a. The vehicle was repossessed for nonpayment in 2008. A judgment was 
issued against Applicant on September 12, 2008 for this debt. It remains unsatisfied. 
(Response; Item 7; Item 8; Item 9; Item 10.) 
 
Applicant admitted she is indebted to the Federal Government in the approximate 
amount of $4,000 for unpaid taxes, interest, and penalties, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. She 
intends to pay it when she is able. (Response; Item 4; Item 6.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on state taxes for the tax years 1996, 1997, and 1999, in 
the total amount of $8,376.44 as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.e. Tax liens were filed 
against Applicant by the same state for: $3,126 in June 1999 (allegation ¶ 1.f); $966 in 
November 2000 (allegation ¶ 1.g); $764 in August 2006 (allegation ¶ 1.h); $435 in 
August 2006 (allegation ¶ 1.i); $946 in September 2007 (allegation ¶ 1.j); and $1,046 in 
August 2010 (allegation ¶ 1.k). Applicant admits these debts and acknowledges that 
she has taken no action to satisfy them. (Response; Item 6.) 
 
Additionally, Applicant is indebted on eight delinquent medical debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.l through 1.s. These debts total $4,532. She indicated that the medical debts 
were incurred due to medical emergencies in November 2007 and November 2008. She 
acknowledged that she still owes all of these debts. (Response; Item 6; Item 7; Item 8; 
Item 9.) 
 
Applicant has not attended financial counseling. She attempts to live within her 
means by living on a budget and not using credit cards. (Item 6.) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts including a significant 
amount of tax debt. She has been unable to pay any of her obligations on her social 
security income. She has experienced problems paying her tax obligations since 1996, 
without resolution, and continued to amass additional consumer and tax debts as 
recently as 2007. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 The evidence does not show that Applicant has resolved any of the debts 
alleged in the SOR. Her financial issues are recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not 
applicable.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. Applicant explained in her Response that she 
incurred her debts as a result of long periods of unemployment or underemployment, 
problems with late pay, medical problems, and the national recession. These were 
circumstances beyond her control. However, to be applicable AG ¶ 20(b) also requires 
that the individual act responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant does not have the 
funds available to make any payments, even on the smallest debts, despite her 
intentions to eventually do so. I am unable to make a determination that she acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 Applicant did not attend any financial counseling. Further, there is little indication 
that Applicant’s delinquent accounts are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has not made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve her delinquent 
debts. The record fails to establish that any payments have been made on any of her 
debts. AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant presented no evidence to show that she was in the process of formally 
disputing any of her debts or that she had successfully disputed any of her debts in the 
past. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 
unable to address her financial delinquencies and has failed to do so. While she has 
experienced numerous events beyond her control that left her financially destitute, her 
financial situation at the present time does not permit her to satisfy her delinquent 
accounts in the foreseeable future. Accordingly, continuation of these circumstances is 
highly likely, and the potential for coercion, exploitation, or duress remains 
undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.s:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
