 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 11-09036 
 ) 
Applicant for Position of Trust ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 22, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security 
Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 22, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 4, 2012. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 11, 2012, scheduling the hearing for January 7, 2013. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
 
2 
and B, which were admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant 
to submit additional information. He submitted four pages of documents that were 
collectively marked AE C and admitted without objection. Correspondence about the 
additional exhibit is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on January 15, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
her current employer since 2005. He seeks to retain his eligibility for a public trust 
position. He served in the U.S. military from 1968 until he was honorably discharged in 
1972. He is a high school graduate. He is married with two adult children.1 
  
 Between 2005 and 2006, Applicant purchased numerous cartons of cigarettes 
over the Internet. He admitted that he used the Internet to avoid paying state taxes on 
the cigarettes. On April 18, 2007, the state Department of Revenue sent him a 
Consumer Cigarette Use/Excise Tax Return, stating he purchased 212 cartons on May 
2, 2005, and 40 cartons on June 7, 2006. He was to fill out the return, which stated that 
he was to pay $13.50 per carton in cigarette excise tax; 6% of the purchase price of the 
cigarettes as a use tax; and penalties and interest. He was to complete the return with 
payment by June 4, 2007. He did not complete the return or make the payment when it 
was due.2 
 
 On October 31, 2007, the state Department of Revenue sent Applicant another 
Consumer Cigarette Use/Excise Tax Return, stating it was a Pre-Assessment Notice. 
The state completed this return, filling in all the required information. This return stated 
Applicant purchased 262 cartons on May 2, 2005, and 40 cartons on June 7, 2006. The 
return calculated the amount due as $4,077 in cigarette excise tax; $512 in use tax; and 
$514 in penalties and interest; for a total amount due of $5,107. He was to complete the 
return with payment by December 3, 2007. He did not complete the return or make the 
payment.3 
 
 On June 25, 2008, the state Department of Revenue sent Applicant a Cigarette 
and Use Tax Notice of Assessment. The calculation of the excise and use tax was the 
same as the Pre-Assessment Notice, but the state added $5,222 in penalties and legal 
fees and $723 in interest, for a total amount due of $10,539. The completed form and 
payment was due by July 25, 2008. He did not complete the form or make the 
payment.4 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 24, 30; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 14-15, 25-26; GE 3; AE A. 
 
3 Tr. at 26; AE A. 
 
4 AE A. 
 
3 
 In January 2009, the state filed a tax lien of $11,047 against Applicant, which 
included $10,539 as noted on the June 2008 Notice of Assessment, plus a $14 filing fee 
and additional interest of $493.5 
 
 Applicant was interviewed for his background investigation in April 2011. He 
acknowledged that he purchased cigarettes over the Internet with the intent to avoid 
state taxes. He stated that he received notices from the state that he owed about 
$6,000 in taxes, and he received written notification of the tax lien of about $11,000. He 
stated that he intended to obtain legal representation on the matter.6 
 
 Applicant responded to the SOR on September 22, 2012. He denied the 
allegation that he was indebted to his state for a tax lien filed against him in the 
approximate amount of $11,047. He provided no explanation for his denial. 
 
 Applicant testified that he did not pay the taxes due on the cigarettes because 
the state “want[s] [him] to self-incriminate, they want [him] to supply them with the 
information about it.” He admitted that he bought the cigarettes without paying the 
taxes, but he “want[s] to see where they have the proof that [he] did do that.” He 
believes the state’s information “was illegally obtained,” but he did not state the basis of 
that belief. He also complained that the forms and notices he received were not signed. 
Applicant appeared to acknowledge by the end of the hearing that his position was 
untenable.7 
 
 In his post-hearing submissions, Applicant stated that he attempted to telephone 
the state Department of Revenue for several days, “with no luck talking to anyone.” On 
February 4, 2013, he signed and returned a Consumer Cigarette Use/Excise Tax 
Return, with a letter stating that he wanted “to clear [his] name of a cigarette tax debt 
and lien against [his] property.” He enclosed a check for $500 and agreed to pay $200 
per month until the taxes were paid.8 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 26; GE 3-5; AE B. 
 
6 GE 3. 
 
7 Tr. at 15-31. 
 
8 AE C. 
 
4 
and Office of Personnel Management. DOD contractor personnel are afforded the right 
to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
5 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 In 2005 and 2006, Applicant purchased 302 cartons of cigarettes over the 
Internet in order to avoid paying state taxes on the cigarettes. With penalties and 
interest, the amount owed was $11,047 in January 2009. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant bought the cigarettes over the Internet to avoid paying state taxes. He 
received several notices from the state of his legal obligation. In 2007, the state notified 
him that he owed $5,107. In 2008, the state informed him that penalties and interest had 
been added, raising the total amount due to $10,539. In January 2009, the state filed a 
tax lien of $11,047 against Applicant, which included $493 in additional interest. 
Applicant admitted that he received written notice of the lien. Applicant discussed the 
cigarette taxes and the tax lien during his background interview in April 2011. He stated 
that he intended to obtain legal representation on the matter. He continued to refuse to 
pay any of the cigarette taxes through his hearing. Only after the hearing, did he pay 
$500 to the state and indicate that he was prepared to pay $200 per month until the 
debt was paid. 
 
  I find that Applicant did not act responsibly under the circumstances. His $500 
payment after the hearing is insufficient to qualify as a good-faith effort to pay his 
 
6 
debts.9 His finances are not under control. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I 
am unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. There are no applicable 
mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s honorable military service and his long work record. 
However, Applicant is a tax scofflaw. He has avoided paying his legally-due cigarette 
taxes for more than six years. His $500 payment after the hearing, under the threat of 
the loss of his eligibility for a public trust position, is insufficient to overcome his years of 
failing to fulfill his legal obligations.  
                                                          
9 The Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
