 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 11-07475   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
criminal conduct and alcohol consumption concerns raised by his 19-year criminal 
history punctuated by five domestic violence arrests and five arrests for driving under 
the influence of alcohol. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and Department of Defense (DOD) 
Directive,1 on August 31, 2012, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct 
guidelines. DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960; as amended, as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended 
that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR in September 2012 and requested a hearing. 
The case was assigned to me on November 6, 2012. At the hearing convened on 
December 12, 2012, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A and B, without objection. I received the transcript (Tr.) on December 20, 
2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 60, has worked as a custodian for a federal contractor since 2007. 
Initially granted a security clearance in 2008, his clearance is being reviewed after a 
November 2010 DUI arrest. Applicant admits that he has been arrested at least 12 
times between 1991 and 2010 for multiple offenses, including domestic violence, driving 
under the influence of alcohol (DUI), and larceny.2 
  
Applicant’s five domestic violence arrests, which resulted in two convictions, 
occurred during his first marriage. According to Applicant, his marriage was good until 
his ex-wife changed religions and began using drugs. Applicant takes no responsibility 
for the domestic violence incidents, instead blaming his ex-wife for calling the police 
anytime he confronted her about household issues. Applicant does admit pushing his 
ex-wife once, but only because she blocked the door when he tried to leave the house 
during an argument. According to Applicant, none of the domestic violence arrests were 
alcohol-related.3  
 
 Applicant testified that he did not begin consuming alcohol until his first marriage 
ended in 1997. Although he acknowledged occasional binge drinking, he does not 
believe that he developed a drinking problem. Applicant reported minimum alcohol 
consumption, claiming that he occasionally drank between three to seven beers at 
social gatherings with family or friends. However, Applicant’s five DUI arrests suggest a 
more serious problem. In 1995 and 1998, Applicant was charged with DUI, having a 
blood alcohol content (BAC) over .10%. He pleaded guilty to the 1995 incident and 
served 10 days in jail. Charges in the 1998 incident and the three related failure to 
appear charges were dismissed on procedural grounds.4 In 2001, Applicant was 
arrested after police observed his vehicle swerving in traffic. He pleaded guilty to 
extreme DUI with a BAC over .15% and served 10 days in a work-release program. In 
November 2010, Applicant hit a car occupied by a mother and her four children sitting at 
a stop sign as he attempted to make a right turn at an intersection. Applicant attempted 
to flee the scene of the accident before the police arrived, but was stopped by the other 
                                                          
2 Tr. 23-24, 45-46; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. 25, 40-42, 44-45; GE. 
 
4 The court granted Applicant’s motion to dismiss after the prosecution was unable to produce the identity 
of a civilian riding along with the police the night Applicant was arrested.  
 
3 
 
driver. Applicant’s BAC measured .223%. He pleaded guilty to extreme DUI and was 
ordered to attend alcohol counseling. He also served 30 days in jail and one year of 
unsupervised probation.5 
 
 Applicant believes the bad part of his life, marked by his 12 arrests, is over. He is 
walking a better path, concentrating on being a good father to his three children, ages 5, 
35, and 37. He is also making an effort to avoid bad relationships. Acting under the 
belief that alcohol was ruining his life, Applicant claims that he has not consumed 
alcohol since his November 2010 DUI arrest. He does not participate in any type of 
sobriety management program, but reads self-improvement books and talks through his 
problems with people at his job he described as being “educated.”  Despite his criminal 
history, Applicant has maintained a positive work history. He is seen by his co-workers 
as being a reliable, hardworking professional.6 
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 26, 30-35, 37-39, 42-44, 48-51; GE 2-3. 
 
6 Tr. 16-22, 24, 28, 36-37, 51-54; AE A-B. 
 
4 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s “criminal activity creates doubt about [his] judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness [because] it calls into question his ability or willingness to comply with 
laws, rules and regulations.” Applicant’s criminal history spans almost 20 years. His 12 
arrests for a variety of offenses demonstrate a pattern of willful disregard for the law. 
Applicant’s inability to take responsibility for his actions prevents the application of any 
of the criminal conduct mitigating conditions in this case.7 Neither does he receive any 
mitigating credit for the dismissed 1998 DUI nor the related failure to appear charges, 
which were not dismissed based on evidence of Applicant’s innocence, but because of 
a technicality.8 
 
Alcohol Consumption  
 
 Excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern because it “often leads to 
the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.”9 Although Applicant has 
not been diagnosed as being an alcohol abuser or being alcohol dependent, his alcohol-
related incidents away from work – five DUI arrests over a 15 year period – indicate a 
serious alcohol problem.10 His DUI arrests are also evidence of habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment.11  
 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 96-0710 (App. Bd. Jun. 20, 1997). 
 
8 See e.g.  ISCR Case No. 87-0390 (App. Bd. Sep.21, 1989). 
 
9 AG ¶ 21. 
 
10 AG ¶22 (a). 
 
11 AG ¶ 22(c). 
 
 
5 
 
None of the alcohol consumption mitigating conditions apply. Applicant does not 
acknowledge his alcohol problem, even though he believes his consumption habits 
were having a negative impact on his life. Nor is he participating in any sobriety 
management program. Even if Applicant’s claims of over two years of abstinence are to 
be believed, there is nothing in the record to support a finding that Applicant’s alcohol 
issues are under control or that he is unlikely to drink and drive in the future.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Accordingly, I have reservations and doubts about Applicant ability to protect 
classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2. Security clearance determinations are not limited to 
Applicant’s conduct during duty hours; off-duty conduct can be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s security worthiness.12 Applicant’s off-duty conduct shows a pattern of 
poor judgment and disregard for the law. Furthermore, Applicant has failed to take 
responsibility for his actions or appreciate the severity of his conduct. He repeatedly 
engaged in conduct that endangered the lives of others. He expressed no remorse or 
concern over the potential consequences of his behavior. Ultimately, Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns raised by his 19-year criminal history and his alcohol 
issues.  
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:     Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.k:     For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent with national interest to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 98-0620 (App. Bd. Jun. 22, 1999).  
 
