 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-07174 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations concern. He 
accumulated over $20,000 in delinquent debt since receiving a bankruptcy discharge in 
2002 and has yet to take action to put his financial house in order. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On June 15, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing (Answer). 
 
 On November 14, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
ready to proceed. I was assigned the case on November 29, 2012. After coordinating 
with the parties, I scheduled the hearing for January 16, 2013.  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 through 6, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant appeared at the hearing and testified. I 
left the record open to provide him additional time to submit documents. He submitted a 
 
2 
 
 
recent paystub, which was admitted without objection as Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 25, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old steel worker, working for a DoD contractor since 2009. 
He is married and has one child. His wife is a school teacher and they own their own 
home. His mortgage is current and he drives a late-model car. He testified that his net 
income is $600 per week before overtime.1 He acknowledges living paycheck-to-
paycheck and, after paying monthly expenses, has no money left to address his 
delinquent debts. (Tr. at 40-41, 44) 
 
In March 2011, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) 
requesting a clearance for the first time. He disclosed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge 
from 2002 and a number of delinquent debts. (GE 1) The following month, Applicant 
was interviewed by a Government agent conducting his background interview. Applicant 
discussed his bankruptcy from 2002, where he had discharged delinquent debts dating 
back six or seven years. He also discussed his current delinquent accounts, to include a 
number of judgments and car repossessions. (GE 3) In early 2012, DoD adjudicators 
sent Applicant an interrogatory requesting an update on his efforts to resolve his 
delinquent accounts. Applicant responded in April 2012. He had not contacted most of 
his overdue creditors, but was paying a judgment from 2010 for over $5,000 through 
wage garnishment, SOR ¶ 1.b. He also submitted a $10 payment towards satisfaction 
of a delinquent bank account for overdraft fees, SOR ¶ 1.q. (GE 2) 
 
 At hearing and in his Answer, Applicant admitted the delinquent debts referenced 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.e – 1.n, 1.q – 1.s, and 1.u – 1.v, which together total over $18,000. He still 
had not contacted a majority of his creditors regarding his delinquent accounts, to 
include the creditor for a car that was repossessed in 2007 and had a current balance of 
nearly $11,000. Applicant also admits a judgment from 2008 for $234 and a $248 debt 
for a delinquent payday loan that are referenced in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d, respectively. He 
claims that he is unable to locate the creditors for these debts. He submitted proof that 
the 2010 judgment for $5,000 in ¶ 1.b was satisfied through wage garnishment, and his 
wages are now being garnished to satisfy the delinquent credit card debt in ¶ 1.t, with a 
current balance of approximately $3,800. He testified that he recently paid $10 towards 
the 2007 judgment in ¶ 1.c and the current balance is $256. He did not submit 
documentation to corroborate his testimony. He also claims that the delinquent 
telephone bill in ¶ 1.p is duplicative of another SOR debt, but again did not submit 
documentation to support his contention. He has not made a further payment towards 
satisfaction of the delinquent debt in ¶ 1.q since his $10 payment in April 2012. (Tr. at 
23-39, 43; Answer) After excluding the debts referenced in ¶¶ 1.b and 1.p, Applicant’s 
delinquents debt total over $22,500. He testified that between $20,000 and $25,000 of 
debt was discharged through his 2002 bankruptcy (¶1.o). (Tr. at 33) 
 
                                                          
1
 But see, Ax. A (Applicant’s current paystub shows that his weekly net pay is $45.97 as a result 
of a federal lien on his wages).  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant has not sought financial counseling, but hoped to sit down with a 
financial counselor after the hearing. He testified that his financial situation was caused 
by poor financial decisions. He is willing to pay his debts and believes he is now in a 
position to pay his overdue creditors. (Tr. at 39-40, 45)  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to “control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.” Id. at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Executive Oder 
(E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), 
as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions that are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing 
the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge must apply the guidelines 
in a  common sense manner and take into account the whole person in reaching a 
fair and impartial decision. An administrative judge should consider all available and 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a security clearance.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
4 
 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication an 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of 
Defense have established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially overextended 
may be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s accumulation of over $20,000 in 
delinquent debt after having his debts discharged through bankruptcy in 2002, raises 
this concern and establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 An individual’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the analysis, 
because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”2 Accordingly, Applicant may mitigate the 
financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions 
listed under AG ¶ 20.  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
                                                          
2
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute. 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations concern. Even if I assume 
that he made recent progress in satisfying the 2007 judgment in ¶ 1.c and the debt in ¶ 
1.p is duplicative of another SOR debt, he accumulated a substantial amount of 
delinquent debt since his 2002 bankruptcy discharge and the debts are on-going. His 
financial situation was caused by poor financial decisions, not matters beyond his 
control. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and (b) do not apply. As of the hearing, Applicant had not received 
financial counseling and had yet to contact the vast majority of his overdue creditors. 
His satisfaction of the $5,000 judgment from 2010 and current payment of a delinquent 
credit card through garnishment do not amount to a “good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors.” AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) do not apply. Applicant did not dispute the accuracy of 
the other 21 debts in the SOR, except as to the current balance of some of these debts. 
His admissions are corroborated through credit reports and other evidence submitted by 
the Government. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
 Although Applicant wants to resolve his debts, he has yet to take any action to 
resolve his financial situation and display the level of responsible conduct in his 
personal affairs expected of an individual seeking a security clearance. His failure to 
follow through with the payment plan to satisfy the relatively minor debt in ¶ 1.q, and the 
fact that he only made one $10 payment towards satisfaction of this debt after DoD 
adjudicators inquired about its status, raises further doubt as to the state of his finances 
and reliability. In short, Applicant’s financial situation remains a concern and continues 
to cast doubt as to his eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
 
6 
 
 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).3 Applicant is a hard-working, family man who has been 
employed by a DoD contractor for over three years. However, he has yet to get a 
handle on the significant amount of debt that he has accumulated since having his past 
delinquent debts discharged through bankruptcy. Applicant’s current financial situation 
outweighs the favorable whole-person factors present in this case and raises significant 
doubts about his eligibility for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:          For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.o:         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.p:          For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.q – 1.w:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
3
 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
