KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant did not alleged harmful error by the Judge.  The Appeal Board cannot
consider new evidence on appeal.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 11-04339
DATE: 02/13/2013
DATE: February 13, 2013
In Re:
---------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-04339
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security  clearance.  On July
19, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant elected to have his case
decided on the written record.  On November 23, 2012, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert E. Coacher denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief makes no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  He
submitted materials with his brief that reflect efforts he is making to resolve his outstanding debt.
2
Applicant also made assertions concerning correspondence he has had with creditors and a court,
further detailing those efforts. A number of the written documents submitted on appeal and some
of the representations made by Applicant on appeal are not contained in the record below.    
The Board may not consider new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Additionally,
the Appeal Board’s authority to review a case is limited to cases in which the appealing party has
alleged the Judge committed harmful error.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.  The Board does not review
cases de novo.  Therefore, the decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is
AFFIRMED. 
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan           
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                  
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
