KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge concluded that there are no clear indications that Applicant’s financial
problems are under control.  He also concluded that Applicant’s false statements show a lack of
judgment and an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations.  These conclusions are
sustainable on this record.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 11-08546.a1
DATE: 02/27/2013
DATE: February 27, 2013
In Re:
-------------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-08546
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Christopher Graham, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On July
23, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
1The SOR alleged false statements in the 2005 and 2011 SCAs.  It did not allege false statements in the 2000
SCA.  
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On November 29, 2012, after the hearing, Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s
request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was biased against
Applicant; whether the Judge erred in some of his findings of fact; whether the Judge failed to
consider all of the record evidence; whether the Judge erred in his application of the mitigating
conditions; and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis was erroneous.  Consistent with the
following, we affirm the Judge’s decision.
The Judge’s Findings  
The Judge made the following findings pertinent to the issues raised on appeal: Applicant
works for a Government contractor.  He has held a security clearance since 2000.  There is no
evidence that he has ever compromised classified information.  Applicant has three grown children,
one of whom he provides with financial assistance for college.
In 2000, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA).  He did not disclose
a state tax lien in this SCA, though he discussed the lien with the investigator in the subsequent
clearance interview.  In 2005, Applicant submitted a SCA pursuant to a periodic reinvestigation.
He stated, among other things, that he had not had any liens placed against him during the previous
seven years for failure to pay taxes.  Applicant submitted another SCA in 2011.  He denied having
liens placed against him during the previous seven years for failure to pay taxes.
In fact, Applicant’s state of residence had filed four tax liens against him, two  in 2000 and
one each in 2002 and 2008.  Moreover, the IRS filed tax liens against Applicant in 2006 and 2008.
Applicant owed a total of $53,000 to the IRS for tax years 2002, 2004, 2005, 2008, and 2009.
Therefore, Applicant’s answers about his liens in the 2005 and 2011 SCAs were not correct.1
Applicant has satisfied his state liens, and he has established a repayment plan for the IRS liens.  
Applicant owes other delinquent debts.  Three of the debts alleged in the SOR pertain to real
estate mortgages.  Applicant is making some payments on these debts, although he sometimes does
so by neglecting to pay others.  Applicant also became delinquent on a car loan, and he has worked
out a payment plan for it.   
The Judge found that Applicant did not claim, and the evidence did not show, that
circumstances beyond his control prevented him from paying his debts.  He attributed his financial
problems to overspending.
The Judge’s Analysis   
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial problems raised security concerns under
2Government Exhibit 11, Statement of Subject, dated August 30, 2000, is Applicant’s written explanation of
his financial condition prepared during his 2000 clearance investigation.  The statement reads in pertinent part: “The tax
liens are pertaining to income taxes for [State].  Both liens are being paid through payroll deductions from my wife’s
payroll account.  My wife had not deducted sufficient funds from her pay for taxes.  This resulted in a tax lien being
initiated.” This document is not consistent with Applicant’s contention at the hearing and on appeal that he did not know
what a tax lien was.    
Guideline F.  He concluded that Applicant’s favorable evidence was not sufficient to warrant
favorable application of any of the mitigating conditions.  The Judge cited to the extent of
Applicant’s debts and the ongoing nature of those debts, as well as to a paucity of evidence showing
that (1) circumstances outside Applicant’s control affected his financial condition and (2) that
Applicant took responsible action in regard to those debts.  He concluded that there are no clear
indications that Applicant’s financial problems are under control.  The Judge noted that Applicant
and his wife have been employed for several years and that Applicant presented no reasonable
explanation for his current financial problems.
The Judge stated that Applicant’s false answers to the SCA were deliberate, thereby raising
security concerns under Guideline E.  He considered Applicant’s evidence that his false answers had
been due to honest mistakes but rejected that explanation as unreasonable.  The Judge stated that
Applicant’s 2000 clearance interview, in which he was questioned about his liens, was sufficient to
place him on notice of the Government’s requirement for candor and truthfulness in the clearance
process.2  The Judge also stated that Applicant’s demeanor while testifying detracted from his
credibility.  He concluded that Applicant’s false statements show a lack of judgment and an
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations.    
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to evidence of Applicant’s good work record
and his having possessed a clearance for many years without incident.  He also cited to Applicant’s
admirable personal qualities and to evidence of some debt repayment.  However, the Judge stated
that, because of Applicant’s extensive experience working for Federal contractors and holding a
clearance, he  knew or should have known about the importance of sound financial practices and of
candor during a security clearance investigation.  Accordingly, he concluded that Applicant was not
eligible for a clearance.
Discussion of Appeal Issues
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in his Applicant of the mitigating conditions.  He
argues that Applicant had established repayment plans for his debts and that he is making
satisfactory progress in meeting the requirements of those plans.  Therefore, he argues that Applicant
had mitigated the Guideline F security concerns.  
It is true that a reasonable plan for repayment can, in appropriate cases, mitigate security
concerns arising from delinquent debts.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-03403 at 2, note 4 (App. Bd.
Aug. 23, 2012).  However, a Judge must examine the entirety of an applicant’s circumstances in
light of the security concern raised by them.  Under Guideline F, the concern is that delinquent debts
may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, and an unwillingness to abide by rules and
regulations.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 18.  In the case before us, the Judge found that Applicant had
3“[T]he Judge’s bias against Applicant is evident on the face of the decision.  Failure to mitigate debts that were
paid or almost paid . . . are clear evidence of bias.”  Appeal Brief at 10. 
provided no reasonable explanation for his financial problems and that he was having to alternate
payments among his creditors.  A reasonable person could conclude that Applicant’s financial
problems raise concerns about his judgment that such evidence of repayment as is contained in the
record is not sufficient to mitigate.  In any event, evidence that Applicant is neglecting to pay certain
debts in order to pay others undercuts his contention that he has established a credible plan of debt
resolution.  For the most part, Applicant merely advances a different interpretation of the evidence,
which is not enough to demonstrate that the Judge erred.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-05492 at 2
(App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2012).  We find no error in the Judge’s treatment of the Guideline F mitigating
conditions.
In addressing Guideline E, Applicant contends that the Judge erred in finding that his
falsifications were deliberate.  He argues that he did not know what a tax lien was and that his
answers were due to an honest mistake.  
In analyzing an applicant’s mens rea, a Judge must consider the applicant’s answers in light
of the record as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-04821 at 4 (App. Bd. May 21, 2012).
Evidence of Applicant’s 2000 clearance interview, which could persuade a reasonable person to
believe that he understood what a tax lien was, and the Judge’s evaluation of Applicant’s demeanor,
along with the other evidence in the record, support the challenged finding by the Judge.  See
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1, stating that the Appeal Board gives deference to a Judge’s credibility
determination.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern under Guideline E are supported
by substantial record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-02311 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 26, 2012).
To the extent that Applicant is challenging the Judge’s treatment of the Guideline E mitigating
conditions, we resolve this issue adversely to Applicant.  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had
failed to mitigate his deliberately false statements is consistent with the record that was before him.
Applicant contends that the Judge was biased against him.  The only reason cited in support
of this proposition was that the Judge issued an unfavorable decision.3  As stated above, however,
the Judge’s application of the mitigating conditions is supportable.  Applicant points to nothing in
the record that would persuade a reasonable person to believe that the Judge lacked the requisite
impartiality.  Applicant has failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge was impartial.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 08-03233 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 7, 2009)(An adverse decision, standing alone, is not
sufficient to demonstrate bias).   
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in his whole-person analysis.  Specifically, he argues
that the Judge failed to discuss each of the factors set forth in Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(a)(1).  A
Judge is not required to discuss each of the whole-person factors, nor does a decision turn simply
on finding that one or more of them apply to the facts of a particular case.  A whole-person analysis
requires a Judge to consider an applicant’s circumstances in light of the record evidence as a whole.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-21688 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2007); ISCR Case No. 10-03598 at 3 (App.
Bd. Oct. 10, 2012).  In the case under consideration here, we find no basis to conclude that the
Judge’s whole-person analysis was insufficient given the record before him.    
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that
a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):
“Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
