 
1 
 
                                                                      
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 11-09052 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
February 8, 2013 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accrued $714,543 in delinquent Federal tax debt for tax years 2004 
and 2005. She made little progress toward resolution of her tax debt, and offered no 
evidence of an effective plan to resolve it. Resulting security concerns were not 
mitigated. Based on a review of the testimony, pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case  
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF 86) on March 8, 2011. 
On September 4, 2012, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on October 3, 2012, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on December 26, 2012. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on January 2, 2013, scheduling the hearing for January 23, 2013. 
The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 9, which were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A 
through D, which were admitted without objection. Applicant called one witness, and 
testified on her own behalf. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
January 31, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. She worked for a defense contractor when she was 17 
years old as a summer intern. From 2004 to 2008, Applicant was a home maker. From 
2008 to 2010, she worked as a contract office assistant. She was hired into a full-time 
position with a defense contractor in 2010.  She is married, and has a ten-year-old son. 
(AE B; Tr. 29-30.) 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the single factual allegation set 
forth in SOR, which stated, “You are indebted to the Department of Treasury (IRS) for a 
tax lien entered against you in about October 2010 in the approximate amount of 
$714,543. As of the date of this Statement of Reasons, it remains unpaid.” Applicant’s 
admissions, including those made in response to DOHA interrogatories, are 
incorporated into the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 3; GE 5; GE 6.) 
     
 Applicant’s debt to the IRS arose from a recycling business operated by 
Applicant’s husband and his brother (Applicant’s brother-in-law.)  Applicant’s husband 
started a recycling business with his brother in 2000. The business license was placed 
in Applicant’s husband’s name because his brother was not a U.S. citizen and the 
license required a U.S. citizen to be named. However, Applicant’s brother-in-law, a legal 
permanent resident, operated the business. Applicant’s husband was employed at the 
recycling business until January 2005, when he decided to seek a professional 
certification in another line of work. At that same time in January 2005, they were 
notified that the land the business occupied would be taken through eminent domain by 
the state. The business closed in 2006. (GE 5; GE 6; AE A; Tr. 36-52.) 
 
 The Federal tax debt listed on the SOR is for unpaid income taxes for the 2004 
and 2005 tax years. The IRS assessed that the recycling business made approximately 
$1.5 million in 2004 and $2.5 million in 2005, but that Applicant and her husband failed 
to include these profits in their joint income tax return flings for 2004 and 2005. In 2010, 
after challenging the IRS in court, Applicant and her husband were ordered to pay the 
Department of Treasury back taxes for 2004 and 2005. On October 12, 2010, a tax lien 
was filed by the IRS against Applicant and her husband for $714,543. (AE D; GE 2; GE 
3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; GE 8; GE 9; Tr. 37-41, 52-60.) 
 
  
  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant and her husband have tried to hire professionals to negotiate their tax 
debt with the IRS. Each time, they were told that they needed a large down-payment of 
between $14,000 to $18,000 to submit with an offer in compromise. There were also 
told that they should expect to make payments of approximately $1,900 each month on 
this debt. Applicant and her husband do not have the funds available to make these 
payments. As a result of their inability to reach a payment agreement with the IRS, 
Applicant’s husband’s wages have been garnished. From July 2011 to July 2012, they 
paid $11,412.92 on their delinquent tax debt through garnishment. During that same 
period, their debt increased to $854,824.16, due to interest charges. (GE 5; GE 6; Tr. 
52-57.) 
            
 Currently, the IRS garnishes approximately $254 per month from Applicant’s 
husband’s pay. The amount the IRS garnishes has decreased since the July 2011 to 
July 2012 statement because Applicant’s husband elected to switch to part-time work at 
the job where his pay was being garnished. He found a second, full-time position to 
supplement his income, but that pay is not currently garnished. (AE C; AE D; 37-47.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement reflecting a net monthly 
surplus of $207.09. Applicant’s husband’s jobs both pay $8.25 an hour. Applicant 
estimated that her husband’s net income is $29,000 annually. She estimated her net 
income is approximately $34,000 per year. (AE C; Tr. 47, 57-60.) 
          
 Applicant presented two letters of support from managers at her company. 
Applicant is well respected and thought to be a “model employee.” She has a reputation 
for being reliable and trustworthy. (AE A.) 
 
Policies 
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns under the guideline for financial considerations are set out 
in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 Department Counsel asserted, and the record evidence established, security 
concerns under two Guideline F DCs, as set forth in AG ¶ 19:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant’s became aware of her delinquent tax debt for 2004 and 2005 in 2006. 
In 2010, a lien was filed against Applicant and her husband for failure to satisfy their 
 
5 
 
Federal income tax obligations. This debt remains completely unresolved and has 
increased due to additional interest charges. This evidence raises substantial security 
concerns under DCs 19(a) and (c), thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debt to the Government now totals more than $854,824.16, and 
continues to increase to date. While the tax debt was a result of her husband’s 
involvement in the recycling business, she showed little effort to avoid additional 
delinquent debt. The ongoing nature of this debt and the excessive amounts due 
suggest her financial difficulties are likely to recur. Applicant failed to voluntarily address 
her debt to the Government in a meaningful way. The evidence does not establish 
mitigation under MC 20(a).  
 
 Applicant offered insufficient evidence to support mitigation under MC 20(b). Her 
husband’s decisions with respect to the recycling business were largely beyond her 
control and created their debt. However, her lack of any meaningful efforts toward 
resolution of their debt precludes a finding that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Their debt is being repaid involuntarily, through garnishment. 
 
 Applicant offered no evidence of financial counseling, and did not establish clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control. She provided no 
 
6 
 
evidence to establish any good-faith effort to repay her debt, particularly in the absence 
of evidence of the means to do so. MC 20(c) and 20(d) are therefore inapplicable.  
 
 Applicant admitted owing the SOR-listed delinquent debt. The record credit 
reports and lien recording corroborate this allegation. Accordingly, she failed to 
demonstrate mitigate under MC 20(e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is well respected by 
those that know her. However, she owes an excessive amount of money to the 
Government and has failed to address her debt in a meaningful way. She has little 
funds with which to settle her debt and relies on garnishment of her husband’s pay to 
satisfy their obligation. However, the minuscule amount garnished does not even satisfy 
the interest charges, let alone pay off any of the principal debt. She offered no evidence 
of financial counseling or rehabilitation. The potential for pressure, coercion, and duress 
remains undiminished.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. She did not meet her burden to 
mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                     
 
 
JENNIFER I. GOLDSTEIN 
Administrative Judge 
