KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge made a sustainable conclusion that Applicant essentially walked away from
a significant financial obligation when he had the means to satisfy the debt, and this evidenced
unreliability and lack of trustworthiness.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 11-07747.a1
DATE: 02/27/2013
DATE: February 27, 2013
In Re:
------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 11-07747
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security  clearance.  On
May 22, 2012, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.
On December 12, 2012, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge James F. Duffy denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
decision. 
The Judge made the following findings of fact: Applicant is 35 years old.  In March 2003,
Applicant purchased a home for $149,000.  He was the sole owner.  The home had two fixed
mortgage loans.  His total monthly mortgage payments were about $1,400.  After purchasing the
home, Applicant lived there with his girlfriend.  She contributed about $300 to $400 per month to
their living expenses, which included the mortgage payments.  At that time, Applicant’s annual
income was about $40,000.  The mortgage payments were about half of his monthly income.  After
residing together in the home for a year and a half, Applicant and his girlfriend terminated their
relationship, and she moved out.  At that point, he became solely responsible for the mortgage
payments.  In 2010, he stopped making the mortgage payments.  About two months after stopping
those payments, he moved from the home to an apartment closer to his place of work.  
Applicant no longer wanted the expense of the home or to spend the time to keep up the
maintenance on the residence.  Although he could afford to make the mortgage payments, he no
longer wanted to do so.  After consulting with an attorney, he decided his best option was to let the
home go into foreclosure.  Before stopping the mortgage payments, Applicant did attempt to
refinance the first mortgage loan, but those efforts were unsuccessful.  After moving out of the
home, he did not attempt to rent it because it was in poor condition and renting it was not
economically feasible.  In October 2011, Applicant hired an attorney to represent him in a short sale
of the home.  In March 2012, he entered into an agreement with a realtor listing the property for
short sale.  At the time of the hearing, Applicant had received two short sale offers, and the second
short sale offer was pending final approval.  Prior to the close of the record, the short sale was finally
approved.  The date for the closing of the short sale is not known.  Applicant has no other delinquent
debts.  
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant intentionally defaulted on two
mortgage loans totaling about $138,000.  Even though he had the financial means to make the
mortgage payments, he decided to stop making them in 2010 so that the property would go into
foreclosure.  Although the short sale will relieve him of the financial obligations arising from the
two mortgage loans, such a sale neither constitutes a “good-faith” resolution of those loans nor
eliminates the security concerns resulting from his default on them.  Contrary to his assertion in his
answer to the SOR, Applicant did “walk away” from his legal obligations on the mortgage loans.
His willful default on those loans continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness,
and good judgment.  Although the downturn in the real estate market was a condition beyond the
Applicant’s control, his financial problems were the result of his decision to stop making the
mortgage payments when he was able financially to make them.  In making his decision to
strategically default on the two mortgage loans, he placed his personal interests over his legal
obligations and did not act responsibly under the circumstances.  This calls into question his
willingness to follow the rules for properly handling classified information if doing so might conflict
with his personal interests.   
Applicant asserts that he agrees with the majority of the Judge’s assertions and that he has
made many mistakes in this matter.  He admits to poor judgment, and indicates this was partially
based on poor advice from legal counsel.  He does fully accept the consequences of his actions.
However, Applicant does not feel that his reliability and trustworthiness are in question.  He points
to the fact that he informed his workplace security personnel when he started the strategic default
process.  He believes his efforts to stay forthcoming to his superiors regarding his financial situation
is evidence of his integrity and provides a reason why his security clearance should not be revoked.
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to establish mitigation.  The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel
the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to
weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable
evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).
Applicant’s assertion of the forthcoming manner in which he made his superiors aware of his
financial difficulties and decisions was evidence that the Judge was required to consider.  However,
such evidence does not mandate a favorable decision.  Applicant’s arguments are not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
In this case, the Judge made a sustainable conclusion that Applicant essentially walked away
from a significant financial obligation out of personal interest when he had the means to satisfy the
debt, and this evidenced unreliability and lack of trustworthiness.  These conclusions are supported
by the record.  The Judge adequately discussed why the disqualifying conduct established under
Guideline F was not mitigated.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes
that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision,
“including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle
Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting
Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the Judge’s
ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett      
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields     
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody       
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
