 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-09275 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under the personal conduct guideline, 
but failed to mitigate the concerns raised by her financial problems. She inadvertently 
omitted information about being terminated from a temporary job three years ago on her 
recent security clearance application. However, her accumulation of over $60,000 in 
delinquent debt and lack of action to resolve her debts raises doubt about her eligibility 
for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On August 29, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with DoD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
(Answer).1 
 
                                                          
1
 Applicant’s Answer is undated. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) received it 
on September 28, 2012.  
 
2 
 
 
 On November 14, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
ready to proceed. I was assigned the case on November 29, 2012. After coordinating 
with the parties, I scheduled the hearing for January 16, 2013.  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 through 5, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant appeared at the hearing and testified. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 25, 2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old human resources administrator, working for a federal 
contractor for the past two years. She earned her bachelor’s degree in 2005. She is 
single with no children, but financially supports her 17 year-old half-sister and mother. 
Her sister does not receive support from her father and is a full-time student, while her 
mother is unable to work due to a medical disability. Applicant’s current annual salary is 
$46,000, but after paying her monthly expenses and providing for her family, she has no 
money left to address her delinquent accounts. (Tr. at 22-29, 33-38) 
 
 Applicant has eleven delinquent debts, primarily for uninsured medical expenses 
and student loans that are in default status. The eleven debts total over $60,000 and 
remain unpaid. These debts are referenced in SOR, ¶¶ 1.a – 1.k. Applicant has 
attempted on two separate occasions to resolve her delinquent student loans, but was 
unable to rehabilitate them. She has not sought financial counseling. (Tr. at 22-25, 36-
38; Answer)  
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in May 2011. She 
disclosed her delinquent debts and a petit larceny conviction for shoplifting, when she 
was a freshman in college in 2002. She fully discussed her debts and the shoplifting 
conviction during her background interview in June 2011. She also voluntarily disclosed 
having been fired from a temporary job with a financial services company (FSC) in 
2010. Applicant explained that she was hired by a staffing agency, which placed her 
with the FSC. She had disclosed her shoplifting conviction on the job application with 
the staffing agency and was assured by the agency that they had informed the FSC of 
the conviction. Upon starting with the FSC, Applicant filled out another employment 
application and again disclosed her shoplifting conviction. A week later, she was 
informed by the FSC that her prior shoplifting conviction was a bar to her employment 
with the company. She returned to the staffing agency, which apologized profusely for 
their mistake. Applicant voluntarily left the staffing agency when she secured her current 
job. (Tr. at 29-32; GE 1-2) 
 
 Applicant inadvertently omitted the termination from the FSC on her SCA. As a 
human resources administrator, she understands the need to be upfront about any such 
matters on all applications and has repeatedly revealed her shoplifting conviction on 
numerous employment applications. Applicant is not proud of this incident, but has 
always been candid about her prior conviction. (Tr. at 29-32; GE 2)  
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. Executive Oder (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations, the 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an 
administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering 
all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially overextended 
may be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s accumulation of over $60,000 in 
delinquent debt raises this concern and establishes the following disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 19:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 An individual’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the analysis, 
because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an 
applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”2 Accordingly, Applicant may mitigate the 
financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the mitigating conditions 
listed under AG ¶ 20:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
                                                          
2
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute. 
 
 Applicant has valiantly taken on the added financial burden of supporting her ill 
mother and younger sister. However, in part due to this voluntary decision, she has not 
had the means to address her financial obligations. Notably, she defaulted on her 
student loans after graduating from college over seven years ago and, although she 
twice attempted to bring the loans current, was unable to pay on a consistent monthly 
basis to resolve the delinquency. Applicant’s debts are on-going and she has yet to take 
the necessary steps to place her financial affairs in order. Accordingly, none of the 
mitigating conditions fully apply and Applicant’s finances remain a concern.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern under AG ¶ 16, and only the following warrants discussion: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants. It 
begins with the answers provided in the SCA. An applicant should disclose any potential 
derogatory information. However, the omission of material, adverse information 
standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant intentionally falsified his or 
 
6 
 
 
her SCA. Instead, an administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.3 
 
 Applicant did not deliberately fail to disclose her termination from a prior 
temporary job on her SCA. She voluntarily revealed her eleven-year-old shoplifting 
conviction on her employment applications with the staffing agency and the FSC. It was 
the staffing agency that failed to tell the FSC about Applicant’s prior conviction, not 
Applicant. Furthermore, Applicant’s testimony that she inadvertently omitted this 
employment termination from the SCA is fully consistent with the evidence. She 
voluntarily disclosed other more serious derogatory information on the SCA, including 
the shoplifting conviction and her past-due debts. She also voluntarily disclosed the 
employment termination during her background interview, and then fully answered 
questions posed by the agent and DoD adjudicators. Applicant’s openness and 
responsiveness throughout the security clearance process is inconsistent with an 
individual who is attempting to deceive or mislead the Government about her 
employment history.  
 
 Additionally, I had an opportunity to observe Applicant’s demeanor as she 
testified and questioned her myself. I found her credible. Therefore, I find that Applicant 
did not intentionally falsify her SCA and the allegation under the personal conduct 
guideline is decided in her favor. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).4 Applicant is a hard-working, family-oriented individual. 
Her debts are not a result of frivolous spending or other matters that would themselves 
raise a security concern. Rather, her debts are primarily related to uninsured medical 
expenses and the staggering cost of higher education. However, since graduating from 
college over seven years ago, Applicant has defaulted on her student loans and has yet 
to take action to resolve her financial situation, such as seeking financial counseling. 
Hopefully, she will take the necessary steps in the near future to put her financial house 
in order. Her selfless decision to place her younger sister and mother’s wellbeing over 
her own speaks volumes as to her character and potential to place her security 
obligations above her own needs. However, at this time, Applicant’s financial situation 
                                                          
3
 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-15935 
(Appl. Bd. Oct. 15, 2003). 
 
4
 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
outweighs the favorable whole-person factors present in this case and continues to cast 
doubt regarding her eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:         Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):            FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:               For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
