 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07509 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jon L. Roberts, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding sexual behavior, criminal 
conduct, use of information technology systems, and personal conduct. Eligibility for a 
security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 12, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 The Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to him on April 4, 2012, under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
                                                          
1
 Item 5 (SF 86, dated May 12, 2009). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Guidelines D (Sexual Behavior), J (Criminal Conduct), M (Use of Information 
Technology Systems), and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 10, 2012. In an unsworn declaration, dated 
May 23, 2012,2 Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on November 
1, 2012, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of 
the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant received the FORM on November 7, 2012. He timely submitted a response to 
which there was no objection. The case was assigned to me on January 23, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted portions of four of the factual 
allegations (¶¶ 1.b, 2.a., 3.a., and 4.b.) of the SOR. Applicant’s admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied the remaining allegations or portions 
thereof. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon 
due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since February 
2008, has been serving as a program management consultant. He had previously been 
a senior consultant with two other employers from July 1996 until November 2007 and 
from November 2007 until February 2008.3 He has never served in the U.S. military.4 
He was apparently granted a secret security clearance in 2002, but a subsequent 
application for a top secret security clearance with another government agency was 
denied in February 2005.5 Applicant appealed that decision, but in December 2008, the 
denial was upheld.6 
 
A 1974 high school graduate, Applicant received a bachelor’s degree in an 
unspecified discipline in May 1978, and a master’s degree in an unspecified discipline in 
May 1987. Applicant was married in 1987.  
 
                                                          
2
 Item 4 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated May 23, 2012). 
 
3
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 14-18. 
 
4
 Item 5, supra note 1, at 20. 
 
5
 Item 6 (Letter from Senior Adjudication Officer, dated February 24, 2005). A clearance decision was issued 
against Applicant based on the alleged personal conduct and criminal conduct. 
 
6
 Item 8 (Affidavit, dated February 19, 2010). 
 
3 
                                      
 
As part of the security clearance processing routinely conducted by another 
government agency, Applicant was interviewed on December 4, 2003, and again on 
August 11, 2004. At least one of those sessions took place after or during the 
administering of a polygraph. It is not known if the initial interview was memorialized in 
writing. A written record of the final interview was prepared, but only a partial version of 
it was submitted, having been “redacted to delete extraneous, administrative and/or 
classified information.” A full text of the original document was offered by the other 
government agency to the DOD for review by me, but that document was not submitted 
as part of the FORM.7 Applicant objected to the admission and consideration of the 
contents of the partial version, in part, because he was never accorded the opportunity 
to validate the information contained in the document.8  
 
Sexual Behavior and Criminal Conduct  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 2.a.): The allegation is that from 1996 through 1998, Applicant 
viewed images and videos of child pornography during three separate “stag weekend” 
trips. Applicant denied the allegation, in part, challenging the “stag weekend” 
terminology. The weekends, in a remote location in the woods, were with friends and 
colleagues of the host and were focused on shooting and fishing. The host of the 
weekends confirmed Applicant’s characterization and noted that the host alone 
controlled the guest list, and that Applicant only attended the weekends in 1996 and 
1997. He added that he had addressed the allegation against Applicant when the other 
government agency was investigating the issue, but no one ever approached him to 
interview him.9  
 
As for the portion of the allegation related to viewing child pornography, both 
Applicant and the host acknowledged that on one of those annual weekends an 
uninvited guest of an invited guest brought to the cabin some X-rated video tapes which 
he had rented at a commercial video outlet. Applicant was of the belief that the adult 
pornography “may have included child pornography.” Finding the videos distasteful, the 
host did not view them, but Applicant did so.10 
                                                          
7
 Item 7 (Memorandum for the Record, dated August 14, 2004, attached to Letter from Office of General 
Counsel (of another government agency), dated March 14, 2012. The narrative presented in Item 7 is an unsigned 
version of statements purportedly made by Applicant during his security processing. The cover letter, seemingly 
addressing Fed. R. Evid. 803 (6), Records of Regularly Conducted Activity, stated that it is a true, but redacted, copy 
“of an original record” maintained by the Office of Security in the regular course of business, made by personnel with 
knowledge of the act or event recorded to make a record to be maintained. A signed, written, and authenticated 
statement by Applicant or the interviewer/drafter of the entire statement or record was not included in the Item 
submitted. Furthermore, while the summary may be a true copy of a portion of the original record, there is no 
evidence reflecting the accuracy of the original record, or how the “personnel with knowledge of the act or event 
recorded” obtained such knowledge. As noted, a full text of the original document was offered by the other 
government agency to the DOD for review by me, but that document was not submitted as part of the FORM. 
Accordingly, in the absence of the “best evidence,” which was purportedly made following the interview, it is difficult to 
test the reliability or trustworthiness of the documents submitted. 
8
 Declaration of Applicant, dated November 30, 2012, at 1, attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
9
 Statement of host, dated May 15, 2012, attached to Item 4, supra note 2, as Ex. B. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
  
The partial version of the written record of the 2004 interview conducted by the 
other government agency tells another story. It covers specifics regarding the ages of 
children depicted, referring to some as being under 10, between 10 and 12, between 10 
and 14, and between 12 and 14. It described the females as “Lolita-like” with small 
breasts, but there is nothing conclusive regarding the ages of the individuals depicted in 
the videos. It rambles on, mixing activities at the cabin weekends with activities which 
purportedly took place in 2002 on a computer. It also includes an opinion that if the 
police or other authorities had shown up at the cabin, the attendees would have been 
arrested.  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.b. and 2.b.): The allegation is that in about 2002, Applicant viewed 
images of child pornography on his home computer. Applicant denied the allegation, in 
part, admitting that he had viewed adult pornography on his home computer, but 
denying that child pornography was also viewed. He explained that the interviewer of 
the other government agency asked whether some of the material Applicant viewed 
“could have been” child pornography, and Applicant replied that it was possible.11 The 
mere possibility that the images he viewed could have been child pornography, in the 
absence of other evidence, does not conclusively prove that it was.  
 
The partial version of the written record of the 2004 interview conducted by the 
other government agency tells another story. In it, Applicant purportedly first admitted 
and then denied ever deliberately searching for pornography on his home computer. 
The apparent inconsistencies were not addressed. The version describing such use 
covers specifics regarding the ages of children depicted, referring to them as being 
between 10 and 13. It described the females as “Lolita-like”, but there is nothing 
conclusive regarding the ages of the individuals depicted on the Internet site he visited.  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 2.c.): The allegation is that Applicant viewed images of child 
pornography in one or more magazines, without any reference to a timeframe. Applicant 
denied ever viewing child pornography in magazines. He admitted that when he was in 
his 20’s and working on construction sites, during the years 1978 until 1981, he 
sometimes purchased magazines depicting adult pornography or viewed the same type 
of magazines purchased by colleagues. 
  
Once again, the partial version of the written record of the 2004 interview 
conducted by the other government agency tells two stories. In one part, Applicant 
discussed the magazines he viewed while working in construction. He stated that the 
images of the females were of women who were prepubescent, but there is nothing 
conclusive regarding the ages of the individuals depicted. In the section related to 
activities in the cabin, Applicant purportedly referred to viewing images of children under 
10 in a magazine three or four years prior to the 1996-1998 cabin weekends. Aside from 
the age guesstimate by Applicant, according to the other government agency, there is 
nothing conclusive regarding the ages of the individuals depicted.  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
10
 Item 4, supra note 2, at 2; Statement of host, supra note 9, at 1. 
 
11
 Item 4, supra note 2, at 3. 
 
5 
                                      
 
There is no evidence that Applicant was ever disciplined by employers or 
questioned or charged by police authorities with respect to any of the foregoing 
allegations. 
 
Use of Information Technology Systems 
  
(SOR ¶ 3.a.): The allegation is that in about 2002, Applicant searched keywords 
“cock” and “titty” to view pornographic images on his work computer. Applicant denied 
that he had ever used his office computer to search for pornography. He explained that 
during his annual ethics and information technology (IT) training he was reminded that 
there was no expectation of privacy with respect to company computers. Nevertheless, 
there is no evidence of a rule, procedure, guideline, regulation, or policy from the 
employer which might prohibit the alleged use. The absence of an expectation of 
privacy does not equate to the presence of such a rule, policy, etc. Applicant’s attention 
to detail and following regulations were important, and it is “not at all likely” or actually it 
was “highly unlikely” that the alleged behavior occurred.12 He denied ever using his 
company computer for such purposes, but conceded that he did search such terms and 
view images of adult pornography on his home computer.13 There is no evidence that 
Applicant’s work computer was ever downloaded and analyzed either by the employer 
or by government authorities to confirm the allegation. On one occasion, Applicant 
received an unsolicited e-mail on his work computer which included a pornographic 
image, but there is no evidence that it contained child pornography or was solicited by 
Applicant. He noted that the partial version of the written record of the 2004 interview 
conducted by the other government agency incorrectly reversed his statements about 
the company and home computers. 
  
Personal Conduct  
 
In addition to the personal conduct issues related to Applicant’s misuse of the IT 
system at work in about 2002, and the viewing of child pornography during the 1996-
1998 “stag weekends” and 2002 on his home computer, as well as the magazine 
images during the unspecified periods, as set forth in SOR  and previously described 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c., and 3.a.), the SOR alleged that Applicant falsified material 
facts during an interview conducted by the other government agency in August 2004 
(SOR ¶ 4.b.).; that he omitted and concealed information pertaining to the alleged facts 
set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c. when he completed his SF 86 in May 2009 (SOR ¶ 
4.c.); and that he falsified material facts during an interview conducted by an 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) and memorialized in an 
Affidavit signed by Applicant on February 19, 2010 (SOR ¶ 4.d.).  
Based on the contents of the partial version of the written record of the 2004 
interview by the other government agency, it was reported that Applicant had stated 
during two interviews conducted by that other government agency that on various 
                                                          
12
 Item 4, supra note 2, at 12. 
 
13
 Item 4, supra note 2, at 3,12. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
occasions at least from 1996 until 2002, Applicant had deliberately viewed child 
pornography, and explained his methods of doing so. Based on the contents of that 
partial version of the written record, when Applicant subsequently disputed or explained 
his purported admissions, Department Counsel contends Applicant provided false 
information regarding the full extent of his viewing of child pornography. By disputing or 
disavowing the contents of the partial version of the written record of the 2004 interview 
conducted by the other government agency, according to Department Counsel, he has 
repeatedly lied about his actions and activities, and he has proven to be unreliable and 
untrustworthy.  
Character References and Work Performance 
A former colleague (Applicant’s weekend host during the “stag weekends), the 
leader of a religious-based community service and charitable organization, and the 
business manager of his church, have all commented favorably about Applicant. They 
have characterized him as honorable, completely trustworthy, and possessing the 
utmost integrity.14 Applicant’s performance assessments covering the period from 2008 
through 2012 reflect a high quality performer.15 One comment of significance from a 
supervisor was noted, suggesting that Applicant “might hone his communication skills to 
enhance the engagements and exchange of information with team members . . . to 
mitigate any . . . misinterpretation of any comments during collaborative efforts.”16 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”17 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”18   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
                                                          
14
 Character References, various dates, attached to Item 4, supra note 2, as Ex. B through Ex. D.  
 
15
 Performance Assessments, various dates, attached to Item 4, supra note 2, as Ex. E. 
 
16
 Performance Assessment  (2012), supra note 15, at 2. 
 
17
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
18
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
7 
                                      
 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”19 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.20  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”21 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”22 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
                                                          
19
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
20
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
21
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
22
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
  
The security concern for Sexual Behavior is set out in AG ¶ 12:  
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 13(a), sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether the individual has been 
prosecuted is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 13(c), sexual behavior that 
causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress may raise 
security concerns. In addition, sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects 
lack of discretion or judgment is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 13(d). Applicant’s 
alleged history of viewing nude images and pornographic videos of what he believed to 
be prepubescent children between 1996 and 2002, is documented in the partial version 
of the written record of the 2004 interview by the other government agency. If true, 
Applicant’s behavior would appear to be of a criminal nature. It reflected a lack of 
discretion or judgment, and it made him vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
AG ¶¶ 13(a), 13(c), and 13(d), apply.  
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from sexual behavior. Under AG ¶ 14(b), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or 
under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. If the behavior 
no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress, it is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 14(c). Similarly, if the sexual behavior is strictly private, 
consensual, and discreet, AG ¶ 14(d) may apply. 
 
AG ¶ 14(b) partially applies. The sole source of the evidence related to 
Applicant’s sexual behavior is himself, as there were no second parties (except for a 
witness who corroborated Applicant’s position regarding the “stag weekend’), identified 
victims, or arrests. The sexual behavior alleged, if it is to be believed, consisted of three 
distinctly different episodes: viewing possible child pornography in commercial 
magazines during the period 1978 until 1981 – over 30 years ago; unexpectedly viewing 
possible child pornography on one occasion during a “stag weekend” in 1996 or 1997 – 
over 15 years ago; and viewing images of possible child pornography on a home 
 
9 
                                      
 
computer in about 2002 – 10 years ago. The period since the most recent episode was 
so long ago, without recurrence, that I conclude that the alleged sexual behavior, if it did 
occur, is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. As noted above, Applicant denied that the images 
were of children, but did concede that they “could have been of children” since some of 
the images appeared to be of individuals who were prepubescent or “Lolita-like.” There 
is nothing conclusive regarding the ages of the individuals depicted.  
 
There is no signed, written, and authenticated statement by Applicant or the 
interviewer/drafter of the entire statement from the other government agency with 
respect to the 2003 or 2004 interviews. While the partial version of the written record 
may be a true copy of that record, there is no evidence reflecting the accuracy of the 
original record, or how the “personnel with knowledge of the act or event recorded” 
obtained such knowledge. In the absence of the “best evidence” which was purportedly 
made following the interview, it is difficult to test the reliability or trustworthiness of the 
documents submitted, and after considering all of the conflicting evidence, I conclude 
that the signed unsworn and sworn statements are more reliable than an unsigned 
redacted summary.  
 
AG ¶ 14(c) applies. Applicant’s wife and his former colleague have been aware 
of his purported sexual behavior from his past since at least 1996 or 1997, and the 
Government has been aware of his purported sexual behavior from his past since at 
least 2003. After those periods of time, with no evidence of further recurrence, that 
sexual behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress. 
  
AG ¶ 14(d) does not apply. While Applicant’s unexpected and deliberate viewing 
of pornographic images and videos that may have included images of prepubescent 
individuals took place in private and discreet locations – a private cabin and his home – 
and was not openly broadcast to others, and no criminal action was ever proposed or 
taken against Applicant for his actions. Prepubescent children – essentially exploited 
victims – cannot, under the law, consent to such behavior. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern under the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 
30:       
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses is potentially disqualifying. 
Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), if there is an allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted, security concerns may be raised. As noted above, during a “stag weekend” in 
either 1996 or 1997, Applicant inadvertently viewed what may have been child 
 
10 
                                      
 
pornography; in 2002 he may have viewed child pornography on his home computer; 
and during an unspecified period, identified by Applicant as occurring during 1978 until 
1981, he may have viewed child pornography in commercially available magazines. 
While Applicant may have estimated the ages of the individuals viewed, the mere 
possibility that those images were of prepubescent children, in the absence of other 
evidence, does not conclusively prove that they were. Nevertheless, considering the 
mere possibility that the individuals were prepubescent children, as conceded by 
Applicant, further discussion is necessary. Accordingly, AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(d) have 
been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
Likewise, if there is evidence that the person did not commit the offense, ¶ 32(c) may 
apply. Similarly, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply where there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation: including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of 
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement.  
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a), 32(c), and 32(d) apply. As noted above, the alleged criminal 
behavior consisted of three distinctly different episodes: viewing possible child 
pornography in commercial magazines during the period 1978 until 1981 – over 30 
years ago; unexpectedly viewing possible child pornography on one occasion during a 
“stag weekend” in 1996 or 1997 – over 15 years ago; and viewing images of possible 
child pornography on a home computer in about 2002 – 10 years ago. There has been 
no recurrence of those alleged criminal activities in the past 30, 15, or 10 years. 
Applicant has maintained a good employment record and has an excellent reputation in 
the community. It is unlikely that such criminal behavior will recur, and it no longer casts 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Guideline M, Information Technology 
 
The security concern under the guideline for Use of Information Technology 
Systems is set out in AG ¶ 39:   
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
11 
                                      
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
40(e), security concerns may be raised by: the unauthorized use of a government or 
other information technology system. In about 2002, Applicant purportedly searched 
keywords “cock” and “titty” to view pornographic images on his work computer. He 
denied the allegation as not likely, and asserted the search took place on his home 
computer. While there may be no expectation of privacy with respect to Applicant’s 
employer’s company computers, there is no evidence of a rule, procedure, guideline, 
regulation, or policy from the employer which might prohibit the alleged use. 
Nevertheless, considering the mere possibility that there were prohibitions in place, 
further discussion is necessary. Accordingly, AG ¶ 40(e) has been established. 
 
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate such 
security concerns. Under AG ¶ 41(a), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated 
where so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The alleged activity took place 
on one occasion in about 2002, and there is no evidence to suggest that it happened 
more than once or that it took place more recently. Assuming the accuracy of the 
allegation, the passing of over ten years without recurrence is sufficient to conclude that 
it is unlikely to recur, and it does not cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  AG ¶ 41(a) applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes conditions that could raise security concerns. Under AG ¶ 
16(b), security concerns may be raised by: deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative.  
  
Similarly, security concerns may be raised under AG ¶ 16(c) if there is: 
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information. 
 
12 
                                      
 
Also, it is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(e) when there is: 
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . .  
The alleged criminal behavior consisted of viewing possible child pornography in 
commercial magazines over 30 years ago; unexpectedly viewing possible child 
pornography on one occasion over 15 years ago; and viewing images of possible child 
pornography on a home computer about 10 years ago. There has been no recurrence 
of those alleged criminal activities. The other alleged personal conduct issues relate to 
Applicant’s responses to questions in his SF 86 in 2009 – over three years ago; and his 
comments in an affidavit in 2010 – nearly three years ago. There is insufficient evidence 
to conclude that Applicant deliberately provided false or misleading information 
concerning the issue of child pornography or to his use of his work computer. To the 
contrary, Applicant has been consistent in his rendition of the facts. Disagreeing with 
summarized unverified information in the record does not establish that he deliberately 
lied. A summary or partial version of the written record of the 2004 interview prepared 
by an unknown person does not have the same indicia of reliability as an affidavit.  
Accordingly, AG ¶ 16(e) has been established, but AG ¶¶ 16(b) and 16(d) have not.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(c) may apply if the offense is so 
minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Similarly, AG ¶ 17(d) may apply if: 
 
The individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.  
 
Also, if the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, AG ¶ 17(e) may apply. In addition, AG ¶ 17(f) 
may apply if the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
As to Applicant’s alleged self-reported misuse of his employer’s IT system in 
2002, as noted above, there were no adverse consequences of his actions, and there is 
no evidence that Applicant misused employer IT systems since the last incident.  
The Government concluded that since Applicant’s statements disagree with the 
information submitted by the other government agency, Applicant must now be lying. 
The summary or partial version of the written record of the 2004 interview prepared by 
 
13 
                                      
 
an unknown person, without any indication that the contents were verified as accurate 
by Applicant or the drafter of the summary, when the original transcript of the interview – 
the best evidence of what was actually said – is still available, is essentially 
unsubstantiated, and does not have the same indicia of reliability as an affidavit. An 
unsubstantiated or unverified summary may contain inaccuracies such as those stated 
by Applicant. Slight variations of words or responses, as well as the selected portions of 
an entire document, may convey entirely different impressions and may lead to 
substantial misinterpretation. Applicant has consistently refuted the contents of the 
summary of an existing file submitted by the other government agency. To the extent 
that the alleged sexual behavior of between 12 and 30 years ago might have taken 
place, Applicant has taken positive steps to both alleviate the circumstances or factors 
that may have caused his alleged untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), 17(e), and 17(f) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.23       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s sexual behavior, criminal 
behavior, use of information technology systems, and personal conduct. Applicant 
allegedly viewed images of prepubescent children in videos, in magazines, and on his 
home computer, as well as misused his employer’s IT system in 2002. He denied most 
of the allegations, but there is some information that he may have done so with some 
frequency. That information is not entirely reliable. Applicant acknowledged that he 
routinely viewed adult pornography.  
                                                          
23
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s alleged sexual behavior, criminal behavior, use of information technology 
systems, and personal conduct occurred between 10 and 30 years ago, if it is to 
believed that it occurred, and there is no evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar 
nature. There is no evidence of a personality disorder. Applicant has a good reputation 
for integrity and trustworthiness, but, according to his supervisor, also an apparent 
shortcoming in communication skills leading to possible misinterpretation of his 
comments. No disciplinary or criminal action was ever proposed or taken against him for 
his alleged actions. The alleged behavior is unlikely to recur. Under the evidence 
presented, I have no questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline D:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant  
    
 Paragraph 3, Guideline M:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 4, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 4.a:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 4.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 4.c:    For Applicant  
Subparagraph 4.d:    For Applicant 
    
  
 
15 
                                      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
