 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-10759    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has approximately $54,600 
in unresolved delinquent debt, including $39,000 in unpaid federal taxes. Clearance is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and Department of Defense (DOD) 
Directive,1 on September 18, 2012, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. DOD 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960; as amended, as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted its written case on December 21, 2012. A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on January 7, 2013. 
Applicant did not respond to the FORM; accordingly, the items appended to the 
Government’s brief are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10. The case 
was assigned to me on February 25, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 39, works as an insulator at a shipyard. He has been employed by a 
federal contractor since 2002. Before his job at the shipyard, Applicant worked in 
shipping and receiving for a national retailer. Married 18 years, Applicant has a teenage 
daughter.2 
 
 The SOR alleges, and Applicant admits, that he is indebted to 12 creditors for 
approximately $54,600, the majority of which is a federal tax debt for $39,000. The 
record contains few details about Applicant’s troubled finances. According to his June 
2011 subject interview, Applicant seems to have encountered financial problems when 
his wife lost her job. Applicant also explained that he accumulated a large federal tax bill 
because he did not pay his taxes. However, the interview does not flesh out any 
additional details about either issue. In his August 2012 response to DOHA financial 
interrogatories, Applicant indicated that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) approved a 
payment plan for his delinquent taxes; however, he did not provide any documentation 
to corroborate this claim. Although Applicant expressed the intent to pay his delinquent 
debts in his subject interview, he did not discuss any plans he had for doing so.3  
 
 According to Applicant, there is no reason for anyone to question his finances, 
his ability to live within his means, or his willingness or ability to pay his debts. He has 
not received any financial counseling, but believes that his current financial situation is 
good as he is able to satisfy his recurring monthly obligations.4  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
                                                          
2 GE 5. 
 
3 GE 6. 
 
4 GE 6. 
 
3 
 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a security concern because “an individual who is 
financially over extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”5 Financial difficulties have proven to be a significant motivating factor for 
espionage or attempted espionage.6 The Government does not have to prove that an 
applicant poses a clear and present danger to national security,7 or that an applicant 
poses an imminent threat of engaging in criminal acts. Instead, it is sufficient to show 
that an applicant has a history of unresolved financial difficulties that may make him 
more vulnerable to financial pressures.8  
 
                                                          
5 AG ¶ 18. 
 
6 ISCR Case No. 96-0454 (App. Bd. Feb. 7, 1997). 
  
7 See  Smith v. Schlesinger, 513 F.2d 463, 476 n. 48 (D.C. Cir. 1975). 
 
8 See  ISCR Case No. 87-1800 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 1989) 
  
 
4 
 
  Applicant owes over $54,600 in delinquent debt. The allegations are supported 
by the record, establishing the Government’s prima facie case.9 Applicant has 
demonstrated an inability to pay his debts as well as a history of not doing so.10  
Applicant claims that his financial problems were caused by an event beyond his control 
– the loss of his wife’s income after she lost her job. While this may be true, Applicant 
provided no other information to merit the application of any of the financial 
considerations mitigating conditions. Furthermore, Applicant did not provide any 
documentation to support his claims of a payment plan for his unexplained federal tax 
debt. A person who fails to meet his legal obligation to the Government does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of persons 
granted access to classified information.11 In light of the sparse evidence provided by 
Applicant, I find that his financial problems are recent and ongoing. Also, given the 
paucity of information available, I am unable to determine that Applicant’s financial 
problems are unlikely to recur. Consequently, Applicant’s unresolved delinquent debts 
continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant failed to meet his burdens 
of production and persuasion. At a minimum, an applicant is expected to provide 
information, orally or documentary, regarding his financial interests.12 Absent such 
evidence, there is no basis for a finding of financial rehabilitation. Following Egan13 and 
the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national 
security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.l:    Against Applicant 
 
 
                                                          
9 GE 6-10; Answer. 
 
10 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
11 See ISCR Case No. 98-0810 (App. Bd. Jun. 8, 2000).  
 
12 See ISCR Case No. 00-0104 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2001). 
 
13 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
