 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-10629 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn D. MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 19, 2011. On 
October 3, 2012, the Defense of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. DOD acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 12, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
November 26, 2012, and the case was assigned to me on November 29, 2012. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 4, 2012, scheduling it for January 10, 2013. I convened the hearing as 
 
2 
 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through K, which were admitted without objection. I kept the 
record open until January 25, 2013, to enable both sides to submit additional 
documentary evidence. 
 
 After the hearing, Applicant timely submitted AX L through Q, which were 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX L through Q 
are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. Department Counsel submitted GX 5 
through 10, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on January 23, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 
1.f. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.e and 1.g-1.n. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old engineer employed by a defense contractor since 
August 2000. Before his current employment, he served on active duty in the U.S. Navy 
and retired as a first class petty officer after 20 years of service. He held a security 
clearance in the Navy and retained it when he began his current employment. (Tr. 9.) 
 
 Applicant married in September 1991. He and his wife have two children, ages 
18 and 20, both of whom are full-time college students. (Tr. 111, 132.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife built a home in 2005 and lived in it while they built a 
second home. They financed 80% of the purchase price with a first mortgage loan of 
about $336,800 and a second mortgage loan of about $60,000. The monthly mortgage 
payments on this home were about $1,600 per month. After the second home was 
completed, they moved into it and rented out the first home. They financed 100% of the 
purchase price of the second home with a first mortgage loan of about $556,000 and a 
second mortgage loan of about $139,000. (Tr. 60-61.) The second home increased their 
total monthly mortgage payments to about $3,500. In addition, they accumulated about 
$50,000 in credit card debt for lighting, fixtures, and furniture that were not included in 
the home mortgages. (Tr. 101.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife had previous experience in purchasing and financing real 
estate. They had paid off a $244,000 home mortgage in December 2003, a $65,000 
mortgage in May 2004, and a $335,000 mortgage in December 2004. (GX 3 at 2; Tr. 
82-83.) 
 
 Applicant’s tax records reflect that his adjusted gross income was $75,860 for tax 
year 2004; $68,090 in 2005; $79,299 in 2006; $62,467 in 2007; and $67,848 in 2008. 
(AX K.) Applicant and his wife had about $2,000 in savings, and they anticipated that 
Applicant’s spouse would generate additional income as a real estate agent. (Tr. 70-72.)  
 
3 
 
 Applicant’s wife started working as a real estate agent in 2005. (Tr. 130.) Her 
income fell short of her expectations a result of the downturn in the real estate market. 
In 2007, she expected to earn about $74,000 in commissions, but she actually earned 
about $24,000. (AX A at 5; Tr. 73.) In 2008, she expected to earn about $36,000 but 
actually earned about $16,000 (AX A at 4; Tr. 74.) She earned about $10,000 in 2009 
and $20,000 in 2010. (AX A at 2-3.)  
 
In January 2006, the renters moved out of the first home without notice, and 
Applicant and his wife were unable to continue making the mortgage payments on the 
first home. (Tr. 59-60, 68.) They incurred additional expenses repairing damage caused 
by their renter. (Tr. 130.) They considered moving back into the first home, but the 
mortgage lender initiated foreclosure and refused to allow Applicant and his wife to live 
in it unless they resolved the delinquent mortgage payments. They offered to add the 
amount of the delinquent payments to the amount of the loan and increase their monthly 
payments on the first home from $1,600 per month to $1,800 per month, but the lender 
refused to modify the loan. (Tr. 84-85.) They tried to rent both homes, without success. 
They tried to sell both homes, but the real estate market had dramatically declined. The 
mortgages on both homes were foreclosed.  
 
 In October 2007, Applicant and his wife sent letters to all their creditors, 
explaining why they were unable to pay the full amounts of their scheduled payments. 
(GX 2 at 185.1) Their creditors were not willing to modify the payment schedules. (Tr. 
122.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in March 2008. The 
petition listed the mortgages on both homes and all the other debts alleged in the SOR. 
The unsecured debts listed in the petition totaled about $72,472. (GX 8 at 17-18, 20-22; 
AX B.)  
 
The bankruptcy court records also reflect that the Chapter 13 plan provided for 
the first and second mortgages on both homes to be paid by Applicant and his wife, with 
the arrearages on the mortgages on the second home to be paid by the bankruptcy 
trustee over a period of 49 months. The plan reflected that there was no arrearage on 
the loans for the first home. (GX 6 at 3.)  
 
Applicant and his wife were required by the bankruptcy court to undergo financial 
counseling, and they complied with the court requirement. (GX 5 at 1-2; GX 8 at 4-7.) 
Applicant testified that they made payments to the bankruptcy trustee for about six 
months, and then the bankruptcy petition was dismissed. (Tr. 46-47.) In Applicant’s 
post-hearing submission, he stated that he made six payments totaling $10,056, and he 
submitted copies of cancelled checks for three payments. (AX L; AX O.) 
 
                                                          
1 The page numbering on GX 2 begins with page 159. 
 
 
4 
 
The evidence is somewhat inconsistent regarding the basis for dismissing the 
bankruptcy petition. Applicant testified that his wife told him that the bankruptcy trustee 
said that the petition should have been filed under Chapter 7 because they had more 
than $1 million in assets and liabilities. (Tr. 48-49.) According to Applicant’s wife, their 
bankruptcy attorney told them that their only choice was a Chapter 13 bankruptcy, 
because they earned too much money to file a Chapter 7 petition. (Tr. 153.) Applicant 
testified that after the bankruptcy was dismissed, their bankruptcy lawyer told him, 
“[E]verything’s dismissed, you don’t need to worry about nothing no more. Your credit’s 
just bad, and that’s the way it’s going to be for five to seven, ten years.” (Tr. 29.) 
Applicant also testified that their bankruptcy lawyer’s assistant told them: “Since it’s 
been dismissed, we don’t need to file . . . . Since it’s already been – the creditors 
already closed on our accounts and everything from previous actions, that there was no 
need for us to file, pay another 15- to 3000, which we didn’t have, to him, to refile for 
one piece of paper . . . .” (Tr. 50.)   
 
Applicant’s wife was the principal point of contact with the bankruptcy lawyer, 
because Applicant travels frequently. (Tr. 152.) She testified that the bankruptcy lawyer 
told her that he intended to dismiss the petition and refile it because he was unable to 
submit some documentation by the filing deadline. She agreed to the dismissal, but the 
lawyer did not tell her about the cost of refiling. She testified that they did not refile 
because they could not afford the $3,000 that the lawyer wanted. (Tr. 131-34.) She also 
testified that they believed the debts listed in the bankruptcy petition were resolved, 
because they were not contacted by any of the creditors or collection agents. (Tr. 137-
38.)  
 
Applicant testified that he had no further conversations with the bankruptcy 
lawyer after the case was dismissed. (Tr. 54.) However, he later testified that in October 
2012 (after the SOR was sent to him and his pay was garnished for the unsatisfied 
second mortgage on the first house), he contacted the bankruptcy attorney, who 
advised him that they could pay him to file another bankruptcy or they could do it 
themselves. He also testified that the bankruptcy attorney advised him that collection of 
the debts in the bankruptcy petition was barred by the statute of limitations. (Tr. 95, 
120.) 
 
 The bankruptcy court records reflect that the holder of the first mortgage on the 
first home objected to the Chapter 13 payment plan, and that the objections were 
sustained on July 30, 2008. (GX 5 at 4.) The record does not reflect the basis for the 
objections. Confirmation was denied, and the bankruptcy case was dismissed on 
September 4, 2008. (GX 7; GX 9.) The bankruptcy court ordered, “The trustee need not 
file a final report in this case unless property or money was administered.” (GX 9.) 
Payments to the trustee were ordered to be discontinued on September 5, 2008. (GX 
10.) There is no evidence that a final report was filed. Both Applicant and his wife 
testified that they did not know what happened to the money they sent to the trustee. 
There is no evidence that the payments to the trustee were applied to the debts alleged 
in the SOR.  
 
 
5 
 
An Internal Revenue Service Form 1099-A reflects that the first home was sold in 
February 2009, for more than the amount due on the first mortgage. (AX M.) Applicant 
reported the sale in his 2009 federal income tax return. (AX N.) The lender for the 
second mortgage obtained a garnishment of Applicant’s pay in October 2012. (AX E; Tr. 
88.) Applicant is waiting for a court hearing on his request that the garnishment be 
reduced from $1,000 per month to $500 per month. (AX J; Tr. 86-87.) He was unable to 
produce any evidence pertaining to the foreclosure of the two mortgages on the second 
home. (AX J at 1-2.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife moved into a rental home after the foreclosure action was 
initiated. In July 2012, they were required to move again when their landlord became 
delinquent on his mortgage payments and the rental home was foreclosed. (AX G.) 
They both testified that their experience has left them with no inclination to deal with real 
estate again. (Tr. 145-46.) 
 
Applicant and his wife have not taken any action to resolve the delinquent credit 
card debts and installment contracts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.f and 1.h-1.n. Applicant 
testified that they relied on their lawyer’s advice that the debts are not collectible 
because of the statute of limitations. (Tr. 94-95.) He was not able to produce any 
documentation of the lawyer’s advice. (AX P.) Applicant’s wife did not mention the 
statute of limitations in her testimony.  
 
When Applicant was questioned by a security investigator about his debts in 
June 2011, he told the investigator that all the debts were included in his bankruptcy. He 
could not give the investigator any detailed information about the debts, explaining that 
they were being handled by his bankruptcy attorney. He did not mention the statute of 
limitations. (GX 2 at 162-64.)  
 
 Applicant carefully tracks the family’s income and expenses. (AX C.) He testified 
that he and his wife usually have a monthly remainder of $900 to $1,000, which they set 
aside for their children’s college expenses. (Tr. 111.) Their monthly income is about the 
same as it was when they bought their two homes, but their disposable income is 
reduced by the $1,000 garnishment. Applicant estimated that he has around $10,000 in 
his current employer’s retirement plan, but his wife has no retirement funds. (Tr. 77-78.) 
They have no personal credit cards, and they have not incurred any additional 
delinquent debts since they filed their bankruptcy petition. Applicant drives a 20-year-old 
van, and they have not taken a vacation since they filed their bankruptcy petition. (Tr. 
118-19.) They are current on their federal and state income taxes. (Tr. 125.) 
 
In October 2012, Applicant received a pay raise because of his outstanding 
performance. (AX H.) Character reference letters were submitted by 23 of Applicant’s 
coworkers and supervisors. His supervisor for the past 10 years, who is a program 
manager, regards him as trustworthy and honest. He “strives for excellence” and 
consistently meets performance standards.  (AX I at 2.) Another program manager, who 
has known him for more than 10 years, regards him as a team player who takes his 
responsibilities seriously. (AX I at 1.) Applicant’s deputy program manager for the past 
 
6 
 
17 months regards him as a team player, a skillful employee, and a man of integrity. 
(AX I at 3.) A coworker for nine years describes him as “lawful by default” in his 
adherence to rules. (AX I at 4.) His coworkers and associates consistently describe him 
as trustworthy, honest, dedicated, proactive, a person of high integrity, and a coworker 
who does not hesitate to go beyond the call of duty. (AX I at 5-23; AX R.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
7 
 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges the two delinquent mortgage loans on the first house (SOR ¶¶ 
1.f and 1.g) and the two delinquent mortgage loans on the second house (SOR ¶ 1.b 
and 1.c). It alleges the Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition that was filed in March 2008 and 
dismissed in September 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.a). Finally, it alleges a deficiency of $13,604 
after an auto repossession (SOR ¶ 1.k) and eight delinquent credit card and installment 
accounts totaling about $56,116 (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, 1.h-1.j, and 1.l-1.n). 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an applicant’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f. His admissions in his 
answer to the SOR, the testimony and the documentary evidence presented at the 
hearing, and the post-hearing documentary evidence establish the following 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline:  
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
AG ¶ 19(e): consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.  
 
 Security concerns based on financial considerations may be mitigated by any of 
the following conditions: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
 
AG ¶ 20(f): the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is partially established. The defaulted mortgages and other 
delinquent debts related to the real estate investments arose under circumstances 
making them unlikely to recur, because Applicant and his wife have no interest in future 
real estate investments. However, the debts are numerous and ongoing, and the 
circumstances surrounding them cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. His purchase of the two homes was highly 
leveraged. He committed himself to mortgage payments totaling about $3,500 per 
month, even though his adjusted gross income was only about $68,090 in 2005; 
$79,299 in 2006; and $62,467 in 2007. He relied on rental income to pay the mortgage 
on the first home, with no realistic contingency plan for dealing with any interruption of 
 
9 
 
the rental income. He relied on his wife’s future real estate sales commissions even 
though she had no earnings track record.  
 
 When Applicant fell behind on his mortgage payments and was facing 
foreclosure, he initially acted responsibly. He kept in contact with the lenders, tried to 
rent or sell the properties, and sought a modification of the loan on the first home. He 
kept in contact with his other creditors, but was unable to modify the payments on his 
credit card debt and automobile loan. He prudently sought a Chapter 13 payment plan. 
However, in his bankruptcy petition he agreed to continue making payments on all four 
mortgages, apparently in an effort to keep at least one of the properties. When the 
bankruptcy court denied confirmation of the payment plan and dismissed the case, 
Applicant took no further action to resolve any of his debts.  
 
 In June 2011, Applicant told a security investigator that all the debts were 
included in his bankruptcy and were being handled by his bankruptcy attorney. At the 
hearing, he claimed that he relied on his bankruptcy lawyer’s advice that collection of 
his debts is barred by the statute of limitations. Assuming that such advice was given, 
he did not receive it until October 2012. He has not explained why he took no action to 
resolve any of his debts between September 2008 and October 2012. He also has not 
explained why he did not assert the statute of limitations to contest the garnishment 
action by the holder of the second mortgage on his first home. 
 
 Applicant was on notice in June 2011 that his unresolved delinquent debts raised 
security concerns. Nevertheless, at the hearing more than 18 months later, he still had 
not determined the status of the delinquent mortgages.  
 
 To his credit, Applicant has incurred no further delinquent debts since his 
bankruptcy. He lives frugally and carefully monitors his income and expenses. However, 
his lack of effort after September 2008 to resolve his delinquent debts leaves me with 
doubts about his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Thus, I conclude that 
AG ¶ 20(a) is not fully established. 
 
 The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) (conditions beyond his control) is established. His 
renter’s unexpected departure, the damage to his rental property, and the downturn in 
the real estate market were conditions beyond his control. However, the second prong 
(responsible conduct) is not established, for the reasons set out in the above discussion 
of AG ¶ 20(a). 
 
 The first prong of AG ¶ 20(c) (counseling) is established by Applicant’s 
completion of the court-mandated counseling in connection with his bankruptcy. 
However, the second prong is not established, because Applicant’s financial problems 
are not under control. 
 
“Good faith” within the meaning of AG ¶ 20(d) means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case 
No. 99-0201 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant demonstrated “good faith” during the 
 
10 
 
period preceding dismissal of his bankruptcy, but he has not demonstrated good faith 
since September 2008. His payments to the holder of the second mortgage on his first 
home are by involuntary garnishment, which “is not the same as, or similar to, a good-
faith initiation of repayment by the debtor.” ISCR Case No. 09-5700 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 
2011), citing ISCR Case No. 08-06058 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2009). Reliance on a statute 
of limitations “is not normally a substitute for good-faith efforts to pay off debt.” ISCR 
Case No. 07-16427 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010.) (Internal citations omitted.) Even if 
Applicant’s delinquent debts are legally unenforceable, the facts and circumstances 
surrounding his conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy them are relevant to his 
suitability for a security clearance. See  ISCR Case No. 01-09691 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 
27, 2003). I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the first mortgage on the first 
home, which was satisfied by the foreclosure sale in February 2009 and alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.g, but it is not established for the other debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Applicant has claimed that the debts are 
unenforceable, but he has not disputed the legitimacy of any of the debts, provided 
documentation of the basis for any disputes, or provided evidence of actions to resolve 
any disputes. AG ¶ 20(f) is not relevant, because unexplained affluence is not an issue 
in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant has served his country and held a security clearance for many years, in 
uniform and as a civilian contractor. Like many people, he was caught up in the 
irrational exuberance of the real estate market in 2005 and 2006. He appears to have 
 
11 
 
learned from his financial mistakes and now lives frugally and manages his finances 
carefully.  
 
 On the other hand, a security clearance adjudication is aimed at evaluating an 
individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection 
procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) Applicant has not 
demonstrated the sense of duty and obligation toward his creditors that is expected of 
those entrusted with a security clearance. He has demonstrated concern about his job, 
his clearance, and his family, but not about his duty to repay creditors. While any 
animosity he feels toward predatory mortgage lenders might be understandable, it does 
not explain his failure to address his other debts. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
