 
1 
 
 
                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-14339 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
   
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                            Statement of the Case 
 
On July 23, 2009, Applicant signed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 4, 2012, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On September 18, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before a DOHA administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 30, 
 
2 
 
 
2012. I convened a hearing on January 7, 2013, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses, introduced one exhibit (Ex. 1), and 
offered a summary of facts found in ten official U.S. Government source documents for 
administrative notice. The source documents were identified as Exs. I, II, III, IV, V, VI, 
VII, VIII, IX, and X. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.) The Government’s Ex. 1 was admitted 
without objection.  
 
Applicant objected to my taking notice of facts in three official source documents 
submitted for administrative notice (Exs. III, IV, and V) because they dealt with 
espionage by Russian agents in the United States.  Applicant stated that the facts of his 
case did not show that he or any member of his family was involved in espionage. Thus, 
to take notice of such facts could be prejudicial to his case. Guideline B specifically 
requires that adjudication under the foreign influence adjudicative guideline “can and 
should consider the identity of the foreign country to which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information.” Accordingly, I overruled Applicant’s objection and included Exs. III, IV, and 
V among the source documents of which I took notice.  See Guideline B, ¶ 6. 
 
Applicant testified, called no other witnesses, and offered three exhibits, which I 
marked and identified as Ex. A, B, and C, and admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on January 15, 2013. 
                                                    
                                                         Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations of security concern under AG B, Foreign 
Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all 
eight allegations and provided additional information. Applicant’s admissions are 
admitted as findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including witness testimony, 
exhibits, relevant policies, and the applicable adjudicative guideline, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old, married, and the father of two children. He is employed 
as a telecommunications network engineer by a government contractor. He was granted 
a security clearance in October or November of 2009. In December 2009, Applicant was 
arrested for Driving Under the Influence (DUI); it was his first offense. He completed a 
substance abuse education program in 2010. In April 2011, he was convicted and 
sentenced to 12 months of probation before judgment. In April 2012, he successfully 
completed all requirements of his probation. (Ex. 1; Ex. C; Tr. 39-42.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s DUI is not alleged in the SOR, nor is any conduct under the alcohol 
consumption adjudicative guideline.1 However, his arrest and conviction generated a 
review of his record, which resulted in the Guideline B security issues raised in the 
SOR. (Ex. A; Tr. 41-42.)  
 
  Applicant was born, raised, and educated in the former Soviet Union. When he 
was approximately 17 years old, he was admitted to a select academy which trained 
engineers to serve in the several branches of the Soviet military. After five years of 
study, he received a master’s degree in electronics in 1990, was commissioned as an 
officer, and was assigned to prepare equipment for training military students in the field. 
(Ex. 1; Tr. 23-25, 42-45.) 
 
 In exchange for his education, Applicant was expected to serve in the Soviet 
military for 20 years. However, after serving for one year and about four months, he was 
involuntarily retired when the Soviet Union, in a bilateral agreement with the United 
States, reduced the number of service members serving in its military forces. Applicant 
then went to work for several companies in the Russian commercial sector as a 
telecommunications engineer. Applicant’s education at the Soviet military academy and 
his service in the Soviet military is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g. (Tr. 22-24; 42-45.) 
 
 In 1997, Applicant, his wife, and their young son immigrated to the United States. 
They, and his wife’s parents, were sponsored for U.S. residency by an uncle of 
Applicant’s wife. Applicant’s father-in-law later died. (Ex. 1; Tr. 25, 35.) 
 
 After arriving in the United States, Applicant acquired work as a 
telecommunications network engineer. He has worked for his current employer, a 
government contractor, for nine years. (Ex. 1; Ex. A; Tr. 26-27.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife was also born, raised, and educated in the former Soviet Union. 
She is employed in internet technology support by a public library. Applicant and his 
wife became U.S. citizens in 2002. Their minor son was also naturalized and became a 
U.S. citizen. Applicant’s daughter was born in the United States in 2000 and is a U.S. 
citizen. (Ex. 1; Tr. 28-29, 38.) 
                                            
1 I considered Applicant’s DUI only for the purpose of chronology in this case. I did not consider it 
in arriving at my findings or in my conclusion. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) 
the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered 
stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)).  
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s mother and father immigrated to the United States in 2002 or 2003. 
They became U.S. citizens in 2009. They are also dual citizens of Russia. They own an 
apartment in Russia, valued at about $20,000, which they lease to tenants. Applicant’s 
sister, a citizen and resident of Russia, manages the apartment for them and collects 
rent from the tenants, which she uses, in part, for her support. Applicant’s parents’ most 
recent travel to Russia occurred in 2009 or 2010. Applicant’s parents’ dual citizenship 
and their ownership of real property in Russia are alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c. 
Applicant’s sister’s Russian citizenship and residency in Russia are alleged at SOR ¶ 
1.d. (Tr. 30-32, 52-53, 59-60.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife’s uncle is a citizen and resident of Russia. He owns a 
telecommunications company in Russia. Applicant’s wife has contact with him two or 
three times a year. Applicant’s mother-in-law, who resides in the United States, is a dual 
citizen of Russia and the United States. The citizenship and residency of Applicant’s 
wife’s relatives are alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f. (Tr. 32-35.)  
 
 Applicant has maintained contacts with a high school friend and a friend from his 
Soviet military academy, both of whom are citizens and residents of Russia. Both 
individuals work in technical engineering and network communications. In the past, 
Applicant’s contacts with his military academy colleague occurred three to five times a 
year. He reports his current contacts are now between one and two times a year. (Ex. 1; 
Tr. 33-34, 46-48.) 
 
 The military academy Applicant attended is no longer in existence. However, the 
graduates maintain contact with one another, and they have had reunions about every 
five years since they graduated in 1990. Applicant has attended two such reunions. In 
2009, he traveled to the former Soviet Union, and he attended a reunion with about 35 
or 40 of his former military academy classmates. Some of the classmates were still 
serving in the military. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.h. that Applicant maintains contact with 
former academy classmates. (Tr. 36, 45-49, 62-63.) 
 
 The chief services officer for Applicant’s employer provided a letter of character 
reference for the record. This individual noted that Applicant possessed a high level of 
professional and technical expertise that he used to help the firm’s customers achieve 
success. Additionally, the chief services officer stated that Applicant was reliable and 
possessed a sound work ethic. (Ex. A.) 
 
 Applicant argued that his background had been reviewed and his eligibility for a 
security clearance had been determined in 2009. He stated that since 2009, his parents 
had become U.S. citizens, and he claimed that nothing else in his circumstances had 
changed since he had been granted a clearance in 2009. He therefore questioned the 
need to review again his security clearance eligibility. (Tr. 10-12.)  
 
 
5 
 
 
   I take administrative notice of the following facts about Russia, which appear in 
official U.S. government publications provided by Department Counsel to Applicant and 
to me:2 
 
According to information compiled for the National Counterintelligence 
Executive’s 2011 Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and 
Industrial Espionage, Russia’s intelligence services are conducting a 
range of activities to collect economic information and technology from US 
targets, and [Russia] remains one of the top three most aggressive and 
capable collectors of sensitive US economic information and technologies, 
particularly in cyberspace. Non-cyberspace collection methods include 
targeting of US visitors overseas, especially if the visitors are assessed as 
having access to sensitive information. Two trends that may increase 
Russia’s threat over the next several years [are] that many Russian 
immigrants with advanced technical skills who work for leading US 
companies may be increasingly targeted for recruitment by the Russian 
intelligence services; and a greater number of Russian companies 
affiliated with the intelligence services will be doing business in the United 
States. 
 
On June 28, 2010, the U.S. Department of Justice announced the arrests 
of ten alleged secret agents for carrying out long-term, deep-cover 
assignments on behalf of Russia. Within weeks, all ten defendants 
pleaded guilty in federal court and were immediately expelled from the 
United States. On January 18, 2011, convicted spy and former CIA 
employee Harold Nicholson, currently incarcerated following a 1997 
espionage conviction, was sentenced to an additional 96 months of 
imprisonment for money laundering and conspiracy to act as an agent of 
the Russian government for passing information to the Russian 
government between 2006 and December 2008. 
 
Beyond collection activities and espionage directed at the United States, 
Russia has provided various military and missile technologies to other 
countries of security concern, including China, Iran, Syria, and Venezuela. 
[Russian President Vladimir] Putin’s return is unlikely to bring immediate, 
substantive reversals in Russia’s approach to the United States, but 
because of Putin’s instinctive distrust of US intentions and his 
transactional approach towards relations, it is likely that he will be more 
confrontational with Washington over policy differences. Continuing 
concerns about US missile defense plans will reinforce Russia’s 
reluctance to engage in further nuclear arms reductions and Russia is 
unlikely to support additional sanctions against Iran. Russian intelligence 
and security services continue to target Department of Defense interests 
in support of Russian security and foreign policy objectives.  
                                            
2
 I have omitted footnotes that appear in the quoted materials. 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
7 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
                                                           Analysis 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 A Guideline B decision assessing the security worthiness of a U.S. citizen with 
Russian contacts must take into consideration Russia’s ongoing and aggressive efforts 
to collect sensitive U.S. economic and technological information. American citizens with 
immediate family members who are citizens or residents of Russia could be vulnerable 
to coercion, exploitation, or pressure. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the foreign influence 
guideline.  The facts of Applicant’s case raise security concerns under disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(i).3  
 
 Applicant’s father, mother, and mother-in-law are naturalized U.S. citizens who 
maintain dual citizenship with Russia. Applicant’s parents own an apartment in Russia, 
which they rent to tenants. Applicant’s sister, a citizen and resident of Russia, helps to 
manage the apartment and uses some of the rent proceeds for her own support. 
                                            
3 AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or 
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a 
foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 17(i) reads: “conduct, especially 
while traveling outside the U.S., which may make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or 
coercion by a foreign person, group, government, or country.”  
 
8 
 
 
Applicant’s wife’s uncle, a resident and citizen of Russia, owns a telecommunications 
company in Russia. Applicant’s wife has contact with her uncle two or three times a 
year. Applicant’s familial relationships with citizens and residents of Russia create a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, or coercion. 
 
In 1990, Applicant graduated from a Soviet military academy with a master’s 
degree in electronics, and he was commissioned as an officer in the Soviet military. 
Although he was involuntarily retired from the Russian military in a reduction in force in 
about 1991 or 1992, he has maintained relationships with one high school classmate 
and one classmate from his military school days. Both individuals are knowledgeable in 
electronics and telecommunications. In the past, Applicant had contact with his military 
school classmate three to five times a year. In recent years, Applicant has reduced his 
contacts to one or two a year. 
 
Additionally, even though his military academy no longer exists, Applicant has 
remained a part of the alumni group from the school, which holds reunions every five 
years. Applicant has attended two of the five-year reunions. In 2009, he traveled to the 
former Soviet Union for a reunion, which was attended by 35 to 40 of his former 
classmates, including several who were still serving in the Russian military. Applicant’s 
connections to this group of former Russian military academy colleagues could create a 
potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive 
information and his desire to help a foreign group by providing protected or classified 
information. By traveling to Russia for class reunions with his former military academy 
colleagues, some of whom are active in the Russian military, Applicant made himself 
vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign group or government.  
 
 Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply.  
 
Applicant’s father, mother, and mother-in-law are U.S. citizens who hold dual 
citizenship with Russia. Applicant’s sister is a citizen and resident of Russia. Applicant’s 
parents own real property in Russia, which they rent to tenants. Applicant’s wife has an 
uncle who is a citizen and resident of Russia, and she has contact with him about twice 
a year. Applicant and his wife have ongoing relationships with these five individuals who 
are Russian citizens. These contacts are not casual but familial and consistent. 
 
9 
 
 
Additionally, since graduating from a Russian military academy 23 years ago, 
Applicant has maintained contact with one of his classmates on a regular basis, and he 
has twice traveled to Russia for reunions with his military academy classmates. His 
most recent trip was in 2009, when he met with 35 to 40 of his former classmates. 
Applicant’s conduct in traveling to his reunions and his relationships with his former 
classmates raise concerns that he could be targeted for exploitation, pressure, or 
coercion by the government of Russia in ways that might also threaten U.S. security 
interests. Applicant’s relationships with this group are strong and enduring. It not 
possible to conclude that Applicant can be expected to resolve such conflicts in favor of 
the U.S. interest. 
 
Applicant failed to rebut the Government’s allegations that his contacts with his 
family members and former classmates who are citizens of Russia created a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
Applicant’s contacts and relationships with these individuals could force him to choose 
between loyalty to them and the security interests of the United States. (ISCR Case No. 
03-15485 at 4-6 (App. Bd. June 2, 2005); ISCR Case No. 06-24575 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 
2007))  I conclude that the mitigating conditions identified under AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and   
8(c) do not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
10 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole-person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant is a talented and valued employee of a U.S. government contractor. He was 
granted a security clearance in 2009. He argues that he should retain his clearance in 
the present because he was deemed security worthy in the past. 
 
Applicant misunderstands the nature of a security clearance. A security 
clearance is a privilege that exists only so long as the Government has confidence that 
an individual can be entrusted with classified and privileged information. If certain facts 
in the individual’s background come to light, even after the individual has been granted 
a security clearance, the Government retains the right---and indeed has an affirmative 
obligation---to review those facts and determine if the individual remains security 
worthy. In this case, Applicant’s relationships and contacts with Russian citizens, both 
family members and former classmates, raise serious unmitigated concerns about his 
vulnerability to coercion and his heightened risk for foreign influence.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under AG B.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.h.:   Against Applicant 
 
                                     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
 
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
 
