 
1 
 
 
                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12614 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
   
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                            Statement of the Case 
 
On August 30, 2010, Applicant signed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 10, 2012, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B, Foreign Influence. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On October 27, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
 
2 
 
 
(DOHA). The case was assigned to me on November 29, 2012. I convened a hearing 
on January 9, 2013, to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The Government called no 
witnesses, introduced two exhibits (Ex. 1 and Ex. 2), and offered a summary of facts 
found in two official U.S. Government source documents for administrative notice. The 
source documents were identified as Exs. I and II. The summary of facts and the source 
documents were identified as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. HE I was admitted for 
administrative notice without objection.  
 
Applicant testified, called one witness, and offered three exhibits, which I marked 
and identified as Ex. A, B, and C and admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on January 17, 2013. 
                                                    
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations of security concerns under AG B, Foreign 
Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all 
five allegations. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as findings of fact.   
 
 After a thorough review of the record in the case, including witness testimony, 
exhibits, relevant policies, and the applicable adjudicative guideline, I make the 
following findings of fact:  
 
 Applicant is 33 years old, divorced, and the father of an eight-year-old child. He is 
employed as an information technology consultant by a government contractor, and he 
seeks a security clearance for the first time. (Ex. 1; Tr. 40-44.) 
  
  Applicant was born and raised in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan (Jordan). 
After graduating from high school, he studied business administration and management 
for two years at a college in Jordan. In 2003, he left Jordan and moved to Qatar, where 
he was employed as a quality control linguist by a U.S. government contractor. He met 
and married his wife, a native-born U.S. citizen, in Qatar, and their child was born there 
in January 2005. In August 2005, Applicant immigrated to the United States with his 
wife and child. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 50-53, 74-75.) 
 
 In April 2006, Applicant enlisted in the U.S. military and was assigned to work as 
a linguist. His domestic situation deteriorated, and he and his wife had marital 
difficulties. In July 2006, Applicant was arrested for attempted assault on his wife. He 
was sentenced to two years of probation. After one year, he was released from 
probation. In March 2007, he received a general discharge under honorable conditions 
and was released from the military. (Ex. 1; Ex. 2; Tr. 53-54.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife separated in 2008, and they have since divorced. They 
share custody of their child. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2009. (Ex.1; Ex. 2; Tr. 
40.)   
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant is the oldest of eight children. His mother and father are residents and 
citizens of Jordan. His mother is a housewife, and his father is an entrepreneur and 
inventor who specializes in alternative fuel sources. In 2009 and 2012, Applicant visited 
his family in Jordan. When he traveled to Jordan in 2012, Applicant took his child with 
him. In 2012, Applicant’s mother also came to visit him in the United States. Applicant 
speaks by telephone with his mother and sometimes with his father once every month 
or once every two months. At ¶ 1.a., the SOR alleges that the citizenship and residency 
of Applicant’s parents raise security concerns. (Tr. 55-58, 78, 82-83.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.b. that Applicant’s three brothers are citizens and 
residents of Jordan. One of Applicant’s brothers works in the women’s fashion industry 
in Jordan as a salesman. Another brother works as a self-employed sound system 
engineer. Applicant’s third brother is a law student in Jordan. Applicant does not contact 
his brothers individually by telephone. His mother provides news and information about 
the brothers when Applicant speaks with her. However, the brother who is a law student 
communicates with Applicant by sending him text messages on his cell phone. (Tr. 60-
61, 84-85.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.c. that Applicant’s four sisters are citizens and residents 
of Jordan. Two of Applicant’s sisters are married and are housewives; one sister is a 
college student; and Applicant’s youngest sister is in fifth or sixth grade. Applicant 
speaks with his sisters on the telephone about once every six months. (Tr. 61, 86.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.d. that Applicant’s aunt is a citizen and resident of 
Jordan. Applicant’s aunt is a housewife. (Tr. 62.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.e. that Applicant has a friend who is a citizen and 
resident of Jordan. Applicant’s friend is a self-employed internet technology 
professional. Applicant and the friend grew up together and lived in the same 
neighborhood. They speak on the telephone every three or four months. The friend and 
his girlfriend are planning to visit Applicant in the United States. (Tr. 62-63, 87-89.) 
 
 Applicant’s witness spoke highly of his character. She said she has known 
Applicant for about six years and considers him to be hard-working, loyal, and 
trustworthy. (Tr. 32-36.) 
 
 Applicant also provided letters of character reference from individuals with whom 
he had worked. His current business manager explained that he found Applicant to be 
“extremely reliable, honest, conscientious, highly ethical, professional, and extremely 
easy to get along with.” He further stated that Applicant was “the most successful 
recruiter we have on our team.” (Ex. A.) 
 
 Two other individuals provided positive letters of character reference in support 
of Applicant. They stated that Applicant is an able and valued colleague who is reliable 
and trustworthy. (Ex. B; Ex. C.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
   I take administrative notice of the following facts about Jordan, which appear in 
official U.S. government publications and which were provided by Department Counsel 
to Applicant and to me:1 
 
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is a constitutional monarchy ruled by 
King Abdulla II. According to the State Department’s 2011 Human Rights 
Report, Jordan’s three most significant continuing human rights problems 
were: 1) citizens’ inability to peaceably change their government; 2) 
abuses committed with impunity by security forces; and 3) violence 
against women. 
 
Other human rights problems were arbitrary deprivation of life, torture or 
mistreatment, poor prison conditions, arbitrary arrest and denial of due 
process through administrative detention, prolonged detention and 
external interference with judicial decisions, as well as infringement on 
citizens’ privacy rights, and restrictions on freedom of speech, press, 
assembly and association. 
 
Legal and societal discrimination against Jordanians of Palestinian origin 
remains widespread, particularly against those refugees who entered from 
Gaza after the 1967 Arab-Israeli War. Such persons are subject to 
arbitrary withdrawal of their citizenship without due process; exclusion 
from services such as access to public assistance, education, and medical 
services; and they are often under-represented in government due to their 
exclusion from the political process. 
 
The Government of Jordan considers dual Jordanian-American citizens to 
be Jordanian citizens. Jordanian authorities may not inform the U.S. 
embassy of arrests, detentions, or accidents involving dual Jordanian-
American citizens. Jordanian law subjects dual citizens to certain 
obligations; for example, males under the age of 37 are required to 
register for service in the Jordanian military. 
 
Under Jordanian law, any adult male may prevent a female or child 
relative from leaving the country by registering a hold on their travel with 
Jordanian authorities. This is possible even if the child or woman only 
holds U.S. citizenship. Jordanian authorities consider such disputes to be 
family matters and the U.S. embassy has a limited ability to intervene.  
 
The threat of terrorism remains high in Jordan. Al-Qaida in Iraq affiliates 
have carried out terrorist activities against U.S. and Government of Jordan 
targets in Jordan. Such activities often do not distinguish between U.S. 
government personnel and private U.S. citizens. 
 
                                            
1
 I have omitted footnotes that appear in the quoted materials. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
  
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
6 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 A Guideline B decision assessing the security worthiness of a U.S. citizen with 
Jordanian contacts must take into consideration Jordan’s continuing human rights 
problems and the ongoing threats of terrorism against U.S. and Government of Jordan 
targets. American citizens with immediate family members who are citizens or residents 
of Jordan could be vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the foreign influence 
guideline.  The facts of Applicant’s case raise security concerns under disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b).2  
 
 Applicant’s father, mother, three brothers, four sisters, aunt, and childhood friend 
are citizens and residents of Jordan. Applicant’s close relationships and contacts with 
these family members and a friend in Jordan, a country with a poor human rights record 
and a high risk of terrorism, create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, or coercion.  
 
                                            
2 AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or 
other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a 
foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.”   
 
7 
 
 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen recently, in 2009. In 2009 and 2012, he traveled 
to Jordan to visit his family members. In 2012, Applicant’s mother also visited him in the 
United States. Applicant’s telephone contacts with his parents occur monthly or every 
other month. His younger brother, a law student, sends Applicant text messages. 
Applicant’s childhood friend hopes to visit Applicant in the United States, and Applicant 
has telephone contact with him every three or four months. 
 
Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply.  
 
Applicant has ten immediate family members who are citizens and residents of 
Jordan and a good friend, an internet technology professional, who is a citizen and 
resident of Jordan. Jordan has a poor human rights record and a high risk of terrorism. 
It is possible that one of the many Jordanian individuals with whom Applicant has close 
relationships could be pressured in a way that would put Applicant in the position of 
having to choose between the interests of that individual and the interests of the United 
States.  
 
Applicant’s ties to the United States are recent. He immigrated to the United 
States in 2005, and he became a U.S. citizen in 2009. Since becoming a U.S. citizen, 
he has traveled to Jordan twice. In 2012, his mother came to visit him in the United 
States. His ties to his family in Jordan are strong and enduring. It is not clear that he has 
such deep and longstanding relationships in the United States that he could be 
expected to resolve a conflict of interest in favor of U.S. interests.  
 
 Applicant is a concerned and involved family member. His commitments to his 
family members are admirable. His relationships with his family members, especially his 
mother, are filial and consistent. His contacts with his family members and his friend in 
Jordan are not casual. Applicant  failed to rebut the Government’s allegations that his 
contacts with his family members and friend who are citizens of Jordan created a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
Applicant’s contacts and relationships with these individuals could force him to choose 
between loyalty to them and the security interests of the United States. (ISCR Case No. 
03-15485 at 4-6 (App. Bd. June 2, 2005); ISCR Case No. 06-24575 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 
 
8 
 
 
2007))  I conclude that the mitigating conditions identified under AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and   
8(c) do not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of the 
whole-person concept and all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. 
Applicant is a talented and valued employee of a U.S. government contractor. His 
colleagues and managers speak highly of him and his professional skills. He became a 
U.S. citizen in 2009. He seeks a security clearance for the first time. Applicant has 
strong ties to his family and a friend in Jordan. He has visited Jordan twice since 
becoming a U.S. citizen. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under AG B.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.e.:   Against Applicant 
 
                                     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
 
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
 
