 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 Redacted )  ISCR Case No. 11-09637 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Financial Considerations concern. Her financial problems 
were caused by the unscrupulous conduct of her mortgage lender and her former 
husband’s refusal to pay court-mandated child support. Prior to the issuance of the 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), Applicant satisfied her largest debt. She received 
financial counseling and has either resolved or is paying her other debts. She now has 
her finances firmly under control and handles her financial affairs in a responsible 
manner. She has worked for the same employer, a major defense contractor, for over 
17 years and held a clearance the entire time without issue. Her past financial problems 
no longer raise doubts about her reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Procedural History 
 
On September 19, 2012, the Department of Defense (DoD), in accordance with 
DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant an SOR, alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). On October 11, 2012, 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing (Answer). 
 
 
2 
 
 
 On November 14, 2012, Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
ready to proceed. I was assigned the case on November 29, 2012. After coordinating 
with the parties, I scheduled the hearing for January 16, 2013.  
 
 At hearing, Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 through 4, 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and after the hearing 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (Ax.) A through C, which were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 25, 2013. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in her mid-forties. She is an administrative assistant for a major 
defense contractor, earning about $45,000 annually. She has been working for her 
current employer for over 17 years and held a security clearance the entire time without 
issue. Her recent job evaluations state: 
 
[Appellant] exceeds performance requirements with a good attitude, 
people skills, and willingness to accept new responsibility and challenges. 
She is the consummate team player, interacting with all the [redacted] 
team members, customers and other contractors in the [redacted] 
community. . . . She exceeds established responsibilities and goals . . . 
consistent with company ethics, values and behaviors. . . . She is 
constantly trying to increase her skill set.  
 
(Tr. at 21, 35-37; GE 1; AE C) 
 
 Applicant obtained her bachelor’s degree in 2006, while working full time and 
raising her daughter on her own. Her daughter is now 19 years old and is a freshman in 
college. Her daughter earned a number of academic scholarships that will pay for her 
tuition, as well as room and board. She also has a part-time job to pay for other 
miscellaneous expenses. (Tr. at 21-22, 25, 37-38; GE 1) 
 
 Applicant divorced in 1996 after five years of marriage. Her former husband was 
court ordered to provide child support, but routinely did not pay and when he did pay it 
was late or less than the amount ordered by the court. Applicant raised their daughter 
on her own with little to no financial assistance from her former husband. (Tr. at 21-22; 
30-31, 42; GE 1) 
 
Applicant’s financial trouble started in late 2007, early 2008 when she purchased 
a home. At closing, the lender had, without explanation or cause, increased the interest 
rate and monthly mortgage payments beyond the amount she had been promised. 
Applicant signed the loan documents, planning on getting a second job or a roommate 
to defray the higher cost. She was able to pay her mortgage and other bills until three 
years ago when her former husband lost his job and stopped paying child support 
altogether. At about the same time, her late model car suffered a series of mechanical 
issues and the roommate arrangement fell through. Applicant attempted to get a second 
 
3 
 
 
job without success. Her daughter got a part-time job after school, but it was simply not 
enough to cover their increased household expenses. Applicant started using credit 
cards to pay for their day-to-day living expenses. She negotiated with the bank to 
modify her mortgage, but eventually decided to sell the house when her monthly 
expenses once again rose due to further car-related mechanical problems and the cost 
of her daughter’s advanced placement and college-level courses. She sold the home 
and satisfied her mortgage in late 2011, early 2012. Applicant’s mortgage debt was 
approximately $150,000. (Tr. at 21-26, 38-42; GE 2) 
 
 Applicant sat down with a certified financial counselor for advice on resolving her 
other debts. She had previously attempted to negotiate with her overdue creditors to 
satisfy her credit card debt, but realized that she was unable to pay her delinquent debts 
without getting into further financial trouble. The financial counselor advised Applicant to 
file for bankruptcy to resolve her debt. Applicant met with a bankruptcy attorney who 
also advised her to file for bankruptcy. Applicant took the required financial counseling 
course, filed for bankruptcy, and her non-secured debts were discharged. The debts 
referenced in SOR ¶¶ a-j and m-s represent about $25,000 in credit card debt, which 
were discharged in bankruptcy. None of the credit card debt was for extravagant 
consumer purchases or vacations. Instead, the purchases were for necessities. 
Applicant no longer has credit cards, except for an employer-provided credit card for 
travel-related business expenses. Applicant has not abused her employer-provided 
credit card, nor been late in paying travel-related charges. (Tr. at 23-33; Ax. B) 
 
Applicant reaffirmed her car loan because she only has $2,000 to $3,000 left to 
pay on the car and, even though the car is a 10-year old model; it is more affordable 
than purchasing a new car. Applicant has brought the car loan current. She also 
contacted the creditor for her student loans and set up a payment arrangement. She 
has been paying per the terms of the agreement and the account is now current. These 
debts are referenced in SOR ¶¶ k and l. (Tr. at 23-36, Ax. A-B) 
 
 Applicant took another financial counseling course in November 2011. (Ax. B) 
She recently reduced her living expenses by moving in with a roommate, which will 
generate an extra $500 a month in savings to pay for unanticipated expenditures and to 
bolster her savings account. She continues to live on a strict budget and has not 
accumulated any new delinquent debt. (Tr. at 23, 27-28, 33-34; GE 2) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to “control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.” Id. at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Executive Oder 
(E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), 
as amended. 
 
4 
 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions that are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing 
the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge must apply the guidelines 
in a  common sense manner and take into account the whole person in reaching a 
fair and impartial decision. An administrative judge should consider all available and 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a security clearance.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication an 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of 
Defense have established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to financial problems is articulated at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
One aspect of the concern is that an individual who is financially overextended 
may be irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Applicant’s past financial problem raises this 
concern and establishes the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 However, an applicant’s past or current indebtedness is not the end of the 
analysis, because “[a] security clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at 
collecting an applicant’s debts. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an 
applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.”1 Accordingly, Applicant may 
mitigate the financial considerations concern by establishing one or more of the 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 20. The relevant mitigating conditions are:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were caused or exacerbated by matters beyond 
her control. The main culprits were her unscrupulous lender who changed the terms of 
her mortgage at closing and her former husband who failed to abide by court orders to 
provide child support. However, AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully applicable because Applicant 
                                                          
1
 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 3 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
 
6 
 
 
was not forced to sign the loan documents and did not attempt to address her non-
mortgage related debts until relatively recently. 
 
 Applicant met her burden in establishing AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d). Her past 
financial problems were not due to frivolous spending or other issues of concern. 
Instead, it arose under a unique set of circumstances at a time when Applicant was 
trying to pay for a home she could not afford and support a teenage daughter on her 
income alone. Both of these financial constraints no longer exist. Applicant’s past 
financial problems are unlikely to recur because she has taken financially prudent steps 
that will allow her to pay her bills and any unexpected contingencies without having to 
rely on credit. 
 
 Furthermore, Applicant received financial counseling, addressed her past-due 
debts, and put her financial house in order. She satisfied the largest of her debts, the 
mortgage, before the SOR was issued. She attempted to resolve her credit card debt 
outside of bankruptcy and, only after she was advised by a certified financial counselor 
and an attorney that her only option was bankruptcy, did she file for bankruptcy. Outside 
of bankruptcy, Applicant addressed her student loans and, more importantly, 
demonstrated financial prudence by reaffirming the loan on her late model car versus 
adding more debt by purchasing a new car. In short, Applicant established that she is 
firmly in control of her finances and manages her finances in a responsible manner.  
 
 After weighing the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find that 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations concern. Her past debts no longer cast 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).2 Applicant is a dependable, hard-working individual who 
has worked for a major defense contractor and held a security clearance without issue 
for the past 17 years. She has raised a child on her own and placed her daughter’s well-
being and education above her own self-interest. Such selflessness speaks volumes as 
to Applicant’s character and ability to place her obligations above her own needs. 
Applicant answered the questions posed by the Government and myself in a 
straightforward fashion without making excuses or attempting to minimize her 
responsibility in resolving her debts. These favorable whole-person factors, coupled with 
Applicant’s mitigation of the security concerns raised by her past financial problems, 
                                                          
2
 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
 
leaves me firmly convinced that she can continue to be entrusted with classified 
information. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s continued eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.s:         For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant continued access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
