 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 12-07416 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
foreign influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 12, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B. The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 29, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me January 15, 2013. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals issued a notice of hearing on January 17, 
 
2 
 
 
2013. I convened the hearing as scheduled on February 5, 2013. The Government 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8, which were admitted into the record without objection. 
The Government requested administrative notice be taken of HE I through III. There 
were no objections, and I granted the request. Applicant testified on his own behalf. He 
offered Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted into the record without 
objection. The record was held open until February 12, 2013, to allow Applicant to 
submit additional documents. He timely submitted AE F, which was admitted into the 
record without objection.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 13, 
2013.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 
1.c and denied the allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d. At his hearing, he admitted he 
mistakenly denied the allegation in ¶ 1.a and should have admitted it. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He was born and raised in Uzbekistan. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in Uzbekistan in 1984. He married in 1994. His wife was also born 
and raised in Uzbekistan. They has a daughter born in Uzbekistan in 1995. In 1998, he 
was selected in a diversity lottery, and he and his family were permitted to immigrate to 
the United States. He, his wife, and their daughter became naturalized U.S. citizens in 
2004. In 2005, Applicant earned another bachelor’s degree from a U.S. college. He 
began work on a master’s degree, but had to stop because he had difficulty paying the 
tuition. In 2006, Applicant and his wife had a son born in the U.S.2 
 
 In 2007, Applicant was granted a confidential security clearance so he could 
work as a translator for a government contractor. In 2008, he was granted a secret 
security clearance. He worked for another government contractor as a linguist, 
translator, and interpreter at an overseas facility. He was employed in this capacity until 
November 2011. He no longer is employed as a linguist. He now works in the United 
States for a government contractor. While holding a security clearance, he has had no 
security violations or issues.3  
 
 Applicant has a brother and a sister who lived in Uzbekistan. He had a second 
brother who is deceased. His remaining brother is a doctor who works part-time for the 
Department of Health and is the head of a laboratory for the treatment of women’s 
medical issues in Uzbekistan. All of the medical facilities in Uzbekistan are government 
controlled or owned. Applicant stated that in the past his brother considered quitting his 
part-time job at the Department of Health and going back to treating patients. Applicant 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel’s memorandum is HE IV. 
 
2 Tr. 27-35, 90. 
 
3 Tr. 35-41. 
 
3 
 
 
is unaware of his brother’s current employment status in this department. Applicant last 
visited his brother in Uzbekistan in 2001. He communicates with him a couple of times a 
year. His brother has applied for the diversity lottery to immigrate to the United States. 
Applicant inquires about the status of his brother’s application when they do talk. His 
brother is not married.4  
 
 Applicant’s sister and his two nephews are citizens and residents of Russia. His 
sister’s husband went missing several years ago and has since been declared dead. 
His disappearance was reported to the police. Applicant explained that there is no 
information about his whereabouts. He explained his brother-in-law has issues with 
alcohol and that could have something to do with his disappearance. Applicant’s sister 
is an elementary school teacher. His eldest nephew is in college and the younger one is 
in middle school. In 2005, Applicant submitted a petition to sponsor his sister to 
immigrate to the United States. The initial petition was approved and it is now going 
through the visa processing steps and immigration requirements. Applicant checks 
online regularly to see the current status of the petition. His eldest nephew is no longer 
eligible to immigrate under this sponsorship because he is an adult. His younger 
nephew is included in the petition.5 
 
 Applicant maintains contact with his sister about once a month through Skype. 
Applicant’s wife also maintains contact with her one to two times a month. Applicant 
sends her gifts at the holidays and also sends her about $100 to $200 a year as a gift.6  
 
 Applicant’s wife’s has three brothers and three sisters who are citizens and 
residents of Kazakhstan. They all live in a small town and have blue collar jobs. 
Applicant’s wife has limited contacts with her eldest sister by Skype because she is the 
only one with a computer. Applicant does not have any contact with his wife’s relatives 
in Kazakhstan. He assumes when she contacts her eldest sister that other relatives may 
be present. None of these relatives are interested in immigrating to the United States. 
Applicant met them once in 2001. After moving to the United States, his wife was 
interested in maintaining contact with her relatives. That has decreased over the years 
as she has become more assimilated in the United States.7  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d alleges Applicant’s wife has two half-brothers who are citizens and 
residents of Uzbekistan. This is incorrect. Applicant’s mother-in-law had a half-brother 
and this half-brother had two children. These are the relatives alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
Therefore, they would be half-cousins of Applicant’s wife. One of them has since died. 
Applicant and his wife have no contact with the remaining half-cousin.8  
                                                          
4 Tr. 43-46, 65. 
 
5 Tr. 46-62; AE B is a copy of the immigration application for Applicant’s sister and family. 
 
6 Tr. 56-62. 
 
7 Tr. 65-70. 
 
8 Tr. 70-72. 
 
4 
 
 
 As a precaution, Applicant formally and in writing renounced his citizenship with 
Uzbekistan.9 Applicant has no property in Uzbekistan. All of his assets are in the United 
States. He estimated he has about $100,000 in assets. He does not have any 
delinquent debts. He has filed and paid his past federal income tax returns. He and his 
wife are geographically separated in the United States while their daughter completes 
high school. They are hoping to reunite after she goes to college. Applicant’s wife is 
employed. Neither Applicant nor his wife are members or affiliated with any social 
groups with ties to Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, or Russia. His wife does belong to a social 
media chat room where she communicates with some former classmates.10  
 
 Applicant was conscripted to serve one to two months in the Soviet Army after he 
completed college. He had no choice in the matter. It also was mandatory to be a 
member of the Soviet Youth party when he was young. If you did not pay the required 
dues, you were not permitted to have any type of career. Applicant’s membership was 
nominal. This all occurred before the collapse of the Soviet Union.11 
 
 Applicant provided copies of certificates of appreciation awarded to him during 
the period 2008 through 2011. Specifically, the certificates recognized him for his 
“outstanding support to our nation’s safety and security in direct support of the global 
war on terrorism” and “in grateful acknowledgment of your hard work and patriotism.” 
He also provided a certificate of appreciation for his dedicated service as an 
interpreter.12 
 
Russia 
 
Russia’s intelligence services conduct a range of activities to collect economic 
information and technology from U.S. targets and remains one of the top three most 
aggressive and capable collectors of sensitive U.S. economic information and 
technologies, particularly in cyberspace. Non-cyberspace collection methods include 
targeting of U.S. visitors overseas, especially if the visitors are assessed as having 
access to sensitive information. Two trends that may increase Russia’s threat over the 
next several years is that many Russian immigrants with advanced technical skills who 
work for leading U.S. companies may be increasingly targeted for recruitment by the 
Russian intelligence services; and a greater number of Russian companies affiliated 
with the intelligence services will be doing business in the United States.  
 
The Russian Federation’s intelligence capability is significant and focuses on 
collection of information from the United States. Russia has targeted U.S. technologies 
and has sought to obtain protected information from them through industrial espionage. 
                                                          
9 AE C. 
 
10 Tr. 72-83. 
 
11 Tr. 87-90. 
 
12 AE E. 
 
5 
 
 
Russian espionage specializes in military technology and gas and oil industry expertise. 
As of 2005, Russia and China were the two most aggressive collectors of sensitive and 
protected U.S. technology and accounted for the majority of such targeting. Russia is a 
leading arms exporter, with major sales of advanced weapons and military-related 
technology to China, Iran, Syria, and Venezuela. 
 
In 2010, Russia continued to increase its intelligence-gathering efforts and 
intelligence capabilities directed against the United States interests worldwide through 
espionage, technology acquisition, and covert actions. Also in 2010, the United States 
Department of Justice announced arrests of ten alleged secret agents for carrying out 
long-term, deep-covered assignments on behalf of Russia.  
 
The threat of terrorism in Russia continues to be significant. Travel in the vicinity 
of Chechnya may be dangerous, despite Russian efforts to suppress the terrorists. Acts 
of terrorism include taking hostages and bombings.  
 
Russia has recognized the legitimacy of international human rights standards, 
but human rights abuses continue. Both Russian federal forces and Chechen rebel 
forces act with impunity while engaging in torture, summary executions, 
disappearances, and arbitrary detentions. There are reports of attacks on and killings of 
journalists, physical abuse by law enforcement officers, extremely harsh and at times 
life-threatening prison conditions, arbitrary detention, and politically motivated 
imprisonments. Additional problems include media suppression, and widespread 
corruption throughout the executive, legislative, and judicial branches, and law 
enforcement.  
 
The U.S. Department of State reports allegations that Russian government 
officials and others conduct warrantless searches of residences and other premises and 
electronic surveillance without judicial permission. This surveillance includes Ministry of 
Internal Affairs and Federal Security Office monitoring of internet and e-mail traffic. 
Additionally, Russian law enforcement agencies have legal access to the personal 
information of telephone and cell phone users.   
 
Uzbekistan 
 
 Uzbekistan gained independence from the Soviet Union in late 1991, but 
maintains close ties with Russia. Uzbekistan is an authoritarian state. Although its 
constitution provides for a presidential system with separation of powers among the 
executive, legislative, and judicial branches, in practice, the president and centralized 
executive branch dominates political life exercising almost complete control over the 
other branches of government.  
 
 Foreign policy in Uzbekistan is highly dependent on presidential decision-making. 
In 2005, the Uzbek government violently cracked down on unrest in the southern city of 
Andijon. The U.S. Government and others criticized this crackdown, and in response, 
the Uzbek government terminated U.S. basing rights in Karshi-Khanabad that were 
 
6 
 
 
important to the U.S. military efforts in neighboring Afghanistan. Subsequently, 
Uzbekistan shifted towards closer ties with Russia and China.  
 
 Regional threats include illegal narcotics, trafficking in persons, extremism, and 
terrorism. Uzbekistan shares a border with Afghanistan and has expressed concern 
about a potential “spillover” effect of terrorism. Al-Qa’ida remains a threat and has 
looked to consolidate power with other terrorist organizations in the region. 
 
 The U.S. Department of State advises U.S. citizens that potential for terrorist 
attacks or localized civil disobedience still exists in Uzbekistan. Supporters of terrorist 
groups are active in the region. These groups and others have conducted kidnappings, 
assassinations, and suicide bombings, as well as an attack on the U.S. Embassy in 
Tashkent in 2004.  
 
 Uzbek law enforcement uses its powers to suppress legitimate expressions of 
political or religious belief. In addition to restrictions on religious freedom, the most 
significant human rights problems include arbitrary arrest and detention; prolonged 
detention; harsh, even life-threatening prison conditions; torture and abuse of detainees; 
and denial of due process and a fair trial. Restrictions on freedom of speech, press, 
assembly and association, movement and communication, and violence against women 
were also prevalent. Government-organized forced labor, including that of children, is 
an on-going concern.  
 
 Since 2003, Congress has, on several occasions, passed legislation prohibiting 
or limiting foreign assistance to Uzbekistan, and has blocked certain Uzbek government 
officials from entering the United States, unless the Secretary of State determines that 
Uzbekistan has made substantial progress in meeting commitments to respect human 
rights.  
 
Kazakhstan 
 
 Kazakhstan gained independence from the Soviet Union in late 1991. The United 
States was the first to recognize its independence. Kazakhstan has pursued close 
relations with Russia and China, as well as the European Union and the United States. 
Supporters of extremist groups remain active across central Asia. These groups have 
expressed anti-U.S. sentiments and may attempt to target U.S. Government or private 
interests in the region, including Kazakhstan. Because of increased security at official 
U.S. facilities, terrorists are also targeting “soft” civilian targets.  
 
 In the wake of recent violent incidents linked to religious extremists, Kazakhstan 
has tightened government controls over religious organizations. The laws severely 
restrict the peaceful practice of religion in Kazakhstan. The laws also require law 
requires religious groups to register and give the government broad power to deny 
religious organizations legal status and otherwise regulate their activities.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 The Kazakhstani constitution concentrates power in the presidency. The 
president controls the legislature and the judiciary, as well as the regional local 
governments. Recent elections have fallen short of international standards.  
 
 The most significant human rights problems were severe limits on citizens’ rights 
to change their government; restriction on freedom of speech, press, assembly and 
association; and the lack of an independent judiciary and due process, especially in 
dealing with pervasive law enforcement and judicial abuse and government corruption. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
 
8 
 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable:  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (d) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The 
“heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively 
low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in 
having a family member living under a foreign government or owning property in a 
 
9 
 
 
foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”13 
 
Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of Uzbekistan. Applicant has contact 
with him a couple of times a year, but has not visited him since 2001. His sister and two 
nephews are citizens and residents of Russia. He is sponsoring his sister and nephew 
for immigration to the United States. His wife has three brothers and three sisters who 
are citizens and residents of Kazakhstan. His wife occasionally has electronic 
communication with her siblings. All three foreign countries due to their human rights 
records, terrorism activities, and their governments’ intervention into personal freedoms 
of individuals raise security concerns. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply to 
the relatives mentioned above. Applicant’s wife has a half-cousin in Uzbekistan that 
neither Applicant nor his wife has contact with. I find there is no security concern 
regarding this relative. 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and conclude the following are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
10 
 
 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government or the 
country is known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. 
Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of Uzbekistan. His sister and nephews are 
citizens and residents of Russia. His wife’s siblings are citizens and residents of 
Kazakhstan. It is clear that all three countries have governments that suppress 
individual freedoms, have terrorist organizations that target U.S. citizens, and Russia 
specifically conducts espionage against the United States. All three have poor human 
rights records.  
 
Applicant and his family have lived in the United States since 1998. They have 
been naturalized U.S. citizens since 2004. He has a son born in the United States. 
Applicant has worked with the U.S. Government in support of the global war on 
terrorism. All of his assets are in the United States, and he owns no property in any 
other foreign country.  
 
 Applicant maintains a relationship with his brother and is hopeful his brother can 
immigrate to the United States. His brother is a doctor. Through his part-time 
employment, he has some relationship with the Uzbekistan government. His affiliation is 
unlikely to create a risk of foreign exploitation. Applicant maintains a relationship with 
his sister and her family. He is sponsoring her for immigration to the United States. Both 
siblings live in countries that raise concerns. Their positions do not raise any unusual 
security concerns or place them in a heightened risk scenario. Neither work in high-
profile jobs that might be targeted. However, due to the nature of the countries where 
they live, I cannot find it is unlikely Applicant might be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of his brother and sister and the interests of the United 
States. I find AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. Applicant has repeatedly proved through his 
work that his sense of loyalty to the United States is deep and he can be expected to 
resolve any conflicts in favor of U.S. interests. I find AG ¶ 8(b) applies. AG ¶ 8(c) does 
not apply because Applicant’s relationship with his siblings and nephews is more than 
casual.  
 
 Applicant’s wife maintains some contact with her siblings in Kazakhstan. It is 
infrequent, but there is a familial concern. One sibling has a computer and it is through 
this medium that there may be contact with the others. Applicant’s wife’s contact is more 
than casual. Therefore AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. These relatives are blue collar workers 
and have no special relationship with their government. Applicant does not have contact 
with the relatives. It does not appear that this relationship places the relatives in a 
heightened risk scenario. It is unlikely Applicant would be placed in a position of having 
to choose between the interests of his wife’s siblings and the interests of the United 
States. I find AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
11 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant applied for and was selected by a lottery to immigrate to the United 
States. He moved in 1998. He has established his family roots in the United States. He 
and his family became naturalized U.S. citizens in 2004. He earned a second bachelor’s 
degree in the United States. His daughter is in high school, and he has a son who was 
born in the United States. His wife has a job. Applicant has not been in Uzbekistan 
since 2001. All of Applicant’s assets are in the United States. Applicant has held a 
security clearance since 2008, serving the United States in the global fight on terrorism. 
He has proved he has deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United 
States. I have considered his demeanor and candor during his hearing. I believe 
Applicant would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
foreign influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
   
 
12 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
