 
1 
 
 
 
 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-07819 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The 15 charged-off or collection 
accounts alleged in the Statement of Reasons (SOR), totaling more than $118,000, 
remain unresolved. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on October 5, 
2012, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concern. DoD adjudicators could not 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance. On October 20, 2012, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
hearing. On November 27, 2012, I was assigned the case. On November 28, 2012, 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing for a hearing convened on December 5, 2012. I 
                                                          
1
 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 10 and Applicant’s Exhibits A through E, 
without objection. On December 13, 2012, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations as to 
charged-off and collection accounts listed in SOR ¶ 1.b, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.k, which total 
approximately $13,000. He admitted the remaining allegations. I incorporate Applicant’s 
admissions as facts. After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old computer support technician who worked for a defense 
contractor until terminated in August 2012, due to his lack of a security clearance. (Tr. 
30) Applicant called no witnesses other than himself, and he produced no work or 
character references.  
 
Following high school graduation, Applicant served two years in the U.S. Air 
Force. In 1982, he joined the U.S. Army and retired in 2002 as a sergeant first class 
(E7). (Tr. 19, 20) He retired with a sixty percent disability. (Tr. 52) Until Applicant’s 
retirement, he maintained good credit. His wife handled the household finances. Five 
days after retirement, he was in southwest Asia working for a defense contractor and 
remained with the contractor for 13 months. (Tr. 22) He paid off all of his prior debts and 
had a “significant” amount of money in the bank. (Tr. 23) In February 2008, due to 
company restructuring, he lost his job and was unemployed until September 2009. (Tr. 
23, 42) He remained unemployed. (Tr. 43) During his unemployment, he used his credit 
to save his home. In September 2009, he obtained a job with a defense contractor as a 
desk-side IT (Information Technology) support. (Tr. 20) The companies have changed, 
but Applicant remained in the same job.  
 
 Applicant’s monthly retirement take-home pay is $1,865 and his monthly 
disability take-home pay is $1,075. However, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) 
believes Applicant was overpaid and he currently receives only $30 monthly in disability 
pay. (Ex. A, Tr. 27) He has submitted paperwork to the VA attempting to correct the 
problem and believes once the problem is corrected he will receive a $6,000 lump-sum 
payment.. (Tr. 27) His wife works in customer service for a health care provider, and her 
take-home salary is approximately $820 every two weeks. (Tr. 27, 28) When employed 
full time with the defense contractor, he was receiving $1,876 every two weeks for an 
annual income of $60,000 to $70,000. (Tr. 28)  
 
 Applicant net monthly income (excluding any salary as a contractor) is 
approximately $5,230 and his monthly expenses are approximately $5,200. (Ex. B) Prior 
to his termination, he had money to apply on his past-due obligations. (Tr. 59) He 
provided no documentation of having made payments.  
 
 After obtaining employment in 2009, Applicant contacted his creditors. Some 
would work with him and others demanded total payment. (Tr. 24) Because of 
uncertainty in the work place, he was unwilling to commit to monthly payments not 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
knowing if he would be able to make the payments. (Tr. 24) His goal is to pay his 
creditors. He knows that, at some point, he will have enough funds to pay his past-due 
accounts. In 2009, Applicant considered filing for bankruptcy protection. (Tr. 25)  
 
 The largest of Applicant’s unaddressed obligations is a $59,000 debt-
consolidation loan obtained in May 2006. (Ex. 3, 4, Tr. 31) His goal was to consolidate 
his obligations and make $1,000 monthly payments to pay off the loan. (Tr. 41) His 
January 2007 credit bureau report (CBR) lists this debt as “pays as agreed.” (Ex. 2, Tr. 
38) After becoming unemployed in 2008, the account went to collection. 
 
 Applicant denied two department store accounts placed for collection (SOR 1.g, 
$1,210 and SOR 1.h, $841). He said he cancelled his credit cards with the store, and 
his wife is current on her store credit card. (Tr. 45) No documentation was received 
showing the accounts were current. The account listed in SOR 1.j ($2,108), which he 
denied owing, is listed in his CBR as having been sold to another lender. (Tr. 47) The 
same amount ($2,108) appears as a collection account in SOR 1.m, which he admitted 
owing. At the hearing, Applicant stated he would investigate to determine if these two 
debts are the same obligation. No documentation has been received about this debt.  
 
 The majority of Applicant’s outstanding obligations were for general living 
expenses. He has no payment plan or arrangement to pay any of the accounts. He 
intends at some future date to negotiate and pay his obligations. (Tr. 50)  
 
 In 1977, Applicant married and they have two daughters born in 1984 and 1986. 
His son was born in 1990. (Tr. 40) Only his son, who has just started college, lives with 
him and his wife. (Tr. 40)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant has 15 unaddressed 
charged-off or collection accounts totaling approximately $118,000. He denies owing 
five of the debts, which total approximately $13,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 
19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not 
meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant owes $118,000 in delinquent debt. Although he denied five SOR debts 
he failed to provide any documentation supporting his assertion the debts were no 
longer owing. The allegations are supported by the credit reports in the record (Ex. 2, 3, 
4, 6, and 7) and his response to interrogatories (Ex. 5) Applicant has a history of not 
paying his debts and currently has an inability to do so. Applicant’s indebtedness was 
caused by a period of unemployment. Although Applicant receives the benefit of some 
mitigating evidence, these facts are not sufficient to overcome the Government’s prima 
facie case against him. Applicant may have the desire and intent to repay his delinquent 
debts; he does not have the means to do so. Although Applicant is in a difficult situation, 
the security concerns in this case cannot be mitigated by the personal hardships that 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
may be caused by losing his security clearance2 nor by his promise to repay his debts at 
some future date should he be able to return to his job.3 
Applicant has expressed a desire to pay his debts, but the mere desire to repay 
debts without further action in addressing the debts is insufficient to warrant applying 
this mitigating condition. The decision to grant or deny a security clearance must be 
based on past conduct and not speculation as to future hopes and desires. A promise 
however credible and sincere to take remedial steps in the future does not constitute 
evidence of demonstrated reform and rehabilitation.4    
Mitigation consists of progress in addressing past-due obligations by establishing 
a “meaningful track record” in addressing his past-due and collection accounts. The 
concept of “meaningful track record” includes evidence of actual debt reduction through 
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required to establish that he has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required for him to demonstrate he has 
established a plan to resolve his delinquent debt and has taken significant action to 
implement that plan. I must reasonably consider the entirety of Applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that plan is credible and 
realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding 
debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for payment on such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. Here, Applicant 
has no plan to address his delinquent accounts other than his hope that he will be able 
to repay them at some future date.  
Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His 
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He has not acted responsibly in 
addressing his debts. He has received no credit or financial counseling, nor has he 
demonstrated that his financial problems are under control, or that he has a plan to 
bring them under control. He has not made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts.  
 
For AG & 20(b) to apply, the financial problem must be largely beyond the 
person’s control, which it was, and he must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances, which he has not. Applicant experienced a long period of unemployment 
ending in August 2009. During his unemployment he used credit cards to pay general 
living expenses and keep his home from foreclosure. During the three years he was 
employed, following his unemployment, he did not address his past-due obligations. 
Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to 
circumstances outside his control, the Judge must still consider whether Applicant has 
since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR 
                                                          
2
 See ISCR Case No. 08-10238 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 18, 2009); ISCR Case No. 08-10079 at 3. (App. Bd. 
Dec. 10, 2009), and ISCR Case No. 08-00899 at n.1 (App. Bd. Jul. 29, 2008). 
 
3
 See, e.g., ADP Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep.19, 2008); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 1, 1999). 
 
4
 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 96-0544 (May 12, 1997) at p. 5. 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. January 12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. November 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 
25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. December 1, 1999). Applicant has 
failed to act reasonably by not addressing his delinquent debt during the three years he 
was employed.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant 
has not provided documented proof to substantiate the basis for the five accounts he 
disputes.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. During his three years of 
employment, he failed to address his delinquent accounts. Now that he is again on 
unemployment compensation, he has even less funds with which to address those 
accounts. The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—they remain unpaid—it 
is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance. (See AG & 2 (a)(1)) For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
An adverse decision in this case is not a finding that Applicant does not possess 
the good character required of those with access to classified information. Even good 
people can pose a security risk because of facts and circumstances not under their 
control.5 Nor should this decision be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
                                                          
5
 ISCR Case No.01-26893 at 8 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002); See also Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 527-28 (1988). 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, he may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
