 
1 
 
 
                                                                 
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )             ISCR Case No. 12-09445 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for foreign 
influence and financial considerations. His request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 14, 2012, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) setting forth security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence) and Guideline F (financial considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG).1 Applicant submitted a notarized Answer dated September 11, 2012, in which he 
admitted all but one allegation under Guideline B, and admitted all the allegations under 
Guideline F. Applicant also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on January 18, 2013, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on February 21, 2013. Department Counsel offered five exhibits, which I 
admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and did not offer 
exhibits. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on February 27, 2013. 
                                                          
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Department Counsel requested I take administrative notice of information related 
to Pakistan. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice in 
administrative proceedings.2 I take administrative notice of facts relating to Pakistan, set 
forth in Government documents provided by Department Counsel, and marked as HE I. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings and the record evidence, I make the 
following additional findings. 
 
Applicant is 52 years old and was born in Pakistan. He received a bachelor’s 
degree from a Pakistani government university. He was employed by a U.S. agency in 
Pakistan for several years, initially as a security guard and later in the communications 
department. He moved to the United States in August 1988. Applicant married a 
Pakistani citizen in Pakistan in 1997. They had two children born in the United States. 
His son died at about five years of age. His daughter is now 13 years old. He and his 
wife became naturalized U.S. citizens in August 2011. Applicant possessed a Pakistani 
passport, which was issued in 2002. It expired in 2007, and he has not renewed it. He 
last visited Pakistan in 2006. He has not served in the Pakistani military. (GE 1; Tr. 23-
34, 103)  
 
Between 2001 and 2008, Applicant worked for a flooring company. He worked as 
a taxi driver from 2008 to 2012. In July 2011, he accepted his current position with a 
defense contractor. He is employed as a limousine driver while awaiting his security 
clearance adjudication if he obtains a security clearance, he will work as a linguist and 
reside in Afghanistan. (GE 1; Tr. 34-37) 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant's parents are deceased. His father worked for the Pakistani 
government for 28 years, from 1949 to 1977. Applicant described his position as 
“military state deputy officer,” but said it was not a military job.3 Applicant has three 
brothers, one sister, two sisters-in-law, and a brother-in-law who are citizens of 
Pakistan. All are residents of Pakistan, except one brother, who resides in New 
Zealand. His sister and his sisters-in-law are homemakers. He talks with his sister about 
once every two months. Applicant's brother-in-law is retired, after about 30 years as a 
broadcasting engineer. Applicant is unaware if he had contacts with the government in 
                                                          
2 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). 
 
3 Applicant described his father as working in a government office that deals with personnel stationed in 
military housing. (Tr. 97-98) 
 
3 
 
 
his position. Applicant testified that he does not have much contact with his brother-in-
law, but in his January 2012 Standard Form Certification (GE 1, part 2), he stated that 
he talks to his brother-in-law monthly. (GE 1, parts 1, 2; Tr. 69, 73-99, 102) 
 
Applicant's brothers range in age from 49 to 57 years old. His oldest brother is 
retired from a position in flight operations for an airline. Applicant characterized the 
airline as “semi-governmental” because the government has some involvement in its 
operation, but it is primarily privately owned. Applicant talks with his brother once per 
month. Applicant's second brother was a commissioned officer in the Pakistani air force. 
Applicant described his rank as group captain. He retired with about 25 to 30 years’ 
service. He receives a government pension. Applicant speaks with him about once 
every three months by telephone. Applicant's third brother was a lieutenant colonel in 
the Pakistani army. He served in the military police for a short time, and then worked in 
food supply. He served for between 25 and 30 years, retired in 2008, and receives a 
pension. He moved to New Zealand two or three years ago. Applicant and this brother 
talk on Skype about once per month. Applicant saw his brothers during his most recent 
trip to Pakistan in 2006. (GE 1, parts 1, 2; Tr. 69, 73-100) 
 
In about 2000 or 2001, Applicant had a property interest in Pakistan. His brother 
paid each sibling a share of the value of their father’s property, after the father’s death. 
Applicant received $9,000. He used it to pay debts related to a hair salon he owned. He 
has no bank accounts, property, or other financial interests in Pakistan. Applicant last 
visited Pakistan in 2006. He plans to visit in the future, but currently has no funds 
available for travel. (Tr. 79-81, 89) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in May 2007. It included $1.6 
million in secured claims, including several mortgages, auto loans, and a line of credit. 
The petition also listed unsecured claims of more than $152,500. Many of Applicant’s 
debts stemmed from his purchase of a hair salon. He used a portion of the equity in his 
home to purchase the salon, and invested approximately $265,000. He owned it for 
about eight months. He accrued significant debt and tried unsuccessfully to sell it. He 
eventually closed the business, and filed the bankruptcy petition. The petition was 
discharged in August 2007. (GE 2, 4; Tr. 37-43) 
 
 Applicant currently owes a total of $10,419 in delinquent debt: two small debts of 
$500 and $137, and a student loan of $9,782. The delinquencies appear in Applicant's 
credit reports of January, August, and November 2012. He testified his wife made a $50 
payment on the $137 debt, or intended to do so. However, he did not provide supporting 
documentation showing payments on that debt, or the others. (GE 3, 4, 5; Tr. 45-47) 
  
Applicant became responsible for a student loan when he co-signed on the loan 
for a friend. The friend started school, but then returned to Pakistan. Applicant has tried 
to reach his friend about payment. He also has contacted the friend’s father in Pakistan 
and asked him to have his son call Applicant. However, his friend has not returned the 
 
4 
 
 
calls. As of 2007, when he filed his bankruptcy petition, the loan balance was $6,400. 
The loan was not discharged in the bankruptcy. Applicant has been contacted by the 
lender. He agrees he is liable for the debt, but he has not made arrangements to pay 
the loan because he has no funds to do so. (Tr. 42-45)  
 
In January 2012, Applicant had net monthly income of $3,400. He estimated his 
expenses to be $2,605. His monthly payments on two car loans and his credit cards 
total $770. With a total monthly outlay of $3,375, he had a net monthly remainder of 
$25. His assets are two cars valued at $13,500. Applicant testified that he is “trying to 
get above water.” He plans to pay the three outstanding debts with his increased salary 
as a linguist. (GE 1, part 2; Tr. 44) 
 
The Islamist Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan) 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic in South Asia, with a population of 
more than 170 million. It held successful elections in February 2008 and has a coalition 
government. However, many parts of the country are affected by militancy and violent 
extremism. 
 
Terrorist networks operate within Pakistan. Members of the Taliban are known to 
be in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) region, in Balochistan Province, 
which borders Iran and Afghanistan, and in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in the FATA 
region. The FATA region is a sanctuary to al-Qaida and other extremist groups. The 
Haqqani Network also operates with impunity in Pakistan. On September 7, 2012, the 
United States formally declared the Haqqani Network a foreign terrorist organization.  
 
The U.S. Department of State (DOS) defines terrorist safe havens as 
“ungoverned, under-governed, or ill-governed physical areas where terrorists are able to 
organize, plan, raise funds, communicate, recruit, train, transit, and operate in relative 
security because of inadequate governance capacity, political will, or both.”4 The DOS 
concludes that, despite efforts by Pakistani security forces, groups including Afghan and 
Pakistani militants, foreign insurgents, and al-Qaida terrorists have safe haven in 
Pakistan, and train and operate there to plan attacks against the United States and its 
allies in Afghanistan. Taliban senior leaders also enjoy safe haven in Pakistan. 
 
The Pakistani government has a poor human rights record. Reported violations 
include extrajudicial killings, torture and disappearances by security forces, lack of 
judicial independence, arbitrary arrest, honor crimes, wide-spread corruption, 
disappearance and imprisonment of political opponents, and trafficking in persons. The 
May 2012 Human Rights Report by the DOS notes that Pakistani domestic intelligence 
services monitored political activists, politicians, suspected terrorists, and the media. 
The DOS warns U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Pakistan in light of the 
presence of terrorists who have attacked civilian and foreign targets. Credible reports 
                                                          
4 U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2011, Chapter 5, Terrorist Safe Havens. (HE I) 
 
5 
 
 
indicate that authorities routinely used wiretaps, and intercepted and opened mail 
without requisite court approval. 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.5 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guidelines B (foreign influence) and F (financial considerations). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest6 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.7 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
                                                          
5 Directive ¶ 6.3. 
 
6 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
8 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions, and find that the 
following are relevant to the case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 The mere possession of close family ties with a resident or citizen of a foreign 
country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one 
relative lives in a foreign country, and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts 
with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.9 
 
 Moreover, the country in question must be considered. In particular, the nature of 
its government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant's family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion.10 Several terrorist networks operate within Pakistan, including the 
Taliban and al-Qaida. Terrorists have safe haven in Pakistan, where they train and plan 
attacks against the United States and its allies in Afghanistan. The threat of terrorism 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 4 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008). 
 
7 
 
 
remains high. Further, Pakistan has a poor human rights record, including widespread 
corruption, torture by security forces, and disappearances and imprisonment of political 
opponents. The DOS notes credible reports that Pakistani authorities routinely used 
wiretaps, and intercepted and opened mail. American citizens with family members who 
are citizens or residents of Pakistan are at heightened risk of coercion, exploitation, or 
pressure. 
 
 Applicant has three brothers, one sister, two sisters-in-law, and a brother-in-law 
who are citizens of Pakistan. All are residents of Pakistan, except one brother, who lives 
in New Zealand. Several of Applicant's family members have contacts with the Pakistani 
government. One brother is a retired army officer, with 25 to 30 years’ service. Another 
brother is a retired air force officer, also with 25 to 30 years’ service. Applicant is in 
touch with his foreign family members once each month to once every few months. 
Applicant's relationship with his immediate family members in Pakistan, and his regular 
contact with them, creates a heightened risk of exploitation or coercion. Moreover, 
Applicant's ties of affection to his foreign family create a potential conflict of interest 
between his desire to protect them, if they were threatened or coerced by terrorists or 
extremists, and the obligation he would have to protect classified information, were he 
to hold a security clearance. AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) apply. 
 
 About 12 years ago, Applicant had a partial interest in property his father owned. 
When his father died, Applicant's brother paid Applicant and his siblings their 
proportionate shares. Applicant used the $9,000 proceeds to pay debts related to his 
hair salon. He no longer has property or financial interests in Pakistan. Disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 7(e) does not apply, and mitigation is not required. 
 
 I have considered the mitigating conditions under Guideline B (AG ¶ 8), 
especially the following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 Given Applicant’s ties to immediate family in Pakistan, he could be placed in a 
position that could force him to choose between U.S. and foreign interests. His frequent 
contacts demonstrate that his ties to his foreign family are not minimal. Moreover, his 
family lives in a country where terrorists and extremists operate and target U.S. 
interests. Applicant's foreign relatives could be subject to coercion that could force him 
to choose between their interests and those of the United States. AG ¶ 8 (a) and (b) 
cannot be applied. 
 
 Mitigation under AG ¶ 8(c) is also unavailable. Applicant’s contacts with his 
foreign family are frequent and ongoing. There is a rebuttable presumption that 
relationships with immediate family members, and with relatives of a spouse, are 
close.11 Applicant has not rebutted that presumption about his relationships with his 
foreign family members. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the overall security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. . . 
 
 The evidence supports application of the following disqualifying conditions under 
AG ¶19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has $10,419 in delinquencies, demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to 
meet his financial obligations. His previous bankruptcy and his current indebtedness 
also support of finding of a history of failure to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). 
 
9 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant's debts are not in the distant past, as more than $10,000 remains 
unpaid. His inattention to his debts, even during the security clearance process when he 
was on notice that they were a concern, indicates that delinquencies may continue in 
the future. His failure to make attempts to resolve his debts by working with his creditors 
raises questions about his reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) focuses on situations where conditions beyond an applicant’s control 
affect his ability to meet his financial obligations. One debt comprises the bulk of 
Applicant's delinquencies: the student loan of almost $10,000. This debt did not stem 
from conditions beyond Applicant's control. He decided to co-sign the student loan for a 
friend, knowing that he would be responsible for it if his friend did not pay. Other than 
trying to convince his friend to pay, he has no plan in place to resolve the debt, and no 
funds to do so. AG ¶ 20(b) cannot be applied.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) requires a good-faith effort to resolve debts. Applicant used a 
legitimate avenue to resolve the debts related to his failed hair salon business when he 
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. The petition was successfully discharged in 
2007. However, since then, he knowingly co-signed a substantial student loan for a 
friend. His friend apparently has no intention to pay the debt. In the year since he has 
completed his security clearance application, Applicant has been aware that the debt is 
a security concern, but he has made no effort to work with the lender, or establish a 
payment plan. With a $25 monthly net remainder, it is clear he does not have the funds 
to resolve it. In addition, Applicant has not taken steps to pay even the smallest SOR 
debt of $137. An applicant must demonstrate reasonable efforts to resolve debts, and 
Applicant has not done so. AG ¶ 20(d) cannot be applied. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
10 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
In evaluating the whole-person, I considered several factors in Applicant's favor: 
He has been a U.S. citizen for 18 months; his wife and daughter are U.S. citizens; and 
he worked for the U.S. government in Pakistan in the 1980s. However, Applicant has 
immediate family members who are citizens and residents of Pakistan, two of whom 
have long-standing military ties. He keeps in touch with his foreign family, and there is 
no evidence indicating that this situation will change. These facts, along with the 
dangerous conditions in Pakistan, and the prevalence of terrorists and extremists who 
target U.S. interests, represent a heightened risk that has not been mitigated. In 
addition, Applicant is liable for almost $10,000 in student loans, and with virtually no 
funds available to resolve the debt, he is at risk of exploitation.   
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts 
about his ability and willingness to protect the Government’s interests.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f  Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
